The  research  described  in  this  report  was  sponsored  by  the 
Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  under  RAND's 
National  Defense  Research  Institute,  a  Federally  Funded 
Research  and  Development  Center  supported,  by  the  Office 
of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  Contract  No.  MDA903-85-C-003Q. 


This  Note  contains  an  offprint  of  RAND  research  originally  published  in  a  journal 
or  book.  The  text  is  reproduced  here,  with  permission  of  the  original  publisher. 


The  RAND  Publication  Series:  The  Report  is  the  principal  publication  documen¬ 
ting  and  transmitting  RAND’s  major  research  findings  and  final  research  results. 
The  RAND  Note  reports  other  outputs  of  sponsored  research  for  general  distri¬ 
bution.  Publications  of  The  RAND  Corporation  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the 
opinions  or  policies  of  the  sponsors  of  RAND  research. 


Published  by  The  RAND  Corporation 
1700  Main  Street,  P.O.  Box  2138,  Santa  Monica,  CA  90406-2138 


A  RAND  NOTE 


N-2860-DARPA 


RAND 


An  Intelligent  Information  Dictionary  for 
Semantic  Manipulation  of  Relational  Databases 

Stephanie  J.  Cammarata 

March  1988 


Prepared  for 

The  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 


APPROVED  FOR  PURUC  EELEASE,  DISTRIBUTION  UNLIMITED 


An  Intelligent  Information  Dictionary 
for  Semantic  Manipulation  of  Relational  Databases1 


Stephanie  J.  Cammarata 
The  RAND  Corporation 
1700  Main  Street 
Santa  Monica,  CA 
90406-2138 


ABSTRACT 

xThis  paper  describes  an  intelligent  information  dictionary  (IID)  which  serves  as  a  knowledge-based  in¬ 
terface  between  a  database  user  and  the  query  language  of  a  relational  database  management  system.  IID 
extends  the  traditional  roles  of  a  data  dictionary  by  enabling  a  user  to  view,  manipulate,  and  verify  se¬ 
mantic  aspects  of  relational  data.  Our  use  of  IID  focuses  on  the  interactive  creation  of  simulation^  ; 
specific  databases  from  large  "publib"  databases  in  the  domain  of  military  simulation  and  modeling.  We 
TTavfr  identified  classes  of  database-related  activities  performed  by  a  simulation  developer  when  prepar¬ 
ing  databases  as  input  to  simulation  models.  Three  categories  of  IID  capabilities  supporting  these  activi¬ 
ties  a tc:  explanation  and  browsing,  customized  data  manipulation,  and  interactive  consistency  checking. 
4rpthis  paper  ^detaik^pecific  features  of  these  categories  and  present  examples  of  their  use.  ; 

1.  Introduction 

An  intelligent  information  dictionary  extends  the  traditional  roles  of  a  data  dictionary  by  enabling 
the  user  to  view,  manipulate,  and  verify  semantic  aspects  of  data  not  expressed  in  a  relational  database. 

In  the  past,  data  dictionary  systems  have  served  as  an  interface  between  the  database  management  sys¬ 
tem  (DBMS)  and  the  application  programs  that  access  the  data.  This  close  coupling  of  data  dictionary, 
DBMS,  and  application  programs  excludes  facilities  for  interactive  access  by  a  casual  user.  With  the  ad¬ 
vent  of  workstation  environments,  interactive  software,  and  public  domain  databases,  the  use  of  DBMS 
is  no  longer  limited  to  database  administrators  (DBAs),  operations  managers,  and  application  programs. 
Researchers  and  practitioners  in  many  disciplines  are  experimenting  with  DBMS  for  organizing,  main¬ 
taining,  and  sharing  databases  [McCa82].  Unfortunately,  i.e  iVRMS  tools  and  languages  currently  in 

1  This  research  was  sponsored  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  under  the  auspices  of 
RAND’s  National  Defense  Research  Institute,  a  Federally  Funded  Research  and  Development  Center  sponsored 
by  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense. 


Reprinted  from  Advances  in  Database  Technology— EDBT  '88  International  Conference  on  Extending  Database 
Technology,  Venice,  Italy,  March  1988,  pp.  214-230,  ©  Springer-Verlag.  Reprinted  by  permission. 


1 


2 


existence  do  not  have  facilities  to  aid  these  users  in  understanding  and  accessing  the  information  they 
need  [CurtS  1]. 

In  this  paper  we  discuss  an  intelligent  information  dictionary  (IID)  system  which  we  developed 
as  a  knowledge-based  interface  between  an  interactive  user  and  the  query  language  (QL)  of  a  relational 
DBMS.  IID  aids  a  user  in  understanding  the  organization  of  a  relational  database  by  providing 
application-specific  explanations  of  relations,  domains,  attributes,  and  constraints.  This  facility  combines 
knowledge  of  the  domain  with  knowledge  of  relational  database  concepts  to  produce  interactive  tools  for 
browsing,  customized  data  manipulation,  and  interactive  consistency  checking.  HD  encourages  users  to 
interact  with  a  relational  database  by  manipulating  semantic  entities  and  relationships  which  are  implicit 
in  the  relational  representation. 

In  the  next  section  we  present  a  scenario  that  motivates  this  research  within  the  domain  of  mili¬ 
tary  simulation  and  modeling.  We  describe  three  categories  of  database  related  activities  performed  by  a 
simulation  developer  when  preparing  databases  as  input  to  simulation  models.  Section  3  discusses  IID 
capabilities  supporting  these  interactive  database  "preparation"  activities  and  presents  examples  of  their 
use.  The  architecture  of  IID  is  outlined  in  Section  4,  and  Section  5  discusses  related  research.  In  Section 
6  we  conclude  with  some  directions  for  future  work. 


2.  Motivation  and  rationale 


National  security  policy  research  and  analysis  depends  on  the  heavy  use  of  military  modeling  and 
simulation,  such  as  battle  management,  and  command  and  control  studies.  It  is  imperative  that  these 
models  use  large  quantities  of  real-world  data  which  is  valid  and  consistent.  Therefore,  many  classified 
and  unclassified  databases  are  maintained  at  RAND  as  input  to  simulation  models.  As  part  of  our 
research,  we  observed  and  analyzed  the  use  of  these  "public"  databases  as  input  to  specific  simulation 
models. 

When  simulation  developers  attempt  to  use  these  databases,  they  face  some  major  obstacles. 
Most  of  the  public  databases  are  acquired  from  federal  agencies  which  distribute  data  to  a  wide  variety 
of  clients  and  customers.  When  the  databases  arrive  at  a  client’s  site,  they  are  generally  organized  as 
record-oriented  flat  files  that  are  subsequently  "relationized"  and  loaded  into  a  DBMS.  However,  the 
resulting  relational  schema  is  not  designed  using  established  database  design  or  modeling  principles  and 
is  not  developed  with  the  assistance  of  any  domain  experts.  Consequently,  semantic  integrity  constraints 
that  should  apply  to  the  public  databases  are  rarely  expressed  in  the  relational  schema  organization  or 
reflected  in  the  data  instances.  In  addition,  little  documentation  is  provided  with  the  public  databases, 
and  many  data  values  are  missing,  inconsistent,  and  erroneous. 


3 


At  RAND,  these  public  databases  are  maintained  in  Ingres.  Upon  closer  examination  of  database 
usage,  we  discovered  that  the  relationship  between  the  Ingres  databases  and  their  simulation- specific 
counterparts  is  not  at  all  isomorphic.  Most  of  the  public  databases  contain  more  data  than  is  necessary 
for  a  particular  study;  therefore,  it  is  common  for  a  simulation  builder  to  extract  a  subset  of  the  Ingres 
databases  for  use  as  input  to  a  specific  simulation  model.  Furthermore,  modelers  and  analysts  require 
data  which  is  tailored  to  their  own  specific  simulation  needs.  Their  requirements  usually  entail  a  combi¬ 
nation  of  transformations  to  the  Ingres  databases  to  derive  a  database  with  the  desired  profile. 

During  this  derivation  process,  the  semantics  of  the  data  play  a  major  role  in  the  integration  and 
abstraction  operations  performed  by  the  simulation  builder.  Unfortunately,  DBMS  query  languages  can¬ 
not  easily  or  directly  express  these  transformations.  The  database  manipulations  are  usually  performed 
through  the  joint  efforts  of  an  application  expert  and  a  database  specialist.  The  application  expert  uses 
his  or  her  domain  expertise  to  decide  how  data  records  should  be  integrated  and  abstracted;  the  database 
specialist  contributes  by  providing  knowledge  about  database  operations  to  achieve  the  desired  view. 
Furthermore,  many  of  the  required  operations  cannot  be  performed  within  the  DBMS  query  language 
and  also  require  the  services  of  an  applications  programmer. 


2.1.  Database  preparation  activities 

By  observing  modelers  interacting  with  relational  databases,  we  have  identified  three  distinct 
cognitive  phases  that  are  critical  in  composing  simulation  databases:  mennl  modeling  and  synthesis, 
conceptual  retrieval,  and  semantic  validation.  In  the  following  subsections,  we  discuss  the  limitations  of 
interactive  DBMS  facilities  and  how  they  hamper  each  phase  of  database  interaction.  Our  objective  was 
to  remedy  these  deficiencies  by  providing  an  interactive  environment  supporting  database  preparation 
processes. 


2.1.1.  Mental  modeling  and  synthesis 

When  users  are  presented  with  the  task  of  browsing  through  a  database,  they  tend  to  preview  the 
data  in  a  fashion  which  helps  them  mentally  abstract  major  concepts  and  relationships.  The  first  phase  of 
this  process  is  usually  scanning  the  relational  tables  and  attribute  names  to  arrive  at  a  central  organizing 
theme.  For  someone  unfamiliar  with  the  specific  relational  database,  this  activity  is  difficult  because  at¬ 
tribute  names  are  non-intuitive  acronyms  listed  in  a  data  dictionary  with  no  description  of  meaning  or 
usage.  After  a  user  tries  to  glean  an  overall  organization  of  the  relational  structure,  he  or  she  begins  look¬ 
ing  at  rows  of  values  in  the  relational  tables.  The  relational  model  does  not  naturally  represent  hierarchi¬ 
cal  concepts;  therefore,  users  frequently  search  through  data  and  schema  hoping  to  find  some  hierarchi¬ 
cal  organization  as  a  basis  for  abstracting  the  flat  relational  tables.  Furthermore,  most  data  is  encoded 
and  unformatted,  providing  little  evidence  that  their  mental  model  of  the  structural  organization  is  valid 
and  consistent.  By  iteratively  looking  at  the  relational  structure  and  selected  data  values,  a  user  begins  to 
synthesize  a  conceptual  image  of  the  entities  and  relationships  represented  in  the  database  and  how  they 


4 


map  to  the  necessary  simulation  concepts. 

Although  query  languages  allow  flexibility  in  searching  and  selecting  records  based  on  syntactic 
pattern  matching  and  efficient  indexing  techniques,  they  do  not  provide  an  overview  or  general  presenta¬ 
tion  of  the  data.  If  a  potential  user  is  familiar  with  a  database  and  is  an  experienced  DBMS  user,  then  it 
is  much  easier  to  browse  through  a  database  in  search  of  specific  concepts  and  entities.  However,  for  the 
casual  user  there  are  few  tools  or  friendly  environments  to  support  this  modeling  and  synthesis  process. 
For  example,  if  a  simulation  builder  needs  information  about  the  67th  Armor  Division,  he  or  she  may  ap¬ 
proach  this  query  by  searching  all  tables  for  the  string  "67th  Armor  Division".  It  is  unlikely  that  this 
query  will  retrieve  any  useful  information.  First,  "67th  Armor  Division"  is  probably  abbreviated  or  en¬ 
coded  so  a  syntactic  search  may  not  produce  any  matches.  Second,  there  are  many  different  kinds  of  in¬ 
formation  that  a  user  may  desire  about  an  armor  division,  such  as  the  general  characteristics  of  the  67th 
Division,  or  the  subordinate  units  which  are  commanded  by  the  67th  Division.  A  simple  text  search, 
however,  would  not  provide  any  explanation  of  what  is  retrieved,  only  specific  data  values. 


2.1.2.  Conceptual  retrieval 


After  a  user  has  gained  some  familiarity  with  the  organization,  structure,  and  content  of  a  partic¬ 
ular  database,  he  or  she  must  determine  what  data  to  retrieve  for  deriving  a  specific  simulation  database. 
The  user  compares  his  or  her  mental  model  of  what  is  in  the  database  with  a  conceptual  profile  of  the 
desired  data.  Based  on  this  comparison,  the  user  must  retrieve  those  relational  entities  which  map  onto 
the  desired  conceptual  profile.  A  significant  factor  which  simulation  builders  consider  is  the  granularity 
or  resolution  of  the  information.  Most  often,  the  public  databases  represent  a  finer  resolution  than  is 
needed  for  the  resulting  database.  Integrating  and  aggregating  data  elements  play  a  major  role  in  com¬ 
posing  a  simulation  database. 

Users  would  like  to  access  and  retrieve  data  from  public  databases  whose  values  collectively 
represent  conceptual  entities  or  relationships.  However,  query  languages  provide  only  a  microscopic 
view  of  data  entities  and  elements.  To  derive  an  entity  with  the  desired  profile,  a  user  must  translate  the 
profile  into  standard  DBMS  selection,  projection  and  join  operations.  For  example,  if  a  user  wants  to  re¬ 
trieve  all  "reconnaissance"  aircraft,  he  or  she  must  mentally  compose  a  semantic  description  for  the  con¬ 
cept  of  reconnaissance.  Next,  the  user  must  map  the  semantic  description  onto  the  attributes  and  data 
available  in  the  public  databases.  Finally,  a  DBMS  query  is  constructed  which  integrates  data  from  vari¬ 
ous  sources,  retrieving  those  items  which  correspond  to  the  concept  of  reconnaissance.  Similarly,  to 
derive  a  value  for  "firepower"  associated  with  an  airbase,  it  is  necessary  to  access  and  aggregate  a 
number  of  variables  upon  which  firepower  is  dependent. 


5 


Although  many  of  these  capabilities  can  be  performed  by  programs  using  an  embedded  data 
manipulation  language,  we  should  not  expect  casual  DBMS  users  to  become  DBMS  experts  simply  to 
browse  through  the  data  and  retrieve  relevant  conceptual  entities.  View  mechanisms  and  embedded  data 
manipulation  languages  are  similarly  geared  toward  interfacing  application  programs  with  the  database 
and  ignore  the  needs  of  interactive  users. 


2.1.3.  Semantic  validation 

The  final  activity  performed  when  constructing  a  simulation  database  is  to  validate  the  correct¬ 
ness  of  the  structure  and  content  of  the  derived  database.  In  many  cases,  the  data  which  has  been  select¬ 
ed  may  not  be  consistent  or  correct  Numeric  cross  tabulations  may  be  incorrect  if  only  a  subset  of  the 
database  is  retrieved.  Existence  dependencies  between  entities  may  also  need  to  be  verified.  For  in¬ 
stance,  a  user  may  want  to  enforce  a  constraint  stating  that  if  long  range  bombers  are  located  at  an 
airfield,  then  the  airfield  must  have  at  least  one  concrete  runway.  In  addition,  the  simulation  developer 
may  want  to  add  additional  constraints  on  the  derived  database  which  did  not  hold  for  the  public  data¬ 
bases. 

We  have  observed  this  validation  process  being  carried  out  jointly  by  a  database  and  domain  ex¬ 
pert.  This  task  is  usually  performed  by  manually  searching  through  data  records,  looking  for  suspect  or 
errorful  values.  Often,  simply  the  presence  of  a  data  record  will  trigger,  in  the  mind  of  the  domain  spe¬ 
cialist,  a  condition  or  constraint  which  should  be  considered  in  the  simulation  database.  Augmenting  the 
resulting  database  is  also  common  when  necessary  data  is  not  available  from  the  public  databases. 


3.  HD  capabilities 

Traditional  data  dictionaries  are  used  for  defining  DBMS  entities,  generating  reports,  and  ex¬ 
pressing  transactions,  but  are  not  suitable  as  an  interface  between  an  interactive  user  and  a  DBMS 
[Alle82],  Our  intelligent  information  dictionary  fills  this  need  by  addressing  the  three  phases  of  database 
preparation  discussed  above.  I  ID  supports  explanation  and  browsing,  customized  data  manipulation,  and 
interactive  consistency  checking  by  combining  domain  knowledge  with  relational  DBMS  knowledge. 
Object-oriented  knowledge  bases  in  IID  represent  both  the  constructs  of  a  relational  database  and 
domain  specific  knowledge  acquired  from  an  application  specialist  DD  is  implemented  in  Franzlisp  Fla¬ 
vors  running  on  a  Sun  Microsystems  workstation.  The  dictionary  communicates  with  the  Ingres  rela¬ 
tional  DBMS,  also  resident  on  a  Sun  machine.  The  application  database  we  are  utilizing  to  test  IID  is  an 
air  order  of  battle  (AOB)  database  representing  air  resources  such  as  airbases,  runways,  and  aircraft.  The 
examples  shown  in  the  following  sections  are  derived  fron  this  database  and  other  similar  military  data- 


6 


bases.  Details  of  the  HD  architecture  are  presented  in  Section  4. 


3.1.  Explanation  and  browsing 


Explanation  and  browsing  is  enabled  in  IID  by  presenting  an  extensive  collection  of  metadata  to 
users  to  guide  them  through  the  maze  of  relations  and  attributes.  Metadata  in  our  information  dictionary 
does  not  refer  stricdy  to  information  needed  by  the  DBMS,  such  as  data  type  and  field  length.  Rather,  it 
refers  to  semantic  information  about  the  data  which  users  rely  on  when  making  decisions  about  how  en¬ 
tities  relate  to  each  other,  and  whether  the  data  is  relevant  to  their  application.  Figure  1  shows  the  user 
interface  for  browsing  through  relations  and  columns.  Much  of  the  information  show  in  Figure  1  is 
maintained  strictly  within  the  information  dictionary  without  accessing  the  relational  databases.  In  this 
example  the  user  is  viewing  the  column  names  for  the  "aircraft"  relation,  and  the  column  "btype"  is 
further  described.  The  allowable  values  for  btype  are  expressed  as  "Value  constraints".  The  items  in  this 
enumerated  list  are  mouse  sensitive  and  can  be  further  described  as  we  have  shown  for  the  value  ”BC'. 


■“a";  oun  rtmccu  i;oi  1  U 


OAT ABASE:  «ob 


Column  mm:  Dtypa 

Lon*  mm:  Basic  aircraft  type 

Relation:  aircraft 

Croup:  nans 

Units:  n/s 

Data  acquired:  17/c/ts 

Sourca  agency:  Air  Resource  Information  Agency  ^ 

Dsrlvsd  fros:  rO a 
Obligatory:  no 
Oaf aw  it  valua:  n/a 

Valua  constraints:  (AA  At  AC  *0  IA  Bl  [J  bo  CA  CB) _ 

Data  typs:  C  |j|fiE|pijS|iEEj|KB£Sg«i|Sj 

Length:  2 

D ascription:  n»  first  character  indlcat  a  long  ranga  boMar  designed  for  an 
atpupaant  belongs.  For  aos,  coots  art  a  unrafuaiao  operating  raoius  over  uaaa 
aircraft.  The  stceno  cnaractar  contains  ws  at  oesiyi  gross  ueiyit  m  botoer 
grouping  althln  tha  Mjor  equipment  faai  load, 
airfrass  eenu lecturer's  latent  for  utl 11 
capabi 11  ty,  or  aodlficatlon. 


Figure  1:  IID  explanation  and  browsing 


7 


Values  for  column  descriptors  such  as  "Date  acquired",  "Source  agency",  and  "Derived  from", 
are  represented  and  maintained  in  the  information  dictionary.  Therefore,  when  a  new  version  of  the 
AOB  database  is  loaded,  the  "Date  acquired"  field  reflects  this  new  information.  The  descriptors  "Obli¬ 
gatory  ,  "Default  value",  and  "Value  constraints"  not  only  provide  explanatory  information  but  also  have 
associated  procedures  which  interactively  validate  data  instances.  These  capabilities  are  further  dis¬ 
cussed  in  the  section  describing  consistency  checking. 

Another  feature  useful  for  browsing  through  an  unfamiliar  database  is  HD’s  verbose  mode. 
When  verbose  mode  is  enabled,  encoded  DBMS  output  is  expanded  into  its  full  textual  name  or 
identifier.  Similarly,  input  to  the  DBMS  through  HD  can  contain  fully  expanded  abbreviations.  For  ex¬ 
ample,  in  a  traditional  query  language,  a  user  must  know  the  country  code  for  France  in  order  to  retrieve 
all  aircraft  located  in  France.  With  HD’s  verbose  mode,  a  user  can  submit  the  query: 

retrieve  (aircraft.idnwn)  where  country  =  "france" 

Although  "country"  is  not  a  valid  column  name  and  "France"  is  not  an  allowable  value  for  the  column 
name  "ctycd",  HD  preprocesses  the  input  and  submits  to  Ingres  the  query: 


retrieve  (aircraft.idnwn)  where  air  craft. ctycd  =  "fr" 

Similarly  during  output,  any  country  codes  will  be  expanded  to  their  full  country  name. 

These  browsing  capabilities  help  a  user  interact  with  a  DBMS  in  a  more  natural  fashion  and  dis¬ 
tance  the  user  from  the  unintelligible  codified  aspect  of  databases  maintained  by  a  DBMS.  Other 
research  efforts  are  also  addressing  the  issue  that  DBMS  interfaces  are  unsuitable  for  casual  users.  The 
Rabbit  system  [Tou82]  aids  user  interaction  through  an  iterative  process  of  query  reformulation.  Both 
HD’s  browsing  capabilities  and  Rabbit’s  retrieval  by  reformulation  attempt  to  facilitate  the  user’s  under¬ 
standing  of  instance  data. 


3.2.  Customized  data  manipulation 


One  major  obstacle  facing  interactive  users  is  the  lack  of  encapsulation  facilities  for  grouping  in¬ 
dividual  data  values  and  referencing  them  as  a  single  semantic  concept  Users  emulate  conceptual  re¬ 
trieval  by  repeatedly  navigating  through  relations  to  retrieve  the  desired  data.  Instead,  they  would  like  to 
express  a  combination  of  attributes  and  values  as  a  customized  conceptual  package  and  subsequently 
refer  to  that  concept  as  a  single  entity.  Three  IID  features  encourage  customized  data  manipulation:  view 
templates,  smart  joins,  and  aggregation  Junctions. 


8 

3.2.1.  View  templates 


View  templates  allow  a  DBMS  user  to  build  a  template  or  profile  for  a  particular  concept,  and 
refer  to  that  template  for  data  access.  IID  translates  a  view  template  into  an  acceptable  query  and  submits 
it  to  the  DBMS.  In  Figure  2,  we  show  the  template  describing  a  reconnaissance  aircraft.  Although  the 
concept  of  mission  is  not  explicitly  represented  in  this  database,  the  user’s  notion  of  a  reconnaissance 
mission  translates  into  characteristics  represented  in  the  database  such  as  aircraft  capabilities  and  radar 
equipment  In  this  example,  "mission"  can  be  regarded  as  a  virtual  column  for  aircraft  and  "reconnais¬ 
sance"  can  be  viewed  as  a  virtual  value  for  the  column. 

The  retrieve  command  shown  in  the  "Query:"  window  of  Figure  2  indicates  how  the  user  would 
express  a  templated  query.  With  this  capability,  domain  specialists  can  refer  to  database  entities  in  their 
own  terminology  and  can  customize  the  meaning  of  application-specific  concepts  and  relationships.  The 
window  interface  also  allows  a  user  to  view  the  template  description  as  we  have  shown  in  the  "TEM¬ 
PLATE:"  window  of  Figure  2. 


Coluen  ntee :  btype 

l3flq  liu;  jt r craft  type 

Relation:  aircraft 

Group:  none 

unit*:  n/ a 

Date  acquired:  17/S/8S 

ource  egency:  air  Pesource  Information  agency 
Derived  ‘roe:  n/e 
Obligatory:  no 
Dafault  value:  */a 

Value  constraints:  {aa  *6  ac  aD  8a  88  BC  BO  CA  C8) 

Data  type:  C 
Length;  2 

Description:  The  first  character  indicates  the  aajar  family  to  *mcn  Ihe  'tee  of 
eoutpeent  Delongs.  For  aOB,  codes  are  a  for  rotary-elng  aircraft  cr  B  for  fiueo-em 
»t.  The  second  cnaracler  contains  a  cooed  entry  describing  a  further  suotaei 
ng  uithin  the  eejor  eauiDeent  fteily.  for  aOB,  this  code  indicates  the 
^e  eanufacturer's  intent  for  utilization  regarc’ess  of  present  prieary  role. 
IV/,  or  eodi  f  Icatlon. 


Query: 

retrieve  (etrcreft. Idnia)  whers  ••isaion«  s  recon.  1 

Response : 

76-341  76-353  02-341  82-343 

Figure  2  A  view  template  for  reconnaissance 


9 


3.2.2.  Smart  join  operator 


Expressing  a  join  in  a  relational  query  language  requires  a  user  to  navigate  through  foreign  key 
attributes.  In  HD,  a  smart  join  operator  uses  the  information  stored  in  the  dictionary  to  recognize  implicit 
links  between  relations.  For  instance,  in  Figure  3  a  user  wishes  to  retrieve  all  aircraft  of  a  certain  type 
that  are  located  in  Europe.  However,  aircraft  are  not  recorded  by  continent;  rather,  they  are  organized 
by  country.  In  Quel,  this  query  would  be  expressed  as: 

retrieve  (aircraft. idnum)  where  aircrqft.btype  =  "AC"  and 
aircraft.baseid  =  airbase. baseid  and 
airbase. crycd  =  continent. ctycd  and 
continent. name  =  "europe" 

Using  HD’s  join  feature,  the  user  need  only  submit  the  retrieve  command  shown  in  the  "Query:"  window 
of  Figure  3.  During  HD  query  preprocessing,  the  dictionary  refers  to  its  domain  specific  knowledge 
about  aircraft  and  airbases,  and  to  its  knowledge  of  relational  joins.  Join  fields  may  be  specified  with  the 
database  dictionary  information  or  may  be  expressed  interactively  by  a  user.  HD  translates  the  user’s 
query  into  the  equivalent  Quel  command  and  submits  it  to  Ingres.  The  window  interface  also  depicts  the 
relationship  between  "aircraft",  "airbase",  and  "continent",  providing  a  map  of  the  correspondence 
between  relations.  This  display  feature  is  also  convenient  for  browsing  through  the  network  of  relations. 


Calusn  btype 

Larq  naaa:  Basic  aircraft  type 

Ritlanon-  aircraft 

Grcup:  non# 

Units:  n/a 

Data  acquired:  17/6/85 

Source  agency:  air  Basourca  Indorsation  agency 
Derived  'rca :  rva 
Obligatory:  no 
Default  vatua:  n/a 

Value  constraints:  (A*  A6  ac  *0  6A  BB  BC  BD  CA  !B ! 

Data  type:  C 
Lengti:  2 

Description:  The  first  t.tierec'er  notates  ire  eejO'  fa»''y  ic  icn  in*  ■  tue  o4 
•ouipaent  belongs.  For  AOB,  codas  are  X  for  rotary-vinq  atrcra*T  or  J  for  f*wj-»ii 
aircraft.  fha  sacono  cnaracfr  contains  a  riced  cnt-y  descr>Binq  a  ‘urtner  suDfaat 
grcuping  uithin  the  aajcr  eauiseent  faai’y.  Tor  aOB,  *h»*  coae  tna'cates  fh* 
airfraes  aanufacturer ’s  intent  for  yfitsaticn  -ega'Oss  of  present  prtaary  rola. 
capability,  or  aod< f icati on. 


iQusry:  r«trl«v«  (*ircr*f  t .  1dm»)  continent . n%»«  =  Europe  and  elrcref  t .  htype  =  kZ. 


SfftsponM:  43-766  13-392  63-810  02-343  13-388  13-782 


Figure  3  A  smart  join  operation 


10 


3.2.3.  Aggregation  functions 


Aggregation  functions  are  useful  for  abstracting  a  detailed  database  and  retrieving  data  at  the 
desired  level  of  granularity.  Built-in  DBMS  aggregate  functions  are  limited  to  operations  such  as  count, 
sum,  and  average.  HD’s  aggregation  functions  allow  a  user  to  express  a  domain- specific  aggregation  and 
use  that  specification  for  interactive  queries.  Consider  the  query  shown  in  Figure  4.  In  this  example,  the 
user  is  interested  in  computing  the  firepower  associated  with  airbases.  In  the  AOB  database,  however, 
firepower  is  not  recorded  for  airbases  but  rather  it  is  stored  with  missile  depots.  An  IID  aggregation 
function  allows  a  user  to  specify  how  firepower  should  be  computed,  and  to  subsequently  invoke  the 
pre-specified  declaration.  In  this  way,  the  user  has  the  flexibility  to  interactively  derive  appropriate  data. 
Aggregation  functions,  like  view  templates,  enable  users  to  construct  virtual  columns  which  are  automa¬ 
tically  expanded  by  HD.  The  interactive  query  in  Figure  4  is  translated  into  a  Quel  query  of  the  form: 


retrieve  (airbase,  baseid,  firepower = avg  ( depot  firepower 
by  depot.baseid)) 

where  airbase  haseid  =  depot.baseid 


Coluen  ne*e:  Dtype 

Long  nm:  line  aircraft  type 

Halation:  aircraft 

Group:  none 

Unit*:  n/a 

Data  acquired:  17/5/85 

Source  agency:  Air  Resource  Information  Agency 
Derived  fro* :  n/a 
Obligatory:  no 
Default  value:  n/a 

Value  constraints:  (AA  At  AC  AD  Ia  SB  BC  BO  CA  ?B) 

Data  type:  C 
Length;  2 

Description:  The  first  character  indicates  the  eajijr  faai 'y  to  «mch  the  'tea  of 
•qutpeent  Delongs.  For  *0%,  cooes  are  A  for  rotary-eing  aircraft  or  A  for  fixed-on 
■»t.  The  second  cnarecter  contains  a  cooed  entry  describing  a  further  suofset 
nq  oithtn  the  ea)or  equipment  faeily.  For  AOB,  this  code  indicates  the 
«  eanufacturer's  intent  for  utilization  regardless  of  present  prleery  role, 
llity,  or  eodlf Icatlon. 


(avg  depot . f trepouar 
by  depot. b«s id) 
where  airbase,  bad d 
depot. bas id 


Query:  rstrisva  (a irb«*«. be si d ,  *f Irspowor* ) . 

query 

quit 

Select  an  action  in  the  above  eemi  by  eliding  any  mum  button  on  the  oesireo  itee. 

Figure  4  An  aggregation  function  for  firepower 


Aggregation  functions,  view  templates,  and  a  smart  join  operator  supply  the  user  with  a  more 
comprehensible  view  of  the  database  without  forcing  the  user  to  review  the  details  of  each  record.  We 
envision  users  constructing  libraries  of  view  templates  and  aggregation  functions.  These  stored  declare- 


11 


tions  can  be  accessed  and  viewed  by  other  users  thereby  creating  multiple  perspectives.  Soft  selection 
criteria  [Mart86]  is  another  area  which  relaxes  the  rigidity  of  DBMS  query  languages  by  allowing  sub¬ 
jective  or  varying  selection  qualifications.  Similar  research  has  been  conducted  for  statistical  databases 
where  aggregation  is  a  predominate  function  in  database  queries  [Chan81]. 


3.3.  Interactive  consistency  checking 

Many  knowledge  base  management  systems  and  intelligent  database  systems  are  providing  facil¬ 
ities  to  automatically  verify  semantic  constraints  through  the  use  of  triggers  and  allerters  [Ston85].  For 
interactive  database  users  who  are  deriving  personal  databases  from  large  public  databases,  conventional 
methodologies  for  constraint  specification  and  enforcement  do  not  apply.  Conventional  constraints  must 
be  built  into  the  data  dictionary  by  a  database  administrator  and  data  modeler.  Instead,  users  would  like 
to  express  new  value  and  structural  constraints,  and  modify  those  declared  for  the  public  databases.  The 
semantic  validation  capabilities  available  in  IID  allow  interactive  "scrubbing"  of  data  values  in  the  pub¬ 
lic  databases  which  may  be  incorrect  or  inconsistent  with  the  resulting  derived  database.  The  informa¬ 
tion  dictionary  maintains  knowledge  about  obligatory  fields,  default  values,  and  value  and  structural  con¬ 
straints.  For  instance,  if  the  number  of  aircraft  owned  by  a  squadron  is  set  to  "20”,  the  user  would  be 
notified  that  "20"  is  an  incorrect  value  because  of  a  domain  rule  stating  that  the  number  of  aircraft  owned 
by  squadron  must  be  a  multiple  of  6.  A  user  may  also  want  to  express  an  existence  constraint  of  the 
form: 

If  there  is  a  nuclear  launching  site  on  an  airbase, 
then  there  must  be  at  least  one  nuclear  weapons  depot  on  that  airbase. 


Validation  mode  in  IID  supports  both  value  constraints  and  functional  dependencies.  If  the  above 
rule  has  been  entered  and  validation  mode  is  enabled,  then  a  validation  procedure  is  invoked  whenever 
the  user  retrieves  a  nuclear  launching  site.  If  a  nuclear  weapons  depot  does  not  exist  in  the  derived  data¬ 
base,  the  user  would  be  notified  that  a  constraint  rule  has  been  violated. 

Constraint  management  is  receiving  much  attention  in  the  context  of  expert  database  systems  and 
knowledge  base  management  systems.  In  many  cases,  researchers  are  advocating  constraint 
specification,  propagation,  and  satisfaction  as  an  underlying  formalism  driving  the  entire  processing  of 
the  system  [Shep86].  In  HD,  however,  consistency  checking  is  approached  from  a  very  localized  per¬ 
spective,  that  is,  a  user’s  derivation  of  application  specific  databases.  HD’s  validation  procedures  report 
invalid  data  but  currendy  make  no  attempt  to  correct  inconsistencies. 


12 


4.  HD  architecture 


The  HD  software  system  is  comprised  of  three  major  processing  components:  the  Lingres  inter¬ 
face,  Iff)  object-oriented  dictionary  framework,  and  user  interface.  These  components  are  shown  as 
shaded  modules  in  Figure  S.  Domain  dependent  information  reside  in  at  least  three  data  and  knowledge 
bases:  the  relational  database  maintained  in  Ingres,  the  "public"  knowledge  base,  and  one  or  more 
"private"  knowledge  bases.  Figure  5  depicts  these  "domain  specific"  entities  as  dotted  modules.  Expla¬ 
nation  and  browsing,  verbose  mode,  and  validation  mode  are  currently  operational  in  HD.  Limited  func¬ 
tionality  for  aggregation  functions,  smart  joins,  and  user  templates  has  been  tested  and  general  versions 
are  currently  under  development  Design  and  implementation  of  an  extended  user  interface  is  also  un¬ 
derway. 


We  implemented  HD’s  user  interface  on  top  of  a  Sun  View  windows  package  in  Franzlisp.  Our 
initial  versior.  of  the  user  interface  was  designed  to  give  the  user  the  full  range  of  functionality  provided 
by  IID  at  the  expense  of  overloading  the  user  with  too  many  options.  We  are  experimenting  with  various 
designs  and  organization  of  windows,  menus,  and  input  procedures  to  maximize  the  capabilities  of  IID 
while  minimizing  the  cognitive  overhead  incurred  by  hierarchies  of  menus  and  windows. 


13 


Commands  issued  to  IID  through  the  user  interface  are  passed  on  to  IID’s  object-oriented  dic¬ 
tionary  framework.  We  implemented  this  module  as  a  domain- independent  and  DBMS-independent  en¬ 
vironment  for  reasoning  about  relational  database  entities.  The  dictionary  framework  incorporates  gen¬ 
eral  knowledge  about  DBMS  concepts  such  as  relations,  attributes,  and  joins.  In  addition,  the  frame¬ 
work  accesses  domain-specific  information  necessary  for  IID  processing.  During  IID  user  interaction, 
the  dictionary  framework  combined  with  domain  information,  such  as  AOB  data  and  knowledge  bases, 
enables  facilities  like  verbose  mode,  consistency  checking,  and  automatic  join  operations  by  reasoning 
about  database  structures  and  domain  entities. 

Much  of  HD’s  processing  translates  a  user’s  query  into  a  syntactically  and  semantically  valid 
Quel  query.  This  translation  is  similar  to  the  programming  language  concept  of  macro  expansion  where 
a  succinct  declarative  expression  is  replaced  by  a  detailed  procedural  expression.  IID  constructs  a  Quel 
command  (semantically  equivalent  to  the  user’s  input  query)  and  submits  it  to  Ingres  through  the  Lingres 
interface.  Data  instances  are  returned  to  the  user  following  IID  query  postprocessing. 

Three  separate  sources  of  information  comprise  the  domain  dependent  components  of  IID.  One 
data  repository  is  the  public  relational  database  maintained  in  Ingres.  The  AOB  database  we  are  utiliz¬ 
ing  to  develop  and  test  IID  contains  three  main  relations  of  approximately  2000,  7700,  and  1 1000  tuples, 
and  the  number  of  fields  per  relation  ranges  from  25  to  36.  This  database  is  the  source  of  value  data  re¬ 
trieved  in  response  to  HD  queries. 

A  "public"  knowledge  base  corresponding  to  a  domain  database  is  one  of  two  knowledge  sources 
representing  the  semantics  of  the  relational  database.  The  information  retained  in  this  knowledge  base 
can  be  regarded  as  the  default  semantics  applicable  to  the  domain  database.  Development  of  this  com¬ 
ponent  for  the  AOB  database  resulted  from  a  data  modeling  effort  which  proceeded  in  parallel  with  the 
design  and  implementation  of  IID’s  processing  components.  The  knowledge  base  is  organized  as  objects 
relevant  to  AOB  entities  such  as  aircraft  and  airbases.  Extensive  descriptional  information  to  support 
IID’s  explanation  facilities  was  acquired  from  AOB  domain  specialists  and  extracted  from  various 
sources  of  documentation.  The  second  knowledge  source,  a  private  knowledge  base,  represents  seman¬ 
tic  information  derived  by  a  user.  This  knowledge  base  augments  the  public  knowledge  base  and  stores 
aggregation  functions  and  view  templates  for  a  particular  simulation  mode'  or  user.  We  envision  many 
private  knowledge  bases  representing  different  views  of  the  domain  database.  During  our  initial 
developement  effort,  however,  we  have  been  experimenting  with  a  single  private  knowledge  base. 

The  Lingres  facility  we  developed  allows  access  to  an  Ingres  database  from  Flavors  and  Lisp, 
and  offers  the  full  functionality  of  Quel’s  retrieve,  create,  delete,  destroy,  and  append  commands. 
Lingres  maintains  only  the  schema  and  dictionary  data  that  Ingres  itself  supports.  These  capabilities  are 
similar  in  functionality  to  those  offered  by  Kee  Connection,  an  expert  system  tool  interface  [Inte87],  For 
tht  purposes  of  modularity  and  future  development,  our  goal  for  Lingres  was  merely  to  mimic  the  func¬ 
tionality  of  Ingres,  i.e., "Ingres  in  Lisp".  In  the  future,  changing  to  Common  Lisp  (or  another  Lisp)  will 
affect  only  the  "Lisp  to  C’  connection;  supporting  SQL  will  only  require  new  parsing  routines  in 


1 


14 


Lingres;  and  changing  to  another  relational  DBMS,  e.g.,  Oracle,  would  simply  mean  replacing  Ingres 
system  calls  with  calls  to  Oracle  system  routines.  One  of  the  most  time  consuming  operations  of  HD  is 
communicating  with  Ingres;  therefore,  Lingres  also  improves  IID  efficiency  by  duplicating  Ingres  meta¬ 
data,  thereby  reducing  communications  with  Ingres. 


5.  Related  research  efforts 


Similar  work  addressing  browsing  and  explanation  is  often  refered  to  as  metadata  management. 
Mark  and  Roussopoulos  [Mark86,  Mark87]  approach  metadata  management  through  self-describing 
data  models.  They  are  developing  capabilities,  similar  to  IID,  to  initially  browse  through  the  schema  to 
learn  about  the  database  and  then  proceed  to  access  the  data.  They  are  applying  their  model  to  facilitate 
standardized  information  interchange.  In  this  application,  however,  they  are  not  dealing  with  semantic 
aspects  of  the  data,  and  therefore  have  not  incorporated  domain  specific  knowledge  for  explanation  and 
validation. 

Information  Resource  Dictionary  Systems  (IRDS)  have  also  been  the  subject  of  a  considerable 
amount  research  [Dolk87,Kers83,Nava86].  In  the  past,  IRDS  were  considered  primarily  as  a  design 
tool  for  information  modeling  and  database  design.  Only  active  data  dictionaries  were  utilized  during 
batch  DBMS  operation  or  real-time  transaction  processing.  In  [Gold85]  Goldfine  describes  the  National 
Bureau  of  Standards  specifications  of  an  IRDS  system.  This  standard  specifies  a  kernel  set  of  basic  data 
dictionary  capabilities  plus  a  collection  of  independent  optional  modules.  So  far,  three  additional 
modules  have  been  specified  dealing  with  security,  application  program  interface,  and  documentation. 
The  emphasis  on  program  interfaces,  and  neglect  of  interactive  tools  is  evident  in  the  specification. 
However,  we  are  seeing  efforts  extending  the  kernel  IRDS  specification  to  support  interactive  environ¬ 
ments  [Koss87], 

The  scope  of  an  IRDS  system  embodies  the  major  activities,  processes,  information  flows,  orga¬ 
nizational  constraints,  and  concepts  of  an  "Enterprise  Model”.  Because  interactive  use  of  a  DBMS  and 
data  dictionary  have  not  been  feasible  until  recently,  traditional  information  management  processes  do 
not  include  casual  users  exploring  a  database,  deriving  new  databases,  or  sharing  personal  databases. 
We  expect  that  the  functionality  offered  by  IID  will  become  necessary  as  the  use  of  interactive  informa¬ 
tion  systems  proliferates. 


15 


6.  Conclusions  and  future  work 


In  this  paper  we  have  discussed  a  development  effort  and  resulting  software  for  improved  in¬ 
teractions  between  a  database  user  and  a  relational  DBMS.  IID  is  targeted  to  aid  a  casual  database  user 
who  is  familiar  with  the  database  domain  but  is  not  an  experienced  DBMS  user.  One  of  our  research 
goals  was  to  extract  domain-specific  information  from  a  simulation  expert  and  incorporate  it  as 
knowledge  in  the  information  dictionary.  Another  goal  was  to  represent  knowledge  about  relational  data¬ 
base  operations,  such  as  join  operations,  to  support  query  construction.  Explanation  and  browsing,  cus¬ 
tomized  data  manipulation,  and  consistency  checking  are  the  main  processes  supported  by  the  IID  in¬ 
teractive  environment.  Our  initial  studies  indicate  that  IID  facilities  augmented  with  domain  and  data¬ 
base  knowledge  will  significandy  streamline  the  interactive  preparation  of  simulation  databases. 

Development  of  IID  grew  out  of  a  larger  project  which  is  addressing  the  use  of  large  heterogene¬ 
ous  databases  in  object-oriented  simuladon  systems.  We  have  recognized  that  the  preparation  phases  ol 
mental  modeling  and  conceptual  data  manipuladon  stem  from  attempts  to  view  a  flat  relational  database 
as  an  object-oriented  hierarchy  of  simuladon  enddes.  HD  strives  to  present  the  mapping  between  rela¬ 
tions  and  domain  enddes  more  explicidy. 

In  the  short  term,  we  will  be  expanding  IED’s  facilities  to  include  spatial  presentation  and  aggre¬ 
gation.  In  many  public  databases,  location  of  entities  is  a  major  determinate  in  whether  or  not  the  entity 
is  included  in  a  simulation  database.  We  plan  to  extend  the  explanation  facilities  so  that  spatial  data  can 
be  quickly  plotted  on  a  geographical  map,  and  data  points  on  the  map  can  be  easily  accessed  and  aggre¬ 
gated. 


Configuration  management  of  both  public  and  simulation  databases  is  another  desirable  feature. 
Users  would  like  to  be  notified  if  any  of  their  simulation  data  has  been  invalidated  by  a  new  version  of 
the  public  databases.  Furthermore,  they  hope  to  be  able  to  pose  queries  about  the  changes  that  were  en¬ 
forced  by  a  new  version,  such  as:  What  is  the  difference  between  the  old  and  new  versions  of  the  F- 14 
aircraft  data?  To  support  this  feature,  it  is  necessary  to  track  and  log  the  derivation  of  any  simulation  da¬ 
tabase  and  reason  about  operations  which  produced  the  resulting  data. 

In  parallel  with  IID  development,  we  will  be  augmenting  our  simulation  knowledge  base  with 
metadata  and  constraint  information  related  not  only  to  the  relational  aspects  of  the  data,  but  also  to  the 
object-oriented  schema  of  the  data.  Our  long  term  objective  is  the  use  of  IID  as  an  active  information 
dictionary  within  an  object-oriented  simulation  language.  In  this  role  it  will  provide  a  dynamic  commun¬ 
ication  channel  between  a  object-oriented  semantic  schema  and  the  corresponding  relational  instances  of 
many  diverse  public  databases. 


16 


[Allc82] 

[Chan81] 

[Curt81] 

[Dolk87] 

[Gold85] 

[Inte87] 

[Kers83] 

[Koss87] 

[Mark86] 

[Mark87] 

[Mart86] 

[McCa82] 

[Nava861 

[Shep86] 


References 

Allen,  F.  W.,  Loomis,  M.  E.,  and  Manning,  M.  V.,  “The  integrated  dictionary/directory  sys¬ 
tem,”  ACM  Computing  Surveys  14(2),  pp.245-286  (June  1982). 

Chan,  P.  and  Shoshani,  A.,  “Subject:  A  directory  driven  system  for  organizing  and  access¬ 
ing  large  statistical  databases,”  pp.  553-563  in  Proceedings  of  the  seventh  international 
conference  on  very  large  Data  Bases,  Cannes,  France  (1981). 

Curtice,  R.M.,  “Data  dictionaries:  An  assessment  of  current  practice  and  problems,”  pp. 
564-570  in  Proceedings  of  7th  conference  on  very  large  data  bases,  Cannes,  France  (Sep¬ 
tember  1981). 

Dolk,  D.  and  II,  R.  Kirsch,  “A  relational  information  resource  dictionary  system,”  Com¬ 
munications  of  the  ACM  30(1),  pp. 48-61  (January  1987). 

Goldfine,  A.,  “The  information  resource  dictionary  system,”  pp.  1 14-122  in  Proceedings  of 
the  fourth  international  conference  Entity-Relationship  approach,  Chicago,  IL  (October 
1985). 

Intellinews  3(2),  Intellicorp  (January  1987). 

Kerschberg,  L.,  Marchand,  D.,  and  Sen,  A.,  “Information  system  integration:  A  metadata 
management  approach,”  pp.  223-239  in  Proceedings  of  the  fourth  international  conference 
on  Information  Systems,  Houston,  TX  (1983). 

Kossman,  R.,  “An  active  information  resource  dictionary,”  in  Proceedings  of  Ingres  user 
association  meetings,  San  Francisco,  CA  (April  1987). 

Mark,  L.  and  Roussopoulos,  N.,  “Metadata  management,”  Computer  19(12),  pp.26-35 
(December  1986). 

Mark,  L.  and  Roussopoulos,  N.,  “Information  interchange  between  self-describing  data¬ 
bases,”  Data  Engineering  10(3),  pp.46-52  (September  1987). 

Martin,  D.,  Advanced  database  techniques,  The  MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  MA  (1986). 

McCarthy,  J.L.,  “Metadata  management  for  large  statistical  databases,”  in  Proceedings  of 
8th  conference  on  very  large  databases  (September  1982). 

Navathe,  S.  and  Kerschberg,  L.,  “Role  of  dictionaries  in  information  resource  manage¬ 
ment,”  Information  and  Management  10(1),  pp.21-46  (January  1986). 

Shephard,  A.  and  Kerschberg,  L.,  “Constraint  management  in  expert  database  systems,” 
pp.  309-331  in  Expert  database  systems,  ed.  L.  Kerschberg,  Benjamin/Cummings  Publish¬ 
ing  Company,  Inc.,  Menlo  Park,  CA  (1986). 


17 


[Ston85]  Stonebraker,  M.  and  Rowe,  L.A.,  “The  design  of  POSTGRES,”  Memorandum  No. 

UCB/ERL  85/95,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  Berkeley,  CA  (November  15, 1985). 

(Tou82]  Tou,  F.  N.,  Williams,  M.  D.,  Fikes,  R.,  Henderson,  A.,  and  Malone,  T.,  “Rabbit:  An  intelli¬ 
gent  database  assistant,”  pp.  314-318  in  Proceedings  of  the  third  annual  national  confer¬ 
ence  on  artificial  intelligence,  Pittsburg  (1982). 


