AD-A022  559 


SYNTACTIC  ANrtLYSIS  IN  A SPEECH  UNDERSTANDING  SYSTEM 
Madeleine  Bates 

Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Incorporated 


Prepared  for: 

Office  of  Naval  Research 


August  1975 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


Natioinl  Technical  Infiirmation  Service 
V.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


3116 


SYNTACTIC  ANALYSIS  IN  A SPEECH  UNDERSTANDING  SYSTEM 


t 1975 


Sponsored  by 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
ARPA  Order  No.  2904 


This  research  was  principally  supported  by  the  Advanced  Research 
Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  Defense  and  was  monitored 
by  ONR  under  Contract  No.  N00014-75-C-0533 . Partial  support  of 
the  author  by  NSF  grant  GS-39834  to  Harvard  University  is  grate- 
fullv  acknowledged. 

The  views  and  conclusions  contained  in  this  document  are  those 
of  the  author  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily 
representing  the  official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied, 
of  the  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  or  the  U.S.  Government. 


REPRODUCED  BY 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORAAATION  SERVICE 

U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OP  COMMERCE 
SPRINGFIELD,  VA.  22161 

CHICAGO  HOUSTON  lOS  ANGELES 


OXNARD  SAN  FRANCISCO 


BOSTON  WASHINGTON 


BBN  Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


SYNTACTIC  ANALYSIS  IN  A SPEECH  UNDERSTANDING  SYSTEM 

Madeleine  Bates 


Sponsored  by 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
ARPA  Order  No.  2904 


This  research  was  principally  supported  by  the  Advanced  Research 
Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  Defense  and  was  monitored 
by  ONR  under  Contract  No.  N00014-75-C-0533 . Partial  support  of 
the  author  by  NSF  grant  G.S-398  34  to  Harvard  University  is  grate- 
fully acknowledged. 


1 


SYNOPSIS 


‘ 'l! 

I ' 


This  report  presents  a system  for  syntactic  analysis 
in  the  context  of  a computer  system  for  the  understanding 
of  spontaneously  spoken  English. 

When  people  speak,  they  make  certain  assumptions 
about  the  ability  of  their  listener  to  understand  them. 
Human  listeners  are  very  good  at  understanding  even  very 
noisy,  incomplete,  and  ambiguous  speech  when  it  is 
presented  in  a context  which  allows  the  listener  to  draw 
on  his  knowledge  of  the  topic  under  discussion,  general 
knowledge  of  the  world,  knowledge  of  the  speaker  and  of 
the  previous  dialogue,  and  other  non-acoustic  information. 
Presuiiiably  because  of  this  assumed  capability,  speakers  do 
not  produce  an  acoustic  signal  which  carries  enough 
information  to  be  decoded  into  unique  phonemes  or  words  on 
the  basis  of  acoustic  information  alone. 

This  implies  that  no  matter  how  good  the  acoustic 
processor  of  a speech  understanding  system  is,  it  will  not 
be  able  to  uniquely  identify  all  the  words  of  the 
utterance,  and  some  other  processors  will  be  reouired  to 
use  non-acoustic  knowledge,  such  as  syntax  and  semantics, 
to  fill  in  and  disambiguate  the  utterance.  This  report  is 


I 


n 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


concerned  with  the  role  of  syntax  is  such  a process. 


A syntactic  processor  for  speech  must  be  constructed 
quite  differently  from  one  for  text  input.  Given  that  the 
words  produced  from  the  acoustic  information  may  not  be 
unique,  adjacent,  or  all  correct,  we  will  argue  that 
strict  left  to  right,  processing  is  precluded.  The 
syntactic  processor  must  be  able  to  predict  words  or 
syntactic  classes  which  may  fill  the  gaps  in  the 
utterance.  It  must  also  Identify  syntactic  structures 
which  may  be  formed  from  the  partial  information  which  is 
available . 


The  syntactic  analysis  system  presented  in  this 
thesis  is  composed  of  two  parts,  a grammar  and  a pai'ser. 
The  parser  uses  the  grammar  to  process  a partial  utterance 
and  to  make  predictions  about  missing  words. 


The  grammar  for  the  system  is  written  in  a 
modification  of  the  Augmented  Transition  Network  (ATN) 
formalism  developed  by  Woods  [91-93] . The  grammar  itself 
began  as  a modified  subset  of  the  previously  existing  ATN 
grammar  for  the  LUNAR  text  question-answering  system  [97] 
but  has  been  expanded  to  include  constructions  not 
accepted  by  the  LUNAR  grammar  such  as  dates  and  compound 
number  expressions.  The  expressive  power  of  the  modified 
ATN  formalism  is  well  beyond  the  finite  state,  context 


be 

able 

to 

predict 

words  or  ^ 

may 

fill 

the 

gaps 

in  the  | 

I Pil  B-  ■ f P 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 


1 


I 


I 


I 


free,  or  augmented  context  free  grammars  used  by  other 
current  speech  understanding  systems  (see  Chapter  Two  for 
a review  of  such  systems). 

The  parser  for  the  system  is  completely  different  in 
design  from  Woods'  parser  and  is  the  primary  contribution 
of  this  work.  It  uses  a judicious  mixture  of  top  down, 
bottom  up,  depth  first,  ard  breadth  first  parsing 
strategies  to  take  advantage  of  local  information  which  is 
available  in  the  input  without  being  drawn  into  Jong, 
erroneous  paths  which  must  later  be  abandoned.  It  also 
saves  all  the  information  gained  while  following 
alternative  parsing  paths  so  that  any  two  (or  more)  parse 
paths  which  have  a common  portion  can  share  the  common 
part  without  reparsing  it.  This  is  true  even  if  the  pa^se 
paths  split  before  and/or  after  the  common  section,  and 
ever  if  the  common  .section  analyzes  only  part  of  a 
complete  syntactic  constituent. 

One  of  the  most  severe  problems  faced  by  a speech 
parser  is  the  combinatorial  explosion  of  partial  parse 
paths  resulting  from  input  in  which  not  all  the  words  in 
the  sentence  are  available.  This  system  controls  the 
explosion  by  several  methods:  the  use  of  a 
well-formed-substring  table  to  store  constituents  which 
have  been  parsed  so  that  they  never  need  to  be 
re-processed,  merging  of  partial  parse  paths,  attempting 

iv 


E 


B- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

to  ex*‘ end  only  the  best  Ci.e.  most  likely)  parse  paths, 
building  a data  base  of  parse  paths  which  can  be  shared 
from  one  invocation  of  the  parser  to  the  next,  and  using 
other  sources  of  information  such  as  semantics  wherever 
possible  to  help  identify  most  likely  paths. 

Chapter  One  describes  the  nature  of  speech  and  the 
speech  understanding  process,  concluding  with  a 
description  of  the  input,  output,  and  processing 
characteristics  which  a speech  parser  must  have.  Chapter 
Two  reviews  several  methods  for  parsing  formal  languages 
and  English  text,  and  surveys  current  work  in  speech 
understanding  with  particular  emphasis  on  syntactic 
capability 

In  Chapter  Three  we  detail  the  ATN  grammar  formalism 
and  the  modifications  which  have  been  made  to  it,  and 
describe  the  index  into  the  grammar  which  provides 
information  needed  for  some  right  to  left  processing  and 
for  making  predictions.  A small  sample  grammar  is  also 
given . 


Chapter  Four  gives  an  overview  of  the  operation  of 
the  speech  parser,  with  illustrations,  and  Chapter  Five 
presents  more  details  of  the  process,  particularly  the 
scoring  mechanisms.  Annotated  examples  of  the  system  in 
operation  are  given  in  Chapter  Six.  Chapter  Seven 


1 


{ 


IJ 

u 


V 


:d 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


evaluates  the  work  and  suggests  extensions  and  areas  of 


interest  for  further  research. 


The  appendices  present  in  detail  two  grammars  used  by 
the  system  and  give  the  vocabulary  currently  in  use,  with 
a breakdown  by  syntactic  categories  and  features. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

CHAPTER  ONE:  INTRODUCTION  TO  SPEECH  UNDERSTANDING 

1 . 1 Overview 1 

1.2  The  Nature  of  Speech 2 

1.3  The  Nature  of  the  Speech  Understanding  Process  . . 8 

1.4  The  Nature  of  the  Syntactic  Component 12 

1.4.1  The  Input 12 

1.4.2  The  Output 14 

1.4.3  The  Processing 16 

CHAPTER  TWO:  REVIEW  OF  PARSING  METHODS  AND  SYSTEMS 

2.1  Introduction  . 19 

2.2  Formal  Languages  19 

2.2.1  Top  Down 21 

2.2.2  Bottom  Up 25 

2.3  Systems  for  English  Text 27 

2.3.1  The  Transformational  Approach  27 

2.3.2  Strinc^  Analysis 30 

2.3.3  Chart  Parsing 32 

2.3.4  Transition  Network  Grammars  34 

2.4  Sy.stems  for  Speech 40 

2.4.1  Vicens-Reddy 40 

2.4.2  Carnegie-Mellon 's  Systems 41 

2.4.3  SDC's  System 43 

2.4.4  SRI 's  System 44 

2.4.5  Lincoln's  Svstem 45 

2.4.6  LPrtRS 46 

2.4.7  SPEECHLIS 48 

2.5  Conclusions 51 

CHAPTER  THREE:  THE  GRAMMAR 

3.1  Introduction 55 

3.2  Augmented  Transition  Network  Grammars 56 

3.3  Modifications 62 

3.3.1  Tests  on  the  Arcs 62 

3.3.2  LIFTR's 64 

3.3.3  SENDR's  . 65 

3.3.4  The  HOLD  List 69 

3.3.5  RESUMEi'AG-RESUME 69 

3.3.6  Weights  on  Arcs 71 

3.3.7  Minor  Changes 72 

3.3.8  Summary  and  Sample  Grammars  73 

3.4  The  Grammar  Index 77 

vii 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

PAGE 

CHAPTER  P^OUR:  OVERVIEW  OF  THE  SPEECH  PARSER 


4.1  Introduction 8l 

4.2  Input 81 

4.3  Operation 85 

4.3.1  Preliminaries  85 

4.3.2  Beginning  to  Parse  an  Island 90 

4.3.3  Parsing  Through  an  Island  94 

4.3.4  Ending  an  Island 103 

4.3.5  Ending  a Theory 104 

4.3.6  Processing  Multiple  Theories 107 

4.3.7  Processing  Events  Ill 

4.3.8  Summary 113 


iJ 

Li 


CHAPTER  FIVE;  MORE  DETAILS  OF  THE  PARSING  PROCESS 


5.1  Introduction 11^ 

5.2  Depth  vs.  Breadth 114 

5.3  Scoring  Paths II8 

5.4  Scoring  Pi’edictions 125 

5.5  Strategy 129 


CHAPTER  SIX:  EXAMPLES  AMD  RESULTS 


6.1  Introductiof  134 

6 . 2 Example  1 135 

6.3  Example  2 143 

6.4  Example  3 154 

6.5  Example  4 171 

6.6  Summary I86 


CHAPTER  SEVEN:  CONCLUSIONS  AND  FURTHER  RESEARCH 


7.1  Strengths  and  Weaknesses  of  SPARSER I88 

7.2  Prosodies 192 

7.3  Extensions  and  Further  Research 197 

7.3.1  Ungrammatical  Input  197 

7.3.2  An  Experiment 199 

7.4  Conclusion 200 


I 


I 


viu 


ix 


j 


LI 


FIGURES 


PAGE 

1.1  A Word  Lattice 7 

2.1  Sample  Chart'  for  "high  ball" 33 

2.2  A Section  of  a Transition  Network  Grammar.  . . 37 

2.3  Another  Simple  ATN 39 

2.4  Design  of  BBN  SPEECHLIS 50 

3.1  Two  Representations  of  a Parse  Tree 68 

3.2  MINIGRAMMAR 75 

4.1  Sample  Word  Match  Sets 83 

4.2  Portion  of  MINIGRAMMAR  Needed  to  Parse 

"chemical  analyses" 36 

4.3  Path  for  Parsing  "chemical  analyses" 89 


4.4  Initial  Map  for  Parsing  "chemical  analyses".  . 91 


4.5  Lead-in  Transitions  for  Parsing 

"chemical  analyses" 92 

4.6  Map  after  Parsing  "chemical  analyses".  . . . 102 

4.7  Map  after  Parsing  "nickel  analyses" 109 

5.1  The  Left  to  Right  Approach 132 

5.2  The  Ends  Toward  Middle  Approach 133 


1 


Chapter  1 


1 

* 

t 


Introduction 


I 

[ 

I 


5 


1.1  OVERVIEW 

Understanding  speech  is  an  extremely  complex  process 
which  requires  the  use  of  many  types  of  knowledge,  one  of 
which  is  syntax.  This  thesis  presents  a system  called 
SPARSER  which  is  designed  to  provide  and  use  the  syntactic 
knowledge  necessary  to  support  an  artificial  speech 
understanding  system. 

The  remainder  of  this  chapter  discusses  the  nature  of 
the  problem  and  presents  the  assumptions  about  other 
components  of  the  system  which  will  necessarily  interact 
with  syntax.  Chapter  Two  discusses  various  parsing 
strategies  used  for  formal  languages  and  text 
understanding  systems,  and  surveys  previous  and  current 
work  in  the  area  of  speech  understanding.  Chapter  Three 
describes  the  grammar,  and  Chapter  Four  presents  SPARSER, 
a speech  parser.  Chapter  Five  details  the  operation  of 
the  system,  and  Chapter  Six  gives  sample  results  and 
statistics.  The  final  chapter  discusses  the  strengths  and 


1 


I 


-1- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


weaknesses  of  SPARSER  and  indicates  directions  for  further 
research . 

1.2  THE  NATURE  OF  SPEECH 

There  are  many  types  of  speech.  Words  may  be  spoken 
in  isolation,  with  long  pauses  between  them.  Sentences 
may  be  read,  usually  with  strong  inflections.  Natural, 
spontaneous  speech  where  the  words  are  spoken  together 
without  many  pauses  may  fall  anywhere  on  a continuum  from 
very  formal,  slow,  grammatical  speech  to  very  informal, 
rapid,  ungrammatical,  conversational  speech.  We  will 
assume  for  the  remainder  of  this  thesis  that  unless 
explicitly  stated  otherwise  ’’speech”  means  grammatical 
speech  spoken  at  a moderate  rate  with  natural  inflections 
and  pauses,  spontaneously  produced  but  similar  to  the  type 
of  speech  produced  by  reading  text. 

It  is  a well  documented  fact  [17,  3^1,  35,  57]  that 
there  is  not  enough  information  in  the  speech  signal  to 
uniquely  identify  the  phonemes  or  words  in  a normally 
spoken  utterance.  This  is  not  due  just  to  the  occurrence 
of  homonyms,  but  to  a large  number  of  other  factors.  Even 
in  speech  produced  at  a normal  rate  of  speed,  word  and 


-2- 


■ 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


sentence  boundaries  are  usually  obscured  (as  in  ”teara 
eating",  "team  meeting",  "tea  meeting”),  the  pronunciation 
of  phonemes  is  influenced  by  the  surrounding  context, 
phonemes  are  inserted,  deleted,  or  altered  (e.g.  "give 
me"  becomes  "gimme"),  and  there  is  often  very  little 
acoustic  difference  between  sounds  which  are  quite 
different  in  the  ideal  phonetic  representr cion. 

Besides  the  ambiguity  and  erroi  inherent  in  the 
acoustic  signal,  we  may  safely  assume  that  the  acoustic 
processing  component  of  any  -rtificial  speech 
understanding  system  will  introduce  additional  errors  jnd 
ambiguity  because  of  the  uncertainty  in  the  process  of 
segmenting  continuous  speech  into  units  (phonemes, 
transemes  [20],  APEL 's  [89],  syllables,  words,  etc.)  and 
in  the  identification  of  those  units. 

Much  of  the  current  knowledge  of  acoustic-phonetics 
(which  relates  acoustic  properties  of  the  speech  signal  to 
the  phonemes  which  underlie  them)  consists  of  rules  which 
are  generaive  in  nature,  not  analytic.  In  addition,  it  is 
usually  not  possible  to  uniquely  identify  a portion  of 
acoustically  processed  data  as  a single  phoneme;  instead, 
classification  into  sets  of  possible  phonemes  is  all  that 
can  be  done  (see,  for  example,  Schwartz  and  Makhoul  [75]). 


-3- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


For  example,  it  may  be  possible  to  determine  that  a gi/ven 
segment  is  a nasal  without  being  able  to  say  whether  it  is 
an  /m/  or  an  /n/.  If  such  a segment  were  followed  by  a 
segment  which  could  only  be  classified  as  a front  vowel, 
and  that  were  in  turn  followed  by  an  unvoiced  stop  (either 
/t/,  /k/,  or  /p/),  a schwa,  and  an  /!/,  the  the  word 
represented  by  that  segmentation  and  labeling  could  be 
either  "metal"  or  "nickel".  Determining  the  segment 
boundaries  themselves  is  not  easy,  since  a sound  like  /!/ 
may  appear  t''  be  the  sequence  /a/  /!/  and  vice  ve"sa.  The 
recognition  of  small  function  words  such  as  "the",  "a", 
"of",  "have",  "did",  etc.  is  particularly  difficult 
because  there  is  frequently  no  more  than  the  very 
slightest  acoustic  cue  to  their  presence,  and  such  a cue 
may  not  be  sufficitent  to  determine  the  identity  of  the 
word . 


Lexical  retrieval  and  word  matching,  the  process  of 
scanning  an  acoustically  processed  utterance  to  determine 
(with  the  help  of  a dictionary)  what  words  seem  to  be 
there  is  a non-trivial  task  which  has  been  discussed  in 
detail  elsewhere  [42,  71].  Basically,  the  process  of 
comparing  the  ideal  phonemic  representation  of  a word 
against  a portion  of  the  output  of  an  acoustic  processor 
results  in  (at  least)  a score  which  indicates  how  well  the 


-4- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


expected  pronunciation  matches  the  acoustics. 


i: 

!: 

I 


Because  of  the  errors  produced  by  segmentation  and 
labeling,  we  cannot  assume  that  the  correct  words  will 
always  score  best  or  even  high.  Special  matching  rules 
which  attempt  to  compensate  for  particularly  poor  acoustic 
information  at  the  beginning  or  end  of  an  utterance  may 
result  in  matching  such  phonetically  diverse  words  as 
"did",  "give",  and  "been"  in  the  same  portion  of  the 
utterance  while  missing  the  correct  word  "have". 

The  lexical  retrieval  process  could  return  the  result 
of  matching  every  word  in  the  system's  vocabulary  at  every 
point  in  the  utterance  but  this  time-consuming  process 
would  produce  a vast  amount  of  information,  most  of  it 
useless.  Clearly  a bettei*  approach  would  be  to  limit  the 
number  of  words  returned  by  discarding  all  those  which 
score  below  some  given  threshold.  If  the  threshold  is  set 
too  low,  a great  many  spurious  words  will  be  found,  and 
there  is  no  guarantee  (unless  the  threshold  is  zero)  that 
all  the  correct  words  will  be  found  in  their  proper 
places.  The  higher  the  threshold  is  set,  the  fewer  words 
(both  correct  and  incorrect)  will  be  found.  The  optimal 
threshold  will  achieve  a balance  between  accuracy  and 
precision.  It  should  not  be  necessary  to  retrieve  all  the 


-5- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


correct  words,  as  long  as  those  which  are  found  are 
sufficient  to  suggest  those  which  are  missing. 

Preliminary  results  of  the  BBN  speech  understanding 
system  (reported  by  Woods  in  [9^])  indicated  that  the 
ratio  of  correct  to  incorrect  words  found  can  be  expected 
to  be  range  between  1:20  and  1:50,  with  about  55-60$  of 
the  actual  words  found.  More  recent  results  using  a 
different  word  matching  scheme  on  acoustic  data  which  was 
segmented  and  labeled  by  hand  rather  than  by  machine  [^1] 
show  that  this  ratio  can  be  lowered  to  about  1:3  with  63$ 
of  tne  words  found  if  that  level  of  acoustic  segmentation 
can  be  reached  automatically. 

We  conclude  that  acoustic  and  lexical  processing  of  a 
spoken  utterance  will  result  in  the  discovery  of  a number 
of  likely  word  candidates  at  many  places  in  the  utterance. 
Most  of  these  words  will  be  spurious.  This  is  illustrated 
in  Figure  1.1  by  a structure  called  a word  lattice  which 
shows  schematically  that  many  words  may  initially  appear 
to  be  present  in  a simple  utterance.  In  this 
representation  the  numbers  along  the  horizontal  scale  are 
segment  boundary  points  in  the  utterance  which  roughly 
correspond  to  points  in  time  (but  not  exactly,  since  two 
or  more  boundary  points  may  be  used  for  the  same  instant 


-6- 


Figure  1 . 1 
A Word  Lattice 

Sentence:  Give  me  all  glass  samples  with  magnetite. 


-7- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranf.k  and  Newnan  Inc. 


1.3  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SPEECH  UNDERSTANDING  PROCESS 

We  do  not  attempt  here  to  say  that  the  way  a 
particular  artificial  system  works  implies  something  about 
the  way  that  people  understand  language.  Nor  is  there 
enough  known  about  the  way  people  understand  language  to 
say  that  SPARSER  is  modeled  after  the  human  p-ocess. 
However,  human  beings  have  been  engaged  for  millions  of 
years  in  the  process  of  oral  communication  and  presumably 
have  gradually  optimized  themselves  for  the  task  for 
perhaps  have  optimized  the  task  to  suit  themselves).  It 
is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  any  effective  speech 
understanding  system  would  have  some  features  in  common 
with  the  way  people  process  speech.  We  shall  therefore 
Justify  some  of  our  assumptions  concerning  the  nature  of 
the  task  and  the  relation  of  the  syntactic  component  to 
the  rest  of  the  system  by  reference  to  human  behavior, 
without,  however,  claiming  any  further  similarity. 

When  people  speak  naturally  and  informally  they 
frequently  make  grammatical  mistakes,  yet  they  are  easily 
understood.  This  would  indicate  that  a syntax-driven 
system  for  speech  understanding  (which  wcujd  accept  only 
input  meeting  rigid  syntactic  requirements)  might  be 
adequate  for  a limited  application,  but  would  not  be 


I 


I 

I 


! IJ 


j 


i; 

i; 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc.  i 

I 

extendible  to  more  natural,  conversational  speech.  Since 

a number  of  word  candidates  are  likely  to  be  found 

throughout  the  utterance,  it  may  be  fruitful  to  be  able  to  j 

select  a subset  of  them  on  semantic,  pragmatic,  or 

prosodic  grounds  as  well  as  syntactic,  depending  on  which 

cues  seem  most  robust.  A system  in  which  syntax  W's  one  ' 

of  a number  of  equally  important  components  contributing 

to  the  understanding  of  a sentence  would  be  more  flexible 

than  one  which  was  totally  or  primarily  syntax  driven. 

People  use  extensive  knowledge  in  order  to  comprehend 
spoken  utterances  and  it  is  now  generally  accepted  <-hat 
any  successful  speech  understanding  system  must  also  use  a 
number  of  knowledge  sources  in  combination  [22,  57].  It 
is  not  enough  to  follow  the  paradigm  of  "segment  the 
acoustic  signal  into  phonemes,  then  identify  the  phonemes 
and  words,  then  parse  the  sentence,  then  interpret  the 
structure."  Acoustics  alone  cannot  be  depended  upon  to 
provide  a unique  (or  even  only  slightly  ambiguous) 
segmentation  of  the  input  stream  into  words.  Also,  all 
the  words  in  the  utterance  will  not  necessarily  be 
discovered  by  acoustic  information  alone. 


-9- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Why,  in  particular,  is  syntax  needed  to  understand 
speech?  Clearly,  it  is  the  grammatical  structure  of  "John 
hit  Bob"  which  differ'entiates  its  meaning  from  that  of 
"Bob  hit  John"  or  "John  was  hit  by  Bob".  Similarly, 
consider  the  syntactic  case  difference  between  "he"  and 
"him"  in  "The  man  who  knew  him  was  going  left"  ard  "The 
man  who  knew  he  was  going  left,"  l3]  where  the  case  of  the 
pronoun  immediately  signals  whether  it  is  simply  the 
object  of  "knew"  or  the  subject  of  an  embedded  complement. 
Working  from  the  premise  that  one  is  more  likely  to  make  a 
grammatical  statement  than  an  ungrammatical  one,  in  a 
situation  of  lexical  ambiguity  one  may  use  syntactic 
consistency  to  decide  between  "the  cat  sin  the  tree"  and 
the  cat's  in  the  tree".  And  finally,  the  existence  of 
two  or  more  syntactic  structures  indicates  ambiguous 
sentences  or  constituents  such  as  "He  gave  her  cat  food" 
and  "the  boy  with  the  cat  in  the  tree"  (who  is  in  the 
tree?).  It  may  be  necessary  for  some  syntactic  structure 
to  be  built  for  these  ambiguous  strings  in  order  for  some 
other  knowledge  source  to  choose  between  them.  If  the 
syntactic  ambiguity  cannot  be  resolved,  xt  means  that  the 
utterance  is  truly  ambiguous,  in  which  case  the  system 
should  perhaps  ask  for  clarification  in  the  same  way  that 
a human  listener  would  do. 


-10- 


I 


Report  No . 3116 


Belt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 

• to 


i: 

«• 

] 


1 

mm 

m » 

I 

mm 

I 

mm 


mtmt 

I 

mm 


\ 


Syntactic  consistency  should  not  be  the  only  factor 
in  determining  the  utterance  however,  since  it  is  possible 
(even  likely)  to  be  able  to  find  a syntactically 
consistent  interpretation  of  the  utterance  which  is  wrong. 
Because  there  will  be  many  possible  words  for  many 
portions  of  the  utterance,  there  would  be  too  many 
syntactically  correct  but  meaningless  combinations  of 
words  to  justify  requiring,  a complete  parse  of  the  input 
before  any  semantic  processing  is  done.  In  order  to 
obtain  a word  lattice  complete  enough  to  parse  (i.e.  with 
at  least  all  the  content  words  present)  cur’^ent  experience 
indicates  that  about  80  words  would  have  to  be  considered 
for  an  average  7 word  sentence  [41].  Even  in  the  much 
smaller  word  lattice  of  Figure  1.1  it  can  be  seen  that 
there  are  numerous  short  sequences  which  are  syntactically 
but  not  semantically  valid  (e.g.  "Ten  people  are  glass 
samples  with  magnetite",  "glass  samples  give  magnetite", 
"lunar  samples  give  magnetite",  "samples  give  lead", 
"people  are  percent",  etc.). 


I 


-11- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


1.4  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SYNTACTIC  COMPONENT 

As  a consequence  of  the  nature  of  speech  and  speech 
understanding,  the  syntactic  component  of  a speech 
understanding  system  must  deal  with  input  of  a different 
nature  than  text  parsers  and  must  have  different 
operational  characteristics  as  well. 


1.4.1  The  Input 

The  input  to  a parser  for  speech  cannot  be  a string 
of  uniquely  determined  words  but  must  be  something  like  a 
lattice  of  words  (see  Figure  1.1).  When  the  parser  wants 
the  "next  word"  of  the  input  it  must  be  able  to  deal  with 
a list  of  possible  words  and  must  be  prepared  to  cope  with 
the  possibility  that  the  correct  word  is  not  included  in 
that  list.  It  may  also  be  the  case  that  one  or  more  words 
that  the  parser  has  accepted  are  wrong.  Frequently  no 
usable  word  can  be  found  at  one  or  more  places  in  the 
utterance,  so  the  parser  must  also  be  able  to  deal  with 
gaps  in  its  input,  for  example  by  predicting  one  or  more 
words  which  would  be  syntactically  consistent  with  the 
current  interpretation  of  the  utterance. 


a 


-12- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


When  processing  text,  a parser  can  reasonably  take 
advantage  of  a number  of  typographic  indicators  such  as 
punctuation  marks  (a  period  to  delimit  a sentence,  commas 
to  disambiguate  r ^rtain  complex  conjunction  construct j ons , 
etc.),  capitalization  (to  indicate  the  start  of  a sentence 
or  to  distinguish  proper  nouns  such  as  "Pat"  from  other 
words  such  as  the  noun  or  verb  "oat"),  italics, 
underlining.  Quotation  marks,  and  parentheses.  (To 
illustrate  the  importance  of  these  factors  to 
comprehension,  consider  the  unpunctuated  string:  "that 
which  is  is  that  which  is  not  is  not  is  not  that  so"  which 
if  correctly  punctuated  is  a grammatically  correct 
sequence  of  sentences  [3].)  All  of  these  cues  are  missing 
in  speech.  They  are  compensated  for  by  the  use  of  pauses, 
stress,  changes  in  duration,  pitch,  and  loudness,  and 
other  prosodic  features. 

Unfortunately  the  current  lack  of  knowledge  about  the 
acoustic  correlates  of  prosodic  features  makes  it  almost 
impossible  to  use  this  rich  source  of  information  in 
speech  understanding  systems.  Current  speech  parsers  must 
cope  with  the  increased  ambiguity  resulting  from  this  lack 
of  information,  and  if  designed  with  foresight,  should  be 
easily  extendible  to  use  prosodic  information  when  it 
becomes  available.  Section  7.2  discusses  the  issue  of 


-13- 


t 


1 

1 

I 


IT 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  arid  Newman  Inc. 

prosodies  in  more  detail. 

1.4.2  The  Output 

In  most  systems  which  work  with  natural  language  the 
purpose  of  the  parser  is  to  provide  a representation  of 
the  syntactic  units  of  the  input  and  their  relationships 
to  one  another.  This  representation  is  freq  ’ently  a "deep 
structure"  tree  which  may  then  undergo  semantic  analysis 
or  Interpretation.  The  creation  of  a self-contained 

syntactic  structure  is  not  absolutely  mandatory  if  enough 
semantic  and  interpretive  processing  is  done  together  with 
the  parsing,  but  in  any  case  the  syntactic  component  must 
be  able  to  confirm  that  the  input  is  grammatically 
correct,  to  detect  ambiguities,  and  to  identify  syntactic 
relationships  between  syntactic  groupings  of  words.  We 
will  assume  that  some  structure  for  it  is  also  produced. 

A parser  for  speech,  however,  must  do  more  than  this. 
It  must  aid  in  selecting  a syntactically  well-formed 
sequence  of  words  from  the  many  sequences  of  words  which 
are  possible  in  the  word  lattice.  It  must  be  able  to  ask 
questions  of  and  a iswer  questions  from  other  knowledge 
sources.  For  example,  upon  discovering  that  a certain 
sequence  of  words  can  be  a complete  constituent  such  as  a 

-14- 


1 

5 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

noun  phrase,  it  may  ask  for  semantic  analysis  to  determine 
whether  the  constituent  is  meaningful.  On  the  other  hand, 
semantics  may  have  already  made  a supposition  about  the 
relationship  between  two  words  and  the  syntactic  component 
may  have  to  determine  whether  or  not  that  relationship  is 
borne  out  by  the  syntactic  structure.  For  example,  if  the 
words  "analysis*'  and  "iron"  are  found  in  the  utterance 
with  a small  gap  between  them,  a good  semantic  hypothesis 
would  be  that  this  portion  of  the  sentence  is  ^out  an 
analysis  of  ; omething  to  see  if  it  contains  iron.  If 
after  the  gap  between  the  words  is  somehow  filled,  the 
syntactic  component  parses  "analysis  for  iron"  the 
semantic  hypothesis  is  borne  out;  if  it  produces 
"analysis  in  iron",  it  is  not. 

Text  parsers  are  usually  designed  on  the  assumption 
that  the  words  given  as  input  will  form  a grammatical 
sentence,  so  the  duty  of  the  parser  is  merely  to  determine 
the  structure(s)  of  the  sentence.  A speech  parser, 
however,  must  know  that  some  (in  fact,  many)  of  its 
potential  input  sequences  will  be  ungrammatical,  not 
because  the  original  utterance  was  ungrammatical  but 
because  some  combinations  of  words  which  appear  to  be 
recognized  from  the  acoustic  signal  are  ii.''orrect.  The 
speech  parser  should  be  able  to  detect  and  reject  those 


-15- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


sequences  as  early  as  possible. 

Another  goal  of  any  speech  parser  must  be  to  predict 
words  or  syntactic  categories  which  could  fill  gaps  in  the 
word  lattice.  The  type  and  correctness  of  the  predictions 
which  can  be  made  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  grammar 
being  used  and  the  amount  of  context  which  is  taken  into 
account  when  making  the  predictions. 

1.4.3  The  Processing 

Due  to  the  lexical  uncertainty  inherent  in  any 
acoustic  analysis  and  the  fact  that  important  words  may 
not  be  retrievable  by  acoustics  alone,  it  cannot  be 
assumed  that  syntactic  processing  can  process  strictly 
left  to  right  (or  right  to  left)  through  the  utterance. 
Long  content  words  are  more  reliably  identified  by 
acoustics  and  more  easily  verified  by  semantics  or 
pragmatics  than  short  words  or  function  words  or  words 
which  are  garbled  at  the  beginning  or  end  of  the 
utterance.  Peculiar  phonological  behavior  occurs  at  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  an  utterance,  as  a result  of  the 
speaker  "tooling  up"  to  speak  or  "tailing  off".  This 
makes  those  portions  of  the  utterance  psrticularly 
vulnerable  to  error  in  lexical  recognition.  The  usually 


-16- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I) 


1 

i 

I 

1 

I 


1 

! 


; 


good  advice:  "Begin  at  the  beginning  and  go  on  till  you 
come  to  the  end:  then  stop."  [13,  p.158]  does  not  apply 
to  speech  understanding.  Thus  syntactic  processing  must 
begin  with  whatever  reliable  anchor  points  can  be  found 
and  work  "middle  out"  to  fill  in  the  gaps. 

The  control  structure  of  a speech  parser  must  be  a 
combination  of  the  conventional  top  down  and  bottom  up 
approaches:  top  down  in  order  to  make  predictions  and 
bottom  up  in  order  to  minimize  errors  propagated  by 
dependence  on  incorrect  context.  (This  issue  is  discussed 
in  further  detail  in  Chapters  Two  and  Five  and  in  Woods 
[95].) 

If  a complete,  connected  sequence  of  words  could  be 
given  to  a parser,  the  number  of  syntactic  alternatives 
which  must  be  considered  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  the 
surrounding  context  (particularly  the  left  context,  if 
processing  is  left  to  right)  limits  the  number  of  ways  in 
which  an  element  can  be  considered.  If  there  is  no 
surrounding  context,  the  possibilities  increase.  For 
example,  consider  the  sequence  "man  eating"  which  can  be 
part  of  a number  of  different  constructions: 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


A man-eating  shark. 

A man  eating  an  omelet. 

A snow  man,  eating  utensils,  and  several  frogs. 

In  the  sky  I saw  a cloud  man,  eating  lunch  on  a hill. 

3ll  syntactic  possibilities  were  considered  for 
every  small  bit  of  the  possible  utterance,  the  resulting 
combinatorial  explosion  would  preclude  obtaining  the 
correct  analysis  in  any  reasonable  time.  Thus  the 
syntactic  component  must  limit  the  number  of  syntactic 
alternatives  generated,  or  at  least  appropriately  factor 
them  or  treat  them  implicitly  rather  than  explicitly,  and 
it  must  develop  the  correct  alternatives  early. 

The  body  of  this  thesis  presents  a syntactic  system 
which  has  the  above-mentioned  characteristics. 


-18- 


1 


Chapter  2 

Review  of  Parsing  Methods  and  Systems 

2.1  INTRODUCTION 

This  chapter  reviews  a number  of  parsing  methods 
which  have  been  dc'-eloped  for  formal  languages,  natural 
language  in  text  form,  and  spoken  language.  The  main  body 
of  this  thesis  is  concerned  only  with  the  anaivsis  of 
speech,  but  since  much  of  the  terminology  and  some  of  the 
techniques  which  are  used  in  the  other  two  areas  can  be 
carried  over  to  the  speech  domain,  they  are  of  interest 
here . 

2.2  FORMAL  LANGUAGES 

For  the  hierarchy  of  formal  languages  — finite 
state,  context  free,  context  sensitive,  and  recursively 
enumerable  — there  have  been  developed  a large  number  of 
parsing  algorithms  (see  for  example  [1,  33J).  We  will 
concentrate  here  on  context  free  languages  (since, 
interestingly,  they  are  more  adaptable  to  natural  language 
than  formal  context  sensitive  languages,  partly  because  of 
the  efficient  parsing  algorithms  which  are  available  for 

-19- 


1 

1 


r 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

them).  Specifically,  we  will  co.*sider  two  basic 
approaches  to  parsing  them:  top  down  and  bottom  up. 

It  is  usually  said  that  top  down  means  building  a 
deep  structure  tree  by  starting  at  the  root  node  and 
working  down,  and  that  bottom  up  means  starting  from  the 
leaves  of  the  tree  and  building  up  to  the  root,  but  this 
is  somewhat  misleading  because  it  does  not  distinguish 
between  the  flow  of  control  of  the  parser  and  the  order  in 
which  the  parse  tree  is  constructed.  (A  recopnizer  which 
does  not  build  a structure  at  all  may  still  be  said  to  be 
top  down  or  bottom  up.) 

Virtually  all  systems  actually  construct  the  tree  by 
forming  the  smallest  constituents  (near  the  leaves)  first 
and  then  combining  them  in  larger  and  larger  groups  until 
the  entire  tree  is  built.  The  basic  process  which  any 
parser  or  recognizer  goes  through  is  to  determine  the 
sequence  of  rules  in  the  grammar  which  were  applied  to 
generate  the  string.  For  our  purposes,  we  will  say  that 
if  the  parser  discovers  this  sequence  in  the  generation 
order,  it  is  too  down . if  it  discovers  it  in  reverse 
order,  it  is  bottom  up . We  will  now  describe  typical  top 
down  and  bottom  up  algorithms  and  discuss  their  potential 
advantages  and  disadvantages  with  regard  to  speech 
processing . 


I 


U 


-20- 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 

1 


I 


i; 

i; 

!. 


2.2.1  Top  Down 

Top  down  parsers  are  usually  left  to  right  (that  is, 
they  process  the  input  string  from  left  to  right), 
predictive,  and  either  breadth  or  depth  first.  A parser 
which  is  depth  first  attempts  at  each  step  in  the 
derivation  to  choose  one  rule  of  the  grammar  which  was 
used  to  generate  the  input  string.  When  an  error 
indicates  that  the  derivation  sequence  obtaineo  thus  far 
is  wrong,  the  process  must  "back  up"  to  the  last  choice 
point  and  choose  another  rule.  A breadth  first  processor 
applies  all  possible  rules  at  each  step  and  thus  finds  all 
possible  derivations  in  parallel.  A prediotiva  algorithm 
uses  the  information  gained  by  processing  part  of  the 
input  string  to  predict  what  synhol(s)  of  input  will  come 
next.  In  other  words,  the  next  symbol  of  input  is 
processed  only  in  the  context  of  the  previous  input,  so 
the  context  can  actually  influence  the  way  in  which  the 
next  symbol  is  seen. 

A strictly  top  down,  depth  first,  left  to  right 
parser  begins  with  the  root  node  S of  the  grammar  and 
chooses  a rule  S ->  X^X2-..X^.  If  X^...X.  are  terminals, 
they  must  match  the  first  i characters  of  input.  If  X is 
the  first  nonterminal  in  X^X^...X^,  a rule 

^ chosen.  The  process  repeats, 
expanding  the  leftmost  nonterminal  in  the  current 


-21- 


fi 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


IJ 

LJ 


sentential  form  and  matching  the  input  against  initial 
terminal  symbols  until  either  (a)  the  entire  input  has 
been  matched  and  there  are  no  more  nonterminals  to  expand 
or  terminals  to  match,  in  which  case  the  parse  has  been 
successful  or  (b)  the  input  does  not  match  the  initial 
terminal  characters.  In  case  (b),  the  process  backs  up  to 
the  previous  sentential  form  and  tries  to  choose  a 
different  rule  to  replace  the  leftmost  non-terminal.  If 
none  is  available,  it  backs  up  another  step  and  tries 
again.  The  parse  fails  if  all  backup  possibilities  are 
exhausted . 

This  method  is  somewhat  wasteful  in  that  it  may 
require  re-parsing  a constituent  several  times  if  it  is 
"backed  over"  several  times  in  order  to  correctly  parse 
input  to  the  left  of  the  constituent.  One  way  to  remedy 
this  is  by  the  use  of  a Wei 1-Formed-Subst ring  Table  (WFST) 
in  which  all  constituents  and  their  boundaries  are  placed. 
Then,  whenever  the  parser  begins  to  parse  a constituent  of 
a given  type,  the  WFST  can  be  checked  to  determine  if  this 
has  already  been  done,  and  if  so,  the  constituent  can  be 
used  directly  from  the  WFST  without  re-parsing.  (An 
example  of  this  type  of  analysis  as  applied  to  natural 
language  is  contained  in  the  Harvard  predictive  analyzer 
[43]). 


-22- 


i 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Earley's  algorithm  [21,  1 p.320]  for  context  free 
languages  is  an  example  of  a basically  top  down,  breadth 
first,  left  to  right,  predictive  parser  which  incorporates 
the  idea  of  a WEST.  It  constructs,  for  each  position  in 
the  input  string,  a state  set  of  items  which  represent  all 
the  states  in  which  a non-deterministic  pushdown  automaton 
could  be  at  that  position  in  the  string.  That  is,  it 
carries  in  parallel  all  possible  paths  of  the  derivation. 
In  place  of  a push  down  stack  to  keep  track  of  recursion, 
each  state  contains  a pointer  to  the  state  set  containing 
the  state  'or  states)  which  caused  the  last  push.  (This 
method  incidently  allows  left  recursive  grammars,  which 
are  usually  the  bane  of  top  down  parsers,  to  be  handled 
gracefully. ) When  all  the  entries  which  can  be  made  in  the 
current  state  set  have  been  made,  one  or  more  states  show 
vfhich  terminal  and  non-terminal  symbols  can  appear  in  the 
input  at  that  point.  Since  the  process  is  breadth  first, 
all  possible  next  symbols  are  predicted. 

In  an  efficient  implementation  of  Earley's  algorithm, 
the  top  down  process  need  not  be  strictly  followed  since 
it  is  possible  to  compute  in  advance  for  each  non-terminal 
symbol  the  set  of  allowable  initial  terminal  symbols  which 
can  result  from  expanding  that  non-terminal.  Then  it  is 
possible  to  leap  down  any  number  (possibly  infinite)  of 
levels  of  recursion  to  the  input,  and  once  a bottom-most 

-23- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


r 

r 

m 

■ 

! 


rule  is  completed  it  can  be  used,  bottom  up,  to  select  the 
rules  which  could  have  produced  that  constituent. 
Earley's  algorithm  illustrates  an  important  principle: 
the  merging  of  information  in  parse  paths  so  that  if  there 
are  alternative  derivations  (as  for  ambiguous  strings) 
which  have  a number  of  steps  in  common,  the  work  required 
to  process  the  common  part  need  only  be  done  once. 


The  ability  to  predict  one  or  more  acceptable  next 
symbols  of  input  based  on  what  has  already  been  processed, 
and  then  go  to  the  actual  input  to  verify  the  prediction, 
is  one  of  the  strongest  advantages  of  a top  down  system. 
In  an  environment  (such  as  spoken  English)  where  the  "next 
symbol"  is  not  uniquely  determined  but  is  a set  of 
possible  symbols,  this  predictive  ability  may  be  used  to 
screen  out  some  or  all  of  the  erroneous  next  symbols  or  to 
predict  symbols  to  fill  a gap. 

Unfortunately,  the  other  side  of  this  coin  is  a big 
disadvantage  for  top  down  systems.  With  errorful  input, 
if  an  error  has  been  made  in  choosing  one  of  the  elements 
of  the  context,  the  predict5.on  depending  on  that  context 
may  screen  out  the  correct  symbol  from  the  set  of  possible 
next  symbols.  This  may  cause  the  parser  to  waste 
considerable  time  thrashing  around  in  the  wrong  input,  and 
little  if  any  useful  information  about  the  correct  string 
will  be  gained. 


-24- 


L 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I • 


I L 
\ i 


1 

« 

1 

! 


2.2.2  Bottom  Up 

Bottom  up  techniques  begin  with  the  leaves  of  a parse 
tree  and  find  the  derivation  sequence  in  reverse,  ending 
with  the  root  node.  Such  an  approach  is  typified  by 
Cocke's  algorithm  [1  p.31^].  It  processes  the  input  by 
first  considering  all  possible  substrings  of  length  one, 
forming  all  possible  one-word  constituents  and  placing 
them  in  a table.  Then,  using  this  information,  all  pairs 
of  adjacent  words  (and  constituents)  are  considered  and 
all  two-word  constituents  are  formed  and  put  in  the  table. 
Then  all  adjacent  three-,  four-,  five-,  ...  word 
substrings  are  considered  until  the  length  of  the  string 
is  reached. 

This  method  is  neither  left  to  right  nor  right  to 
left  and  has  the  advantage  of  working  with  isolated 
sections  of  the  input  so  that  an  error  at  one  point  will 
not  prevent  a correct  analysis  of  another  portion  of  the 
string.  Although  each  constituent  need  be  parsed  only 
once  because  the  tabular  method  of  parsing  builds  up  a 
WFST,  the  process  unfortunately  recuires  that  all  possible 
parsings  of  all  substrings  of  the  input  be  found  in 
parallel  — a procedure  which  is  enormously  wasteful  of 
space  and  time  even  when  a single  string  is  being 
processed . 


I 


-25- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


For  speech,  the  multiple  words  produced  by  an 
acoustic  analyzer  together  with  the  multiple  syntactic 
categories  for  many  of  those  words  and  the  multiple  ways 
they  can  be  syntactically  combined  when  only  very  local 
context  is  used,  exace*^bate  the  problem  to  such  an  extent 
that  a totally  bottom  up  speech  parser  would  be 
unreasonably  slow. 

If  every  word  had  only  one  part  of  speech  we  could 
get  some  idea  of  how  small  word  groups  are  liK».ly  to 
combine  by  looking  at  small  groups  of  syntactic  classes. 
For  example,  taking  all  possible  pairs  from  a reasonable 
set  of  20  parts  of  speech,  are  there  any  pairs  which 
cannot  occur  in  some  grammatical  sentence?  The  answer  is 
no,  and  in  fact  most  pairs  can  be  used  in  several  ways. 
For  many,  if  not  all,  triples,  the  same  situation  holds. 
In  fact,  one  can  even  dig  up  pathological  examples  to 
illustrate  unlikely  combinations  such  as  having  five 
prepositions  in  a row:  "What  did  you  bring  that  book  I 
didn't  want  to  be  read  to  out  of  up  for?"  [3]. 


-26- 


IJ 

I.; 

ij 

i,i 


[ 


L 
• » 
!. 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


2.3  SYSTEMS  FOR  ENGLISH  TEXT 


A large  number  of  systems  have  been  developed  which 
either  parse,  or  parse  and  interpret,  English  sentences 
(especially  questions)  in  printed  form.  No  attempt  will 
be  made  here  to  review  them  all,  since  a number  of 
excellent  reviews  are  available  elsewhere  ^9,  39,  11 ^ 78 

86].  Instead,  a few  systems  have  bjen  chosen  for 
discussion  which  represent  widely  different  approaches  to 
the  problem,  and  they  are  described  and  discussed  with 
particular  emphasis  on  their  possible  adaptability  to 
speech  input. 


2.3.1  The  Transformational  Approach 


The  most  popular  model  of  English  in  modern 
linguistics  is  that  of  transformational  grammar  [1^-16]. 
There  are  many  schools  of  transformational  grammar  and 
much  dissent  on  the  details  of  the  various  approaches,  but 
they  basically  agree  that  a transformational  grammar 
consists  of  at  least  two  parts,  a base  component  and  a 
transformational  component.  The  base  component  is  a set 
of  context  free  (or  sometimes  context  sensitive)  phrase 
structure  rules  which  operate  to  produce  a deep  structurp 
tree.  This  tree  is  then  processed  by  the  transformational 
component  which  is  a sequence  of  structure  changing 
transformations.  Each  transformation  has  three  parts:  a 


-27- 


1 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


structural  description  which  is  a template  to  match  the 
tree  to  be  transformed,  a set  of  conditions  which  must 
also  be  satisfied  (for  example,  that  two  subtrees 
specified  by  the  template  be  identical),  and  a structural 
change  which  may  insert  or  delete  branches  and  nodes  in 
the  tree  and  move  subtrees  from  place  to  place.  The 
transformations  are  ordered  in  cyclic  sets  and  may  be 
obligatory,  optional,  repeatable,  or  non-repeatable . 
After  some  number  of  transformations,  the  surface  string 
is  formed  by  reading  the  leaves  of  the  final  transformed 
(Siirila£j£  structure ) tree  from  left  to  right. 

This  approach  is  primarily  a generative  one. 
Attempts  have  been  made  to  reverse  the  process,  but  they 
have  not  been  particularly  successful,  in  part  because  c;' 
their  slowness  and  inefficiency.  Petrick^s 
transformational  parser  [6l-6l<]  uses  a specially  written 
context  free  grammar  to  parse  the  input  string  into  one  or 
more  possible  surface  structure  trees.  Then  a series  of 
inverse  transformations  are  applied  to  undo  the  effects  of 
the  transformational  component.  Finally  any  tentativ 
deep  structures  produced  are  verified  by  the 
transformational  phrase  structure  component.  The  system 
is  fairly  slow,  using  38  and  129  seconds  to  parse 
sentences  which  were  generated  by  14  and  3I  forward 
transformations , respect ively . 


-28- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Another  attempt  at  transformational  parsing  was 
developed  by  Mitre  Corporation  [5^,  99].  -’t  is  similar  to 
Patrick's  but  is  even  more  ad  hoc.  The  surface  structure 
grammar  generates  all  but  not  only  valid  surface 
structures,  so  some  of  the  original  trees  obtained  may  be 
wrong  and  cause  wasted  effort  in  the  inverse 
transformation  phase.  The  surface  structure  grammar 
cannot  be  derived  from  the  original  grammar,  nor  are  the 
inverse  transformations  exact  inverses  of  the  original 
transformations  — they  were  written  taking  advantage  of 
the  grammar  writer's  knowledge  of  the  overall  system. 

Neither  system  would  be  adaptable  to  the  kind  of 
fuzzy,  partial  input  available  in  the  speech  domain 
because  of  the  number  of  levels  involved  (each  of  which 
must  operate  on  an  entire  string  or  tree)  and  the 
combinatorial  problems,  which  are  extreme  even  when  the 
input  is  known  exactly.  If  all  the  complete  tentative 
surface  structure  strings  are  enumerated  and  for  each  one 
all  possible  inverse  transformations  applied  at  each  step, 
the  number  of  paths  being  followed  can  grow  exponentially. 
Any  transformation  which  may  have  been  applied  in  the 
generation  of  the  sentence  must  cause  the  analysis  to 
split  into  two  paths,  one  which  inverts  the  transformation 
and  one  which  does  not.  The  inherent  ambiguity  of  speech 
input  would  enormously  increase  the  number  of  possible 


-29- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


inverses  at  every  step  because  of  the  much  larger  number 
of  possible  strings. 

2.3.2  String  Analysis 

String  analysis  was  formulated  first  by  Harris  [32], 
formalized  by  Joshi  [36],  and  further  developed  by  Sager 
[73,  31].  The  system  to  be  discussed  here  is  Sager's 
since  it  embodies  the  most  complete  and  best  documented 
system  using  the  technique. 


Linguistic  string  theory  defines  a number  of 
elementary  strings  in  terms  of  syntactic  categories,  for 
example  "Noun  Tensed-verb"  forms  an  ele-,entary  string 
which  can  be  realized  as  "Dogs  bark."  Any  sentence  string 
can  be  made  more  complex  by  inserting  an  adjunct 
(modifier)  string  to  the  left  or  right  of  an  element  of 
the  sentence.  (e.g.  "Little"  can  be  a left-adjunct  to 
"dogs"  and  "at  mailmen"  can  be  a right-adjunct  to  "bark.") 
These  rules  can  be  formulated  as  context  free  rules.  To 
allow  checks  fc-  number  agreement  and  other  context 
sensitive  effects,  each  syntactic  category  may  have  a 
number  of  sub-categories  which  represent  attributes  or 
features  such  as  "plural"  and  "human".  In  addition, 
Sager  s system  has  associated  with  each  rule  one  or  more 
restriction  tests  which  may  look  at  the  sub-categories  of 
the  words  in  the  phrase  structure  tree  and  test  the  well 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newnan  Ihc. 
formedness  of  the  tree. 

Sager's  parsing  system  consists  of  three  parts;  a 
dictionary,  a set  of  context  free  rules,  and  a set  of 
restriction  tests.  The  dictionary  has  8000-9000  entries, 
but  contains  all  inflected  (regular  as  well  as  irregular) 
forms,  so  that  the  base  vocabulary  of  root  forms  is 
actually  much  smaller.  There  are  25  major  syntactic 
categories  (such  as  Noun,  Verb,  Verb  with  "-ing"  Suffix, 
Past  Participle,  etc.)  and  120  sub-categories. 

The  200  grammar  rules  are  used  to  segment  the  input 
string  into  elementary  word  strings.  Whenever  a node  is 
added  to  the  parse  tree,  the  relevant  restrictions  are 
interpreted  (pro- Iding  the  necessary  context  sensitive 
checks)  and  the  path  is  continued  or  aborted  depending  on 
the  success  or  failure  of  the  restrictions.  The  parser  is 
top  down,  left  to  right,  and  depth  first,  but 
automatically  does  all  backup  so  that  all  possible  parses 
of  the  input  are  found. 

The  system  has  been  applied  to  random  sentences  taken 
from  literature  in  the  field  of  pharmacology  and  is 
reported  to  be  60-80/S  successful,  parsing  reasonably  long 
sentences  in  the  order  of  seconds.  No  general 
characterization  of  the  scope  of  the  grammar  is  given  and 
it  is  difficult  to  assess  whether  the  success  rate  given 


-31- 


4 


r 

1 

■ 

! 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

above  results  from  the  somewhat  limited  style  in  which 
most  scientific  publications  are  written.  It  should  be 
possible  to  adapt  this  model  to  speech  parsing  if  a way 
were  worked  out  to  apply  the  restrictions  in  an  ambiguous, 
incomplete  environment. 

2.3.3  Chart  Parsing 

The  MIND  system  [38]  is  a set  of  tools  for  linguistic 
processing.  The  parser  for  the  system  is  a modification 
of  Cocke's  algorithm,  which  was  described  in  Section  2.2.2 
above.  It  uses  a data  object  called  a chart  to  record 
possible  transitions  from  one  point  in  the  input  to 
another.  The  chart  is  a directed  graph  witii  vertices  and 
labeled  edges.  Edges  represent  mutually  exclusive 
alternatives,  each  of  which  represents  a transition  from 
one  vertex  to  another  and  is  labeled  with  an  analysis  of 
the  portion  of  the  input  spanned.  See  Figure  2.1  for  an 
example  of  the  parsing  of  the  ambiguous  string  "high 
ball.  " 

The  method  of  parsing  is  right  to  left  (!)  and  bottom 
up.  Like  Cocke's  algorithm,  it  finds  not  only  all 
possible  parses  of  the  whole  sentence  in  parallel  but  also 
all  possible  parses  of  all  substrings  of  the  sentence, 
whether  they  can  be  used  in  a larger  constituent  or  not. 
On  the  positive  side,  the  chart  acts  like  a built-in  WFST 


-32- 


m9 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

and  provides  automatically  for  sharing  of  constituents 
once  they  are  built  so  no  re-parsing  is  ever  necessary. 


(CAT  NOUN) 


F igure  2 . 1 

Sample  Chart  for  "high  ball" 

The  technique  of  using  a chart  was  expanded  upon  by 
Kaplan  [37],  resulting  in  a system  for  writing  parser.'? 
called  GSP,  a general  syntactic  processor.  GSP  can  still 
find  all  parsings  in  parallel  but  is  not  limited  to 
strictly  bottom  up  processing.  In  fact,  Woods'  top  down 
parser  for  transition  network  grammars  (see  Section  2.3.4 
below)  has  been  implemented  in  GSP,  as  has  Kay's 
algorithm. 


-33- 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

Kay  s strictly  bottom  up  method  would  not  be  useful 
for  speech  input  for  the  reasons  given  in  Section  2.2.2 
above , but  Kaplan  s system  might  provide  a framework  for 
writing  a speech  parser.  The  complexities  which  would 
have  to  be  represented  in  the  chart  are  mind  boggling, 
however,  and  it  is  difficult  to  assess  the  combinatorial 
problem  involved. 


Augmented  transition  network  grammars  (ATN's),  the 
grammar  model  used  as  a basis  for  this  thesis,  were 
developed  by  William  Woods  [91-93],  although  similar  but 
less  well  developed  models  appear  in  earlier  work  by 
Thorne,  Bratley,  and  Dewar  [80]  and  Bobrow  and  Fraser 
[10]*  A transition  network  grammar  looks  like  a finite 
state  transition  diagram  in  that  it  is  a directed  graph 
with  labeled  states  and  labeled  arcs,  a distinguished 
start  state,  and  a set  of  distinguished  final  states.  The 
label  on  an  arc  indicates  the  type  (usually  syntactic 
category)  of  input  which  will  allow  a transition  to  be 
made  to  the  next  state.  However,  the  network  permits 
recursion.  That  is,  the  label  on  some  arc  may  call  for  a 
structure  (constituent)  created  by  recursively  re-applying 
the  network  beginning  with  an  indicated  initial  state. 


-34- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


A basic  transition  network  grammar  as  described  above 
is  equivalent  to  a context  free  grammar  or  a pushdown 
store  automaton.  To  give  it  additional  power  (up  to  the 
power  of  a Turing  machine),  each  arc  is  augmented  with  a 


of  as  local  variables.  Register  contents  are  available  on 
subsequent  arcs  and  can  be  combined,  copied,  changed,  and 
added  to,  as  more  of  the  tree  structure  is  built. 

This  very  general  mechanism  provides  a 
transformational  capability  which  can  produce  deep 
structures  of  the  same  sort  as  those  of  a transformational 
grammar.  While  the  arrangement  of  states  and  arcs 
reflects  the  surface  structures  of  possible  utterances, 
the  actions  on  the  arcs  permit  elements  of  input  and 
constituents  to  be  re-arranged  so  as  to  produce  a deep 
structure.  Figure  2.2  gives  a diagram  of  an  ATN  for 
simple  passive  sentences. 

In  this  diagram,  the  states  are  represented  as 
labeled  circles  (double  circles  for  an  initial  state)  and 
the  arcs  as  directed  arrows  between  the  states.  Above 


test  and  a sequence  of  actions  to  produce  an  Augmented 
Transition  Network  (ATN).  Tne  test  associated  with  an  arc 
must  be  satisfied  (in  addition  to  the  label)  for  the  arc 
to  be  taken,  and  the  actions  are  to  be  executed  as  the  ar’c 
is  traversed.  These  actions  construct  pieces  of  tree 


structure  and  keep  them  in  registers,  which  may  be  thought 


-35- 


2. 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


each  arc  is  an  indication  of  the  condition  which  must  be 


true  for  the  arc  to  be  taken  (e.g.  a word  of  category 


Verb  or  a constituent  obtained  by  applying  the  grammar 


beginning  at  state  NP/  to  obtain  a noun  phrase).  Below 


each  arc  (or  in  the  indicated  footnote)  is  a description 


of  the  tests  and/or  structure  building  actions  on  the  arc; 


the  symbol  * represents  the  current  item  of  input  — a 


word  or  constituent,  and  structure  building  functions  are 


replaced  by  a schematic  representation  of  the  structure 


produced.  A more  detailed  description  of  ATN  grammars 


will  be  given  in  Chapter  Three  below. 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


Figure  2.2 


37 


ELSE  ABORT 


Report  No.  31  i6 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


1 


It  should  be  noted  that  the  type  of  structure  built 
is  relatively  independent  of  the  sequence  of  states  and 
transitions  in  the  grammar.  An  ‘TN  could  be  written  to 
produce  case  frame  descriptions,  stratif icational 
analyses,  or  dependency  structures. 

The  transition  network  may  be  viewed  as  a grammar,  as 
a non-deterministic  parser,  or  as  a non-deterministic 
generator.  When  viewed  as  a parser,  it  is  left  to  right, 
depth  or  breadth  first,  and  top  down,  but  bottom  up 
information  is  easily  accessible.  When  viewed  as  a 
grammar,  however,  it  becomes  an  almost  neutral  description 
of  a language.  Additionally,  the  distinction  between  the 
arc  type  and  the  arc  actions  leads  to  an  easy  separation 
of  local  information  (pertaining  to  the  current  word)  from 
context  sensitive  information. 

Another  characteristic  of  ATN  grammars,  one  which 
strongly  suggests  its  suitability  for  use  in  speech 
understanding,  is  its  efficient  merging  or  factoring  of 
portions  of  an  analysis  common  to  several  paths.  One  can 
look  at  a ATN  as  a model  of  a context-free  grammar  in 
regular  expression  form  (with  conditions  and  actions  added 
to  extend  the  power  of  the  model).  Thus  a regular 
expression  rule  such  as  X ->  (A)BC*D  can  be  represented  by 
an  ATN  as  shown  in  Figure  2.3. 


!l 

G 


j 


-38- 


I 

1 


Figure  2.3 

Another  Simple  ATN  j ^ 

Woods  says  [92  p.  600]: 

The  merging  of  redundant  parts  of  rules  not  only 
permits  a more  compact  representation  but  also 
eliminates  the  necessity  of  redundant  processing 
when  doing  the  parsing.  That  is,  by  reducing 
the  size  of  the  grammar  representation,  one  also 
reduces  the  number  of  tests  which  need  to  be 
performed  during  the  parsing.  In  effect,  one  is 
taking  advantage  of  the  fact  that  whether  or  not 
a rule  is  successful  in  the  ordinary 

context-free  grammar  model,  information  is 
frequently  gained  in  the  process  of  matching  it 
(or  attempting  to  match  it)  which  has 
implications  for  the  success  or  failure  of  later 
rules.  Thus,  when  two  rules  have  common  parts, 
the  matching  of  the  first  has  already  perform#»d 
some  of  the  tests  required  for  the  matching  of 
the  second.  By  merging  the  common  parts,  one  is 
able  to  take  advantage  of  this  information  to 
eliminate  the  redundant  processing  in  the 

matching  of  the  second  rule. 


This  efficient  merging  can  be  achieved  for  various 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Ber'anek  and  Newman  Inc. 


parsings  which  are  not  identical  but  are  merely  similar. 
That  is,  information  can  be  stored  in  registers  (and 
subsequently  tested  by  conditions  on  other  arcs)  which 
would  otherwise  have  to  be  remembered  implicitly  by  the 
state  of  the  network.  This  factoring  makes  ATN's 
extremely  attractive  as  a possible  grammar  form  for  a 
speech  parser,  since  some  of  the  combinatorial  problems 
are  immediately  reduced  by  taking  advantage  of  the  merging 
capabilities  of  the  grammar. 


2.iJ  SYSTEMS  FOR  SPEECH 

In  the  past  few  years  there  has  been  a flurry  of 
activity  in  the  field  of  automatic  speech  understanding, 
resulting  in  a number  of  different  systems.  Several  of 
these  systems  are  briefly  described  here  with  particular 
attention  to  their  syntactic  capabilities.  A more 
complete  survey  of  these  and  other  systems  can  be  found  in 
Wojf  [90]. 

2.^.1  Vicens-Reddv 

The  first  really  workable  system  to  understand 
continuous  speech  was  developed  at  Stanford  University  in 
the  late  1960^s  [82].  There  were  several  different 
versions  of  this  system  designed  for  various  vocabularies 


-40- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(carefully  selected  for  content  and  size)  and  different 
numbers  of  speakers.  It  achieved  85%  correct 
interpretation  (95%  correct  word  recognition)  for  speakers 
(for  whom  the  system  was  specifically  tuned)  who  uttered 
short  sentences  composed  from  a carefully  chosen 
vocabulary  of  16  words. 

The  highly  constrained  context  free  grammar  would 
admit  only  192  sentences.  The  controlling  program  also 
capitalized  upon  particular  semantic  constraints  imposed 
by  the  limited  task  domain  of  block  movement,  such  as  "If 
the  sentence  starts  with  'PICK-UP'  then  'BLOCK'  must 
appear  somewhere  in  the  sentence",  and  "Words  indicating 
location  can  occur  only  after  the  word  'BLOCK'". 

Although  this  system  was  extremely  limited  in  all 
dimensions,  it  has  served  to  inspire  many  of  the  current 
research  efforts  in  speech  understanding. 

2.H.2  Carnegje-Mellon 's  Systems 

A speech  understanding  system  has  been  developed  at 
Carnegic'-Mellon  University  [66-68,  56]  for  understanding 
chess  moves  (in  the  context  of  a real  game  so  that 
semantic  support  can  come  from  a chess-playing  program). 
The  context-free  grammar  is  small  (18  rules)  and  is 
capable  of  generating  only  a finite  number  of  sentences 


-in- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(about  5 million)  using  a 31  word  vocabulary.  The  role  of 
the  parser  is  to  predict  the  next  element  of  input,  not  to 
build  a syntactic  structure  for  tlie  utterance.  It  is 
mostly  bottom  up  but  operates  in  a top  down  mode  to  verify 
or  reject  hypothesies  made  by  other  components  of  the 
system . 

This  system  is  not  syntax-driven,  that  is,  syntactic 


analyses 

and 

predictions  do 

not  necessarily 

take 

precedence 

over 

other  independent 

processes  such 

as 

semantics , 

but 

it  uses  syntax 

in  conjunction 

with 

semantics 

and 

acoustics  to  make 

decisions  about 

the 

content  of 

the  utterance. 

It  operates 

in  5-10  times  real 

time  with  about 

99? 

word  accuracy.  It  has  been  expanded  to  other  data  bases, 
but  without  fundamental  change  in  scope  or  complexity  of 
the  grammar.  (Although  without  comparable  semantics,  the 
performance  in  these  other  domains  is  relatively  poor.) 

Another  speech  understanding  system,  called  DRAGON 
[4,5],  has  been  implemented  at  Carnegie-Mellon . DRAGON 
models  knowledge  sources  (acoustic-phonetic,  lexical, 
phonological,  svntactic-semantic ) as  probabilistic 
functions  of  Markov  processes  and  uses  an  optimal  search 
strategy  to,  in  effect,  search  all  possible  sentences 
allowed  by  the  (finite  state)  grammar,  all  pronunciations 


-42- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


of  each  sentence,  and  all  matches  of  the  phonetic  strings 
to  the  acoustic  observations  in  order  to  arrive  at  the 
best  intepretation . When  tested  on  102  utterances  with 
vocabularies  ranging  from  2k  to  19^  words,  k9%  of  the 
utterances  (and  83%  of  the  578  words)  were  correctly 
recognized  in  to  Uk  times  real  time. 

2.k.3  SDC  "s  System 

A speech  understanding  system  at  SDC  is  designed  to 
handle  queries  ard  commands  to  a data  management  system 
with  a data  base  of  information  about  submarine  fleets  [6, 
69].  Examples  of  typical  input  are  "Print  manufacturer 
where  product  equals  automobile"  and  "Total  quantity  where 
type  equals  nuclear."  When  such  unnatural  sentences  are 
spoken  by  humans  the  words  tend  to  be  pronounced  almost  as 
if  they  were  in  isolation  rather  than  in  the  continuum  one 
expects  from  connected  speech,  thus  making  the  problem  of 
acoustic  analysis  much  easier. 

The  system  is  basically  syntax-driven  and  uses  a 
small  context  free  grammar.  Semantic  constraints  are 
built  into  the  "syntactic"  categories  of  the  grammar.  The 
system  does  not  require  that  the  utterance  be  processed 
strictly  from  left  to  right,  but  there  is  no  bottom  up 
processing  from  the  word  level  (initial  words  are 
predicted  by  the  discourse  level  controller).  Syntax  then 

-il3- 


J 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


predicts  words  to  either  side  which  acoustics  must  verify. 

Preliminary  statistics  indicate  a 52J  comprehension 
rate  with  a vocabulary  of  150  words  and  a grammar  of  35 
rules.  The  strict  context  freeness  of  the  grammar  is 
critical,  however,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  extend  the 
system  to  allow  more  natural  input. 

2.4.4  SRI ^s  System 

A syntax-driven  system  to  understand  speech  in  the 
domain  of  a person  requesting  help  with  repairing  a 
mechanical  object  such  as  a leaky  faucet  is  under  way  at 
Stanford  Research  Institute  [59,  60 , 84,  85,  8?].  The 
system  operates  from  left  to  right  through  the  utterance 
using  a top  down,  highly  predictive  syntactic  component 
which  is  aided  in  making  predictions  of  the  next  word  by 
semantic  restrictions  embedded  in  the  parsing  procedure. 
The  acoustic  component  is  used  only  to  verify  the 
predictions . 

In  this  case,  che  grammar  and  parser  are  not 
separable  but  are  represented  together  as  a program  whose 
execution  results  in  a parse.  The  parser  is  not  strictly 
depth  first,  but  is  "best  first"  in  the  sense  that 
alternative  parse  paths  are  scored,  the  best  one  is 
extended  one  step  and  re-scored,  and  the  process  is 


-44- 


f 


I 

•I 


) 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

repeated.  There  Is  some  effort  made  to  minimize 
re-parsing  due  to  altering  one  or  more  words  of  input  by 
remembering  successful  paths  previously  encountered  and 
following  them  again  as  far  as  possible. 

Since  an  acoustic  word  matching  function  must  be 
written  for  every  word  in  the  vocabulary,  the  current 
vocabulary  of  the  system  is  effectively  5^  words  although 
the  parser  could  handle  up  to  300.  When  the  system  was 
tested  with  71  utterances,  it  responded  to  51;  86$  of  the 
responses  were  correct.  It  required  on  the  order  of  200 
times  real  time  for  the  analysis. 

The  system's  principal  limitations  are  its  strict 
left  to  right  approach  and  the  lack  of  bottom  up 
techniques.  This  means  that  the  syntactic  and  semantic 
expectations  influence  the  direction  of  the  analysis  more 
than  the  acoustic  component,  so  that  no  advantage  can  be 
taken  of  really  robust  acoustic  information. 

2.H.5  Lincoln 's  System 

A speech  understanding  system  was  developed  at  MIT 
Lincoln  Laboratory  (see  Forgie  [2^-26])  using  the  task 
domain  of  a retrieval,  analysis,  and  display  system  for 
acoustic-phonetic  data.  Several  linguistic  processing 
modules  have  been  written  for  the  system  (see  [23-25]). 


-i45_ 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


The  primary  one,  called  VASSAL,  uses  a context  free 
grammar  with  111  rules  which  are  capable  of  generating 
only  a finite  language.  Semantic  information  is  embedded 
in  the  grammar  by  having  the  nonterminal  symbols  of  the 
grammar  be  semantic  rather  than  syntactic  categories. 
Using  a 250  word  vocabulary,  the  linguistic  processor 
operates  top  down,  left  to  right  through  the  utterance  to 
hypothesize  word  strings  to  be  compared  against  the 
acoustic  analysis  of  the  utterance. 

2.4.6  LPARS 

LPARS,  a locally  organized  parser  for  spoken  input 
written  by  Miller  [53],  is  not  a complete  speech 
understanding  system  because  it  lacks  an  acoustic  front 
end,  but  it  is  discussed  here  because  it  claims  to  provide 
all  the  higher  level  processing  needed  for  such  a system. 

A program  to  accept  the  correct  phonemic  description 
of  an  utterance  and  output  a scrambled  version  of  it  by 
making  random  substitutions  and  deletions  is  used  to 
simulate  an  acoustic  front  end  for  LPARS.  Unfortunately, 
the  scrambler  never  inserts  spurious  phonemes  as  a real 
acoustic  processor  is  likely  to  do,  nor  does  it  induce  any 
fuzziness  in  the  input  in  the  sense  of  assigning  more  than 
one  possible  phoneme  to  a segment.  A word  matching 
program  then  matches  the  phonetic  spelling  of  each  word  in 


-46- 


1 

i 

I 


i 


I 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

the  dictionary  at  each  position  in  the  input  to  determine 
how  likely  the  word  is  to  occur  there.  When  a word  which 
matches  above  a given  threshold  is  found  in  the  input,  a 
process  to  predict  other  words  which  may  occur  nearby  is 
invoked,  but  this  is  very  ad  hoc  and  uses  no  general 
semantic  or  even  syntactic  guidance.  Using  a modified 
transition  network  grammar  as  a guide,  LPARS  then 
constructs,  bottom  up,  all  possible  syntactic  paths 
through  each  group  of  adjacent  words.  The  system  then 
syntactically  proposes  words  or  word  strings  to  fill  the 
gaps. 

Unfortunately  the  form  of  the  grammar  is  so 
restricted  that  it  uo  longer  possesses  the  full  capability 
of  an  ATN  but  is  really  closer  to  context  free.  It 
includes  a mechanism  to  check  semantic  feature  agreement 
between  parts  of  the  sentence  but  does  not  have  general 
register  setting  and  checking  capabilities.  It  handles 
only  regular  verbs,  and  only  the  present  tense  so  that 
affixes  and  auxiliary  verbs  are  minimized.  Only  singular 
NP  s are  permitted,  so  no  number  agreement  checks  need  be 
made.  Since  general  register  setting  and  structure 
building  actions  are  prohibited,  the  parser  finds  only  a 
surface  structure  parse  for  the  utterance,  not  a deep 
structure . 


I 


i 

I 


■) 


I 


j 

i 


Reporc  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

The  reduction  of  the  combinatorial  possibilities  was 
achieved  not  by  clever  heuristics  or  merging  of 
representations  but  by  legislating  out  troublesome  data 
and  input.  For  example,  every  word  has  only  one  part  of 
speech  in  the  lexicon,  and  for  purposes  of  word  matching 
and  proposal,  clusters  such  as  ”on  the  left  of"  are 
considered  to  be  one  word. 

The  system  works  on  a limited  vocabulary  (72  words, 
most  of  them  quite  long)  and  a small  grammar  (24  states, 
31  arcs).  Because  it  processes,  bottom  up,  all 
possibilities  in  parallel  it  would  explode  if  given  a 
large  grammar  or  vocabulary.  It  would  also  be  difficult 
to  modify  the  system  to  do  the  actions  on  arcs 
characteristic  of  a ATN. 

2.4.7  BM  ^PEECHLIS 

The  speech  understanding  system  under  development  at 
Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc.  [7,  12,  55,  70,  70,  75,  94, 
96]  has  used  two  task  domains;  that  of  ! 'iO  LUNAR  text 
question-answering  system  [97]  which  deals  with  chemical 
analyses  of  Apollo  11  moon  rocks  and  cue  dealing  with 
travel  budget  management. 


u 

u 


u 

u 

u 


Li 

[] 


-48- 


Report  No.  3T16  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

The  overall  design  of  the  system  is  illustrated  in 
Figure  2.4.  There  are  seven  basic  components  of  the 
system.  The  acoustics  component  analyzes  the  acoustic 
signal  to  extract  features  and  segment  the  utterance  into 
a lattice  of  alternative  possible  sequences  of  phonemes 
(Schwartz  and  Makhoul  [75]),  phonological  rules  augment 
the  output  of  the  acoustic  component  to  include  sequences 
of  phonemes  which  could  have  resulted  in  the  observed 
phonemes;  the  lexical  retrieval  component  retrieves  words 
from  the  lexicon  on  the  basis  of  this  information  (Rovner, 
et.al.  [71]);  the  word  matcher  determines  the  degree  to 
which  the  ideal  phonetic  spelling  of  a given  word  matches 
the  acoustic  analysis  at  a particular  location  [71].  All 
of  these  components  structure  their  output  in  such  a way 
as  to  represent  the  ambiguity  which  is  inherent  in  their 
analyses.  For  example,  they  can  be  used  to  produce  word 
lattices  such  as  that  which  was  shown  in  Figure  1.1. 

The  Syntactic  component  is  SPARSER,  the  system 
comprising  the  body  of  this  thesis  (see  also  Bates  [7]). 
Acceptable  utterances  are  not  restricted  to  context-free 
syntax,  since  the  grammar  which  SPARSER  uses  is  a modified 
ATN  grammar,  capable  of  handling  a large,  natural  subset 
of  English.  The  remaining  chapters  of  this  thesis  detail 
the  structure  and  operation  of  SPARSER. 


-49- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


The  semantic  component  uses  a semantic  network  to 


associate  semantically  related  words  and  to  judge  the 


meaningfulness  of  a hypothesized  interpretation  (See 


Nasn-Webber  [55]).  This  semantic  formalism  is  much  more 


general  than  any  of  the  previously  discussed  systems, 


although  a new  network  must  be  constructed  for  each  new 


task  domain. 


MATCH 


SYNTAX 

(SPARSER) 


LEXICAL 

retrieval 


CONTROL 


SEMANTICS 


ACOUSTICS 


PRAGMATICS 


Figure  2.4 


Design  of  BBN  SPEECHLIS 


-50- 


ir-n  w ^ ' mw 


Report  No.  3116 


30'it  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


The  pragmatics  component  is  not  yet  implemented,  but 
is  projected  to  contain  information  about  the  past 
dialogue,  a model  of  the  user,  and  other  pragmatic  data 
(see  Bruce  [ 12] ) . 

A control  component  contains  an  overall  strategy  for 
employing  the  other  components  in  order  to  obtain  an 
interpretation  of  an  utterance  (see  Rovner,  et.al.  [70]). 

It  decides  which  component  is  to  be  called,  what  input  it 
is  to  be  given,  and  what  is  to  be  done  with  the  output. 

It  ijets  thresholds  on  word  match  quality.  It  combines  the 
scores  produced  by  the  other  components  in  order  to  rank 
competing  hypothesies,  and  is  the  primary  interface  to  all 
other  components. 

2.5  CONCLUSIONS 

All  but  two  of  the  speech  understanding  sysi'ems 
described  above  are  syntax-driven.  This  is  understandable 
because  syntax  is  the  best  understood  and  most 
fcrmalizable  aspect  of  language  analysis.  However,  that 
does  not  mean  that  it  should  provide  overall  guidance  for 
the  entire  understanding  effort. 

I 

Ji 

; t 


i > 


-51- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


When 

pecDle 

speak  naturally  and 

informally 

they 

frequently 

make 

grammatical  mistakes 

and  seldom 

make 

semantic 

ones , 

yet  they  are  easily 

understood . 

An 

automatic  system  driven  by  a syntactic  processor  which 
could  handle  only  syntactically  correct  input  would  fail 
to  understand  such  utterances,  and  would  likely  be 
difficult  to  modify  to  accept  them.  A system  in  wnich 
syntax  was  one  of  a number  of  equally  important  components 
contributing  to  the  understanding  of  a sentence  should  be 
able  to  do  a better  job,  since  a bad  report  from  syntax 
could  be  overridden  by  acoustics,  semantics,  or  some  other 
source  of  knowledge.  It  shoi’ld  be  noted  that  none  of  the 
systems  just  described  attempt  to  deal  with  ungrammatical 
utterances  at  the  current  time. 

With  one  exception,  all  the  speech  understanding 
systems  described  above  separate  the  parser  from  the 
grammar  which  drives  it.  This  allows  grammars  which  have 
been  previously  developed  for  text  processing  to  be  used, 
though  modifications  are  usually  necessary.  The  grammar 
can  then  be  written  in  a meta-language  which  is  convenient 
to  the  task  and  which  is  as  different  from  the  language  of 
the  parser  which  processes  it  as  a high-level  programming 
language  is  from  machine  coae.  It  also  allows  a potential 
user  to  learn  to  construct  grammars  without  having  to 
learn  to  write  programs  — a distinct  advantage  in 

-52- 


Report  No.  3116 


iMfum 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


motivating  lingui.'sts  without  programming  experience  to 


contribute 

to  the  development  of 

the 

system. 

It 

also 

reflects 

the  principle  (held 

by 

some  but 

not 

all 

linguists)  that  a grammar  should  be  a neutral  description 
of  a language,  biased  as  little  as  possible  toward 
generation  or  analysis,  thus  maintaining  the  potential  for 
the  same  grammar  to  eventually  be  used  in  a system  to  both 
understand  spoken  input  and  produce  natural  language 
output.  The  separation  of  parser  from  grammar  also  allows 
the  grammar  to  be  examined  and  modified  without  risk  of 
introducing  bugs  into  the  parser,  it  permits  various 
parsing  processes  to  be  developed  for  the  same  grammar, 
and  it  usually  permits  easy  experimentation  with  various 
control  structures  within  the  parser. 

With  the  exception  of  BBN  SPEECHLIS,  all  of  the 
systems  above  work  with  either  a small  vocabulary  (which 
lessens  the  degree  of  lexical  ambiguity  in  the  input)  or  a 
limited  grammar,  or  both,  and  so  do  not  deal  effectively 
with  the  combinatorial  explosion  of  syntactic 
possibilities  which  would  arise  given  a large  (>1000 
words)  vocabulary  and  a reasonably  general  grammar. 


What  is  needed  in  the  syntactic  component  of  a speech 
understanding  system  is  a scheme  which  can: 

(a)  blend  top  down  techniques  with  bottom  up  ones  to 
combine  directed  predictive  analysis  with  immunity  to 


-53- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 
errors  in  non-local  context 

(b)  merge  common  information  on  alternate  paths  as  much  as 
possible  to  avoid  re-parsing  and  facilitate  decision 
making 

(c)  pursue  most  likely  paths  first  while  holding 
alternatives  for  further  processing  if  necessary 

(d)  take  advantage  of  the  constraints  which  may  be 
supplied  by  other  sources  of  knowledge,  such  as  acoustics, 
semantics,  pragmatics,  and  prosodies. 


i 

I 

r 

f 

I 

[ 

1 


REL 


NP 


AUX 


/\  1 
PRO  FEATS  TNS 


I NU  PAST  GIVE  N.P  PREP  NP 

I / 

SG  TO  PRO  FEATS 


**NP*»  YOU 


I 

NU 

SG 


u 

u 

LI 

0 

U 

ii 

n 


Figure  2 . 5 


-54- 


i 

1 

-( 

i 


,1 


Chapter  3 


The  Grammar 


3.1  INTRODUCTION 


We  have  chosen  the  Augmented  Transition  Network 
formalism  for  the  grammar  which  drives  SPARSER  because,  as 
was  mentioned  in  Section  2.3.^,  it  is  a representation 
which  allows  merging  of  common  portions  of  the  analysis, 
it  is  amenable  to  both  bottom  up  and  top  down  parsing 
techniques,  it  fairly  clearly  separates  the  use  of  local 
information  from  information  which  was  obtained  from  a 
distant  portion  of  the  utterance  and,  the  author's 
previ.ous  experience  with  a large  ATN  grammar  for  parsing 
text  laid  the  groundwork  for  the  development  of  a similar 
grammar  for  speech. 


V/e  have  tried  as  much  as  possible  to  keep  the 
formalism  v/hlch  was  developed  by  Woods  [91-93]  intact,  but 
some  changes  have  been  necessary.  The  following  section 
describes  Woods'  original  fornalism,  concentrating  on 
those  a.’eas  wnich  have  been  changed  for  the  speech 
grammar.  It  assumes  most  of  the  information  presented  in 
Section  2.3.^  and  it  may  be  skipped  by  readers  already 
familiar  with  ATNs.  Section  3.2  describes  the 


-55- 


t 


I 

i 


Repo^’t  No.  3116  Bolt  Peranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

modifications  which  have  been  made  to  Woods'  formalism, 
and  the  final  section  describes  the  pre-processing^  which 
is  performed  on  the  grammer  so  that  the  speech  parser  can 
use  it. 


3.2  AUGMENTED  TRANSITION  NETWORK  GRAMMARS 

The  concept  of  an  Augmented  Transition  Network  (ATN) 
Grammar  was  introduced  briefly  in  Section  2.3.4  as  a 
finite  state  network  which  has  been  extended  to  allow 
recursion,  tests  on  arcs,  and  structure-building  actions 
on  arcs.  The  sequence  of  a'^cs  which  is  taken  during 
parsing  reflects  the  s'lrfaco  structure  of  the  input 
string,  but  the  actions  allow  the  creation  of  a deep 
structure  which  may  bi  quite  different  from  the  surface 
structure . 

The  form  of  an  A^N  grammar  is  as  follows.  Each  state 
of  the  network  has  a unique  name.  Associated  with  each 
state  is  an  ordered  list  of  arcs.  There  are  eight  types 
of  arcs,  v/hich  follow  the  schemas  below.  (An  arc  is  a 
list  of  elements  which  is  enclosed  in  parenthesies . An 
element  may  be  a single  word  or  another  list.  Capitalized 
words  are  actual  elements,  lower  case  words  in  brackets 
are  descriptions  of  elements  which  will  be  described 
below,  and  * is  the  Kleene  star  operator  which  indicates 


I 

4 


1 


-56- 


f 


e 

i 

! 


IJ 

U 

IJ 


L. 

I, 


k 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

zero  or  more  occurrences  of  the  previous  element.) 

(CAT  <category>  <test>  <action>*  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(WRD  <word>  <test>  <action>*  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(MEM  <list>  <test>  <action>*  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(TST  <label>  <test>  <action>*  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(PUSH  <state>  <test>  <action>*  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(VIR  <category>  <test>  <action>*  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(JUMP  <nextstate>  <test>  <action>*) 

(POP  <form>  <test>) 

The  first  element  of  each  arc  indicates  its  type. 
The  interpretation  of  the  second  element  depends  on  the 
type  of  the  arc  and  will  be  explained  below.  The  third 
element  is  an  arbitrary  test  which  must  be  satisfied  in 
order  for  the  arc  to  be  taken.  Actions,  which  may  occur 
in  any  number  on  all  arcs  but  POP  arcs,  generally 
manipulate  information  that  is  stored  in  registers.  (A 
register  is  like  a temporary  variable  which  may  contain  a 
value.)  The  register  contents  are  constants  (flags)  or 
pieces  of  syntactic  structure  which  are  built  using 
previous  register  contents  and/or  the  current  item  of 
input  and/or  the  features  of  the  current  item.  The  last 
element  of  every  arc  type  except  JUMP  and  POP  indicates 
which  sta:e  of  the  grammar  ir  to  be  considered  next. 


-57- 


r 

I 


f 

t 


Report  No,  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

A CAT  arc  may  be  taken  if  the  current  input  word  is 
of  the  syntactic  category  specified  by  the  second  element 
of  the  arc.  A WRD  arc  specifies  the  exact  uord  which  is 
required,  rather  than  a syntactic  category,  and  a MEM  arc 
is  exactly  like  a WRD  arc  except  that  the  input  word  must 
be  one  of  a list  of  words  specified  on  the  arc. 

A TST  arc  performs  just  the  test  to  determine  whether 
the  arc  may  be  taken;  the  second  element  of  this  arc  is  a 
dummy  label  which  is  never  used  by  the  parser.  A JUMP  arc 
specifies  the  state  to  which  a jump  transition  is  to  be 
made  without  "consuming”  anythin?  from  the  input  string. 
Notice  that  TST  and  JUMP  arcs  are  very  similar,  but  the 
former  is  intended  to  test  some  feature  of  the  input  and 
move  the  input  pointer  over  it  while  the  later  performs  a 
similar  test  but  does  not  move  the  pointer. 

A VIR  arc  checks  to  see  whether  a constituent  of  the 
named  category  has  been  placed  on  the  HOLD  list  by  a HOLD 
action  of  some  previous  arc  (see  below).  A PUSH  arc 
initiates  a recursive  call  to  the  network,  beginning  in 
the  indicated  state,  to  look  for  a constituent.  A POP 
arc,  which  has  no  destination  state,  marks  the  state  which 
it  leaves  as  a terminal  state  for  some  level  o*^  the 
network;  it  also  indicates  the  form  (syntactic  structure) 
which  is  to  be  returned  as  the  result  of  the  analysis  of 
that  portion  of  input  parsed  by  the  current  level. 


I 


-58- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


r 

1 


i! 


1] 


[ 


IJ 

Li 


Li 

i; 


i 


! 

i 

i 

i 

i 

1 

! 

I 

i 


When  the  parser  is  operating,  a number  of  registers 
are  active.  Whenever  a PUSH  occurs,  this  register  list, 
along  with  other  information,  is  saved  on  a stack  while 
the  parser  recursively  operates  on  the  new  (lower)  level 
beginning  with  an  empty  register  list.  When  a POP  arc  is 
taken,  the  stack  is  popped,  wiping  out  the  current 
register  list  and  restoring  the  register  list  which  was 
current  before  the  last  PUSH.  The  constituent  which  was 
POPed  then  becomes  the  current  input  item  for  the  PUSH 
arc . 

Several  types  of  actions  may  occur  on  the  arcs.  The 
most  common  is  (SETR  <reg>  <form>)  which  sets  the 
indicated  register  to  the  value  of  the  form.  The  action 
(SENDR  <reg>  <form>  which  may  be  used  on  a PUSH  arc, 
causes  the  register  to  be  set  to  the  value  of  the  form  at 
the  lower  level  of  recursion  about  to  be  initiated  by  the 
PUSH,  i.e.  the  register  value  will  initialize  the 
register  list  after  the  PUSH.  (LIFTR  <reg>  <form> 
<where>)  is  the  inverse  of  SENDR  in  that  it  sets  the 
register  to  the  value  of  the  form  at  the  level  specified 
by  the  <where>  form.  The  <where>  specification  can  be  an 
integer  indicating  the  number  of  levels  up  or  it  can  be  a 
predicate,  in  which  case  the  nearest  level  at  which  the 
predicate  is  true  is  chosen.  Thus  LIFTR  and  SENDR  are 
used  to  communicate  between  levels  of  recursion;  an 


Mi: 


-59- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


analysis  may  send  information  from  part  of  one  constituent 
into  the  process  which  parses  a sub-constituent,  and 
information  which  is  not  necessarily  part  of  the  structure 
of  a constituent  can  be  given  to  the  process  which  will 
continue  after  the  parsing  of  the  constituent  is  complete. 

For  example,  when  parsing  the  noun  phrase  "the  person 
who  travels  to  Washington"  the  grammar  may  PUSH  for  a 
relative  clause  following  "per’son".  It  is  necessary,  at 
some  point,  to  check  for  number  agreement  between  the  noun 
"person"  and  the  verb  "travels"  since  "»  the  people  who 
travels  to  Washington"  must  not  be  allowed  (and  of  course 
must  bo  rejected  by  a speech  parser  as  early  as  possible). 
SENDR  can  be  used  to  send  down  the  head  of  the  noun  phrase 
to  the  relative  clause  level  so  that  the  agreement  test 
can  be  made  as  soon  as  the  verb  is  encountered. 

The  action  (HOLD  <constit>)  places  the  indicated 
constituent  on  the  HOLD  list,  a global  variable  which  is 
accessible  at  all  levels.  This  action  together  with  the 
VIR  arc  constitute  a mechanism  for  dealing  with  the 
phenomenon  called  left  extraposition  in  transformational 
grammar  theory,  which  moves  a sub-constituent  from  an 
embedded  constituent  up  and  to  the  left  of  its  deep 
structure  position.  An  examples  of  this  is  the  fronting 
of  questioned  noun  phrases  ("Which  doctor  did  he  send  you 
to?").  Since  the  extracted  constituent  can  be  moved  only 


-60- 


i 

I 

i 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

to  portions  of  the  deep  structure  which  dominate  its 
original  position,  once  an  item  has  been  put  on  the  HOLD 
list  it  must  be  removed  (by  using  a VIR  arc)  before  a POP 
is  done  from  the  level  at  which  it  was  placed.  However 
the  VIR  arc  which  picks  it  up  may  occur  many  levels  below 
where  it  was  found. 

The  actions  RESUMETAG  and  RESUME  are  used  to  handle 
the  structures  produced  in  transformational  grammar  theory 
by  the  transformation  known  as  right  extraposition.  For 
example,  the  sentence  "The  place  I went  to  which  was  on 
the  West  Coast"  has  a deep  structure  constituent  for  "the 
place  which  was  on  the  West  Coast"  but  the  relative  clause 
has  been  moved  from  its  original  position  in  the  founted 
noun  phrase  to  the  right  in  the  surface  structure. 

The  function  (RESUMETAG  state),  when  used  as  an 
action  on  an  arc,  creates  a marker  combining  the  named 
state  (at  which  parsing  could  continue  at  some  later  time) 
with  the  current  register  list.  Then  at  some  later  time, 
if  the  action  (RESUME)  is  encountered  on  an  arc  the  marker 
is  retrieved  and  the  configuration  the  parser  was  in  when 
the  RESUMETAG  was  executed  is  re-established.  The 
extraposed  text  can  be  parsed  as  usual,  and  when  a POP  is 
done  the  completed  constituent  is  used  for  the  input  item 
on  the  arc  containing  the  RESUME. 


-61- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 
3.3  MODIFICATIONS 

A number  of  modifications  have  been  made  to  the  ATN 
formalism  just  described  in  order  to  make  it  more  amenable 
to  use  by  a parser  for  speech.  None  of  these  changes 
reduce  the  power  of  the  grammar,  and  some,  as  will  be 
shown,  may  even  clarify  some  points.  We  call  the 
resulting  formalism  a Modified  Augmented  Transition 
Network  (MATN). 

3.3.1  Tests  on  the  Arcs 

Every  arc  of  an  ordinary  ATN  has  a test  component, 
which  may  be  any  predicate.  It  is  usually  a boolean 
combination  of  tests  on  the  current  input  word  (its 
features,  etc.)  and  the  contents  of  registers  which  have 
been  set  by  actions  on  previous  arcs.  In  the  MATN 
formalism,  the  test  component  of  each  arc  is,  on  all  but 
the  PUSH  arc,  a list  of  two  tests.  The  first  is  a tost  on 
the  current  word  and  its  features,  i.e.  a local, 
context-free  test.  The  second  is  a test  on  the  register 
r».ntents,  i.e.  a context-sensitive  test.  Both  tests  must 
succeed  for  the  arc  to  be  taken.  In  the  rare  case  where  a 
disjunction  of  current  word  information  and  register 
contents  is  required,  it  may  appear  in  the  context 
sensitive  slot.  (Experience  with  the  LUNAR  grammar  [97] 
and  the  speech  grammar  has  shown,  however,  that  such  tests 


n 

n 

il 

n 

n 

u 

LI 


-62- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 


I 


! 

I 


> 


i 


I 


i: 

r. 


are 


rarely  used . ) 


The  reason  for  splitting  up  the  tests  in  this  way  is 
that  register  checking  tests  cannot  be  made  unless  the 
registers  are  set,  and  in  many  situations  in  the  speech 
environment  there  may  not  be  enough  left  context  to 
guarantee  that  the  proper  registers  would  be  set.  Thus  it 
is  useful  (as  will  be  seen  in  the  next  chapter)  to  be  able 
to  evaluate  the  coatext-free  test  on  an  arc  at  a different 
time  in  the  parsing  process  from  the  context-sensitive 
one . 


On  PUSH  arcs,  there  are  three  types  of  tests  which 
are  used.  It  is  useful  and  efficient  to  test  the  next 
word  of  input  before  actually  doing  the  PUSH,  to  see,  for 
example,  if  the  next  word  can  begin  a constituent  of  the 
type  being  PUSHed  for.  This  test  is  called  a look-ahead 
test,  and  takes  the  place  of  the  normal  context-free  test 
in  the  test  component  of  the  arc.  Tnere  is  also  the  usual 
context-sensitive  test  on  registers  which  were  set  before 
the  PUSH  arc  was  encountered.  And  finally,  when  the  PUSH 
arc  returns  with  a constituent,  another  context-free  tj.*.<t 
may  be  done  on  the  structure  of  the  entire  constituent. 
Therefore,  the  test  component  of  a PUSH  arc  is  a list  of 
the  three  tests  just  described. 


a 


-63- 


( 


t 

r 

! 

I 

1 

I 


Report  No.  3116  Dolt  Beranek  and  Nev/man  Inc. 

3.3.2  LIFTR 's 


The  action  LIFTR  has  been  removed  from  MATN  grammars, 
but  the  ability  to  send  information  to  a higher  level  has 
been  preserved  in  another  form. 

There  is  a special  register  called  LIFTLIST  which  may 
be  set  by  the  normal  SETR  action.  When  a constituent  is 
POPPed,  the  contents  of  the  LIFTLIST  register  is  attached 
to  the  constituent  in  the  WFST  in  such  a way  that  it 
becomes  the  features  list  on  the  PUSH  arc  which  picks  up 
the  constituent.  Actions  on  the  PUSH  arc  can  then  access 


the  features  list 

in 

any  v;ay  and 

manipulate 

the 

information  there. 

for 

example,  to 

attach 

it  to 

the 

LIFTLIST  register  at 

this 

level  so  it  will 

be 

passed 

up 

again . 

Originally  LIFTLIST 

was  conceived 

of 

as 

a way 

to 

attach  features  to  a 

constituent  which 

did 

not 

really 

havf. 

a place  in  the  syntactic 

structure . 

For 

example , 

one 

might  want  to 

pop 

a number 

as 

the 

structure 

(NP  N NUMBER  105)  with  the  feature  DIGITS  to  indicate  that 
it  had  been  parsed  from  "one  oh  five"  instead  of  "a 
hundred  and  five".  However,  LIFTLIST  can  be  generalized 
to  a mechanism  for  passing  any  information  up  to  the 
higher  level,  as  long  as  the  actions  on  the  PUSH  arc  can 
interpret  the  information. 


L 

L 

L 

U 

n 

n 

n 


n 


-6i|- 


1 

i 

'1 


mmmmmmmMrn 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 
3.3.3  SENDR 's 

SENDR's  were  an  efficient  mechanism  for  text  parsing 
because  they  allowed  tests  to  be  made  on  a lower  level 
which  involved  information  obtained  somewhere  (possibly 
far)  to  the  left  in  the  input  string  — information  which 
would  normally  be  inaccessible  because  it  would  be  hidden 
on  the  stack  during  the  parsing  of  sub-constituents. 

There  are  several  reasons  for  not  allowing  this 
mechanism  in  the  speech  parser.  Suppose,  in  the  input 
that  looks  like  ”...  the  person  who  travels  ...",  the 
word  "person”  is  not  the  word  which  was  really  uttered. 
If  it  were  allowed  to  be  passed  down  it  would  become  an 
integral  part  of  the  analysis  at  the  lower  level,  and  if 
another  word  were  to  be  hypothesized  in  its  place,  the 
lower  level  the  analysis  would  have  to  be  redone  even  if 
none  of  the  words  in  the  relative  clause  had  been  changed. 
This  is  a process  which  would  be  extremely  wasteful, 
esp  daily  in  the  speech  environment  where  one  wants  to  be 
able  to  take  as  much  advantage  as  possible  of  information 
which  was  gained  at  one  point  and  slightly  altered  at 
another.  In  particular,  it  is  advantageous  to  consider  as 
constituents  such  constructions  as  relative  clauses  so 
that  they  can  be  r’'-»ced  in  a well-formed-substring  table 
for  use  by  other  processes. 


I 


( 


I 


[ 

I 


-65- 


r- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

Another  reason  is  that  some  types  of  verifications 
(semantic,  prosodic,  and  pragmatic,  at  least)  can  be  done 
most  conveniently  or  portions  of  an  utterance  which  have 
been  assigned  a syntactic  structure,  i.e.  on 
constituents.  If  a portion  of  an  utterance  is  parsed 
(e.g.  "that  I gave  you"  from  the  complete  utterance  "The 
book  that  I gave  you")  but  does  not  form  a complete 
constituent  because  it  is  missing  a piece  of  information 
from  a higher  constituent  to  the  left  which  would  have 
been  sent  down  had  it  been  available,  then  these 
verifications  may  not  be  made  until  the  missing  word  or 
words  are  identified.  Yet  it  may  be  important  to  build 
and  verify  the  constituent  in  order  to  predict  the  missing 
word  to  the  left.  Therefore,  it  is  better  to  allow 
constituents  to  be  built  without  information  which  would 
normally  have  been  passed  down.  When  parsing  possibly 
incorrect  fragments  with  little  cr  no  left  context,  it  is 
best  to  keep  constituents  as  small  and  as  '.ndependent  as 
possible . 

Since  SENDR's  are  net  permited  in  the  MA^N  grammars, 
it  is  reasonable  to  investigete  the  problem  of  converting 
a regular  ATN  grammar  to  MATN  formalism  in  this  respect. 
(Of  course,  starting  over  from  scratch  to  build  a new 
grammar  is  also  an  acceptable,  and  perhaps  a more 
reasonable  approach,  but  for  purposes  of  comparison  a 


rA  4.  - ■ 


I 

) 


L . 

I ' 


l: 

Li 


1 


<, 


L 


J 


-66- 


J 


f 


1. 


V 

h 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

method  of  converjion  will  be  discussed.)  We  will  first 
discuss  a general  method  for  performing  the  conversion, 
and  then  show  that  in  some  cases  it  can  be  considerably 
simplified . 

Instead  of  sending  down  information  on  a PUSH  arc  to 
state  X,  the  PUSH  is  made  to  a new  state  Y which  then  has 
a JUMP  arc  to  state  X.  On  this  JUMP  arc,  the  registers 
which  would  have  been  sent  down  are  set.  They  may  be  set 
to  a constant  value  if  they  are  merely  flags  (e.g.  (SENDR 
TYPE  (QUOTE  REL))  can  be  replaced  by  (SETR  TYPE  (QUOTE 
RED)  at  the  lower  level).  If  a register  was  meant  to 
contain  other  information,  ic  is  set  to  a distinctive 
dummy  symbol  (e.g.  (SENDR  SUBJ  (GETR  NP))  can  be  replaced 
by  (SETR  SUBJ  (QUOTE  »*NP»»))).  The  PUSH  arc  wnich 
originally  contained  the  SENDR 's  must  be  changed  beyond 
removing  them  and  replacing  the  state;  it  must  have  an 
action  which  will  take  the  constituent  returned,  do  any 
agreement  checks  which  are  necessary  (aborting  the  arc  if 
the  check  fails)  and  perhaps  replace  the  dummy  node  by  the 
aM'ropriate  structure.  The  structure  returned  by  the  PUSH 
for  a relative  clause  on  the  fragment  "that  I gave  you" 
might  look  like  Figure  3.1  (where  the  structure  is  shown 
in  both  the  usual  tree  diagram  form  and  a corresponding 
form  more  amenable  to  computer  output ) . 


i 

I 

i 

I 

I 


i 

\ 

1 

1 


! 


* 


:! 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


1 

f 

I 


11 


S REL 

S NP  PRO  I 

FEATS  NU  SG 
AUX  TNS  PAST 
VP  V GIVE 
NP  »»NP*» 

PP  PREP  TO 
NP  PRO  YOU 

FEATS  NU  SG 


Figure  3 • 1 

Two  Representations  of  a Parse  Tree 

The  PUSH  arc  may  or  may  not  replace  the  dummy  node  after 
making  the  necessary  tests.  In  addition,  tests  on  the 
lower  level  must  know  about  the  dummy  nodes  so  that  they 
will  accept  them. 

This  procedure  may  seem  excessively  complicated,  but 
is  actually  quite  straightforward.  Because  it  is  not 
always  necessary  to  create  a n»  w state  and  arc  every  time 
a PUSH  arc  is  modified  (since  in  practice  many  of  the 
registers  sent  down  are  constants  — nearly  ^0%  of  the 
SENDR  s in  the  LUNAR  grammar  were  or  this  tvpe',  the  size 
of  the  grammar  increases  only  slightly.  The  resulting 
grammar  is  still  clear  and  compact,  and  may  even  give  a 
more  explicit  picture  of  the  parsing  process  than  the 
original,  since  the  network  for  each  constituent  is  self 


IJ 

u 

iJ 

iJ 

0 

LI 


I 


-68- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


i 


i; 

L 

m •• 

!. 

i: 

i: 


contained  and  has  no 
in  the  grammar. 


references  to  registers  set  elsewhere 


3.3.^  Ihe  HOLD  List 

The  HOLD  list,  along  with  HOLD  actions  and  VIR  arcs, 
has  been  eliminated  from  MAIN  grammars.  The  HOLD  list  can 
be  replaced  in  ordinary  ATN  grammars  by  using  SENDR  to 
send  down  items  being  held  every  time  a PUSH  is  done  and 
testing  for  that  item  in  place  of  a VIR  arc.  S'nce  the 
SENDR  can  also  be  removed  by  the  process  described  above, 
the  HOLD  list  can  bo  eliminated  in  the  same  way. 

It  is  not  really  necessary  to  go  through  this  two 
level  process  in  order  to  eliminate  HOLD 's  from  an  ATN. 
In  many  cases,  instead  of  holding  a constituent  to  be 
picked  up  at  some  lower  level,  the  grammar  may  simply  put 
the  constituent  in  a register  and  then  after  some  lower 
level  constituent  has  been  parsed,  embed  the  held  item  in 
the  proper  place.  This  eliminates  the  use  of  a dummy 
register,  and  is  usually  feasible. 


3.3.5  RESUMETAG  and  RESUME 

Several  things  may  be  noted  about  ri  ght  extraposition 
which  can  be  used  to  simplify  the  way  it  is  handled. 
Firstly,  the  portion  of  the  sentence  which  is  extraposed 


-69- 


T 


[ 

i 


I 

I 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


murt  be  a constituent,  such  as  a relative  clause  or  a 
prepositional  phrase.  Secondly,  the  portion  of  the 
constituent  which  is  left  behind  when  such  a 
sub-constituent  is  extraposed  still  forms  a complete 
constituent.  Thus  we  can  have  "How  many  samples  were 
there  which  were  analyzed"  or  "How  many  were  there  which 
were  analyzed"  where  "how  many"  can  be  considered  a noun 
phrase  with  an  elided  noui  , but  we  cannot  have  »"How  many 
were  there  samples  which  were  analyzed."  Finally,  the 
constituent  which  is  extraposed  is  alwayr  moved  up,  out  of 
the  original  constituent. 

The  function  (RESUMETAG  state)  is  still  allowed  in 
MATN  grammars,  but  it  has  a slightly  modified  effect . 
Using  the  LIFTLIST  mechanism,  it  performs  the  equivalent 
of  (LIFTR  RESUMESTATE  state)  and  (LIFTR  RESUMEREGS  REGS), 
i e.  on  the  next  higher  level  it  sets  the  register 
RESUMESTATE  to  the  named  state  and  the  register  RESUMEREGS 
to  the  register  list  which  was  current  Just  before 
RESUMETAG  was  called. 

Instead  of  calling  the  function  RESUME  on  some  later 
arc,  the  MATN  grammar  writer  must  have  a PUSH  arc  which 
PUSIIes  to  the  state  named  by  the  RESUMETAG  and  has  a test 
to  guarantee  that  the  PUSH  is  dene  only  if  the  register 
RESUMESTATE  is  oCt  to  the  same  state  to  which  the  PUSH  is 
to  be  made.  The  actions  on  the  PUSH  arc  can  then  use  the 


a 


ij 


L! 
• • 
I i 

G 

f ? 


i 


-70- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

G 


register  informatio*'  stored  in  RESUMEREGS  together  with 
•-*  the  constituent  returned  from  the  PUSH  to  build  the  entire 

I ■ deep  structure  constituent. 

r By  eliminating  the  RESUME  action  and  requiring  a PUSH 

^ " arc  with  a confirming  test,  we  have  required  a little  more 

I work  from  the  grammar  writer,  but  once  the  grammar  is 

written  it  is  easier  to  see  what  is  happening  in  the 
parsing  process.  It  also  simplifies  the  automatic 
indexiiig  of  the  grammar  (see  Section  3.^)  since  the  state 
in  which  the  parsing  is  to  resume  is  explicitly  named  in 
the  grammar  at  the  point  it  is  to  be  used,  rather  than 
held  in  a register  which  is  available  only  during  the 
actual  parsing  process. 

^ * 3.3.6  Weights  on  Arcs 

j , The  fourth  element  of  every  arc  in  a MAIN  is  a small 

integer  which  is  called  the  weight  of  the  arc.  This 
weight  was  originally  conceived  of  as  a rough  measure  of 
either  (a)  how  likely  the  arc  is  to  be  taken  when  the 
parser  is  in  that  state  or  (b)  how  much  information  is 
likely  to  be  gained  from  taking  this  arc,  i.e.  whether 
the  parse  path  will  block  quickly  if  the  arc  is  wrong. 
That  these  two  schemes  are  not  equivalent  can  be  seen  by 
the  following  example.  In  a given  state,  say  just  after 
the  main  verb  of  the  sentence  has  been  found,  the  arc 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


which  accepts  a particle  may  be  much  less  likely  than  the 
arc  which  lumps  to  another  state  to  look  for  complements. 
However  if  a particle  which  agrees  with  the  verb  is  found 
in  the  input  stream  at  this  point,  then  the  particle  arc 
is  more  likely  to  be  correct. 

Since  it  is  not  at  all  clear  how  to  measure  or  even 
intuit  how  much  information  is  likely  to  be  gained  from 
taking  an  arc,  it  was  decided  that  the  weights  would 
reflect  -relative  likelihoods.  actual  weights  which 
have  been  used  in  the  speech  grammar  reflect  an  intuitive, 
though  experienced  guess  as  to  how  likely  the  arc  is  to  be 
correct  if  it  is  taken,  assuming  the  state  itself  is  on 
the  correct  path. 

3.3.7  Minor  Changes 

Several  minor  changes  have  been  made  to  allow  more 
concise  represents  cion  of  information  in  the  grammar. 

First,  MEM  arcs  have  been  eliminated  and  their 
function  taken  over  by  allowing  WFD  arcs  to  have  a list  of 
words  as  the  second  element.  In  cases  where  this  list  is 
long,  especially  if  it  is  to  be  used  at  several  points  in 
the  grammar,  an  indirect  pointer  to  the  list  may  be  used. 
That  is,  the  second  element  of  a WRD  arc  may  consist  of  an 
atom  surrounded  by  slashes  (Z's),  provided  that  the 


-72- 


Report  No . 3 1 1 G 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


slashed  atom  is  a global  variable  which  is  bound  to  the 
list  of  words  which  would  normally  appear  in  this  position 
on  the  arc.  Thus  arcs  of  the  form  :WRD  (WHICH  THAT)  ...  ) 
or  (WRD  /MONTH/  ...  ) where  /MONTH/  = (JANUARY  ... 
DECEMBER)  are  allowed. 

Another  minor  change  is  the  inclusion  of  actions  on 
POP  arcs.  This  is  useful  to  allow  the  LIFTLIST  register 
to  be  set  just  before  the  POP  occurs.  If  actions  were  not 
permitted  on  the  POP  arc,  they  might  have  to  be  duplicated 
c each  arc  entering  the  final  state. 

3.3.8  Summary  and  Sample  Grammars 

The  form  of  the  arcs  of  a KATN  grammar  are: 

(CAT  <category>  (<cftest>  <cstest>)  <weight>  <action>» 

(TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(WRD  <word> !<list> !<pointer>  (<cftest>  <cstest>)  <weight> 

<action>*  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(TST  <labol>  (<cftest>  <cstest>)  <weight>  <aotion>* 

(TO  <nextstate>) ) 

(JUMP  <nextstate>  (<cftest>  <cstest>)  <weight> 

<action>*) 

(PUSH  <state>  ( <look-ahead>  <cstest>  <constittest> ) 

<weight>  <action>»  (TO  <nextstate> ) ) 

(POP  <form>  (<cftest>  <cstest>)  <weight>  <action>») 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


u 

IJ 


FT 


I 


1 


Two  grammars  which  will  figure  predominantly  in  the 
remainder  of  this  thesis  have  been  written  in  the  MAIN 
formalism.  One  is  an  extensive  grammar  which  can  handle 
many  questions,  declaratives,  noun  phrase  utterances, 
imperatives,  active  and  passive  forms,  relative  clauses 
(reduced  and  unreduced),  complemcits,  simple  quantifiers, 
noun-noun  modifiers,  verb-particle  construe. :un3 , numbers, 
and  dates  (but  not  conjunctions).  It  began  as  a 
modification  of  the  grammar  for  the  LUNAR  system  [97]  but 
has  been  considerably  adapted  and  expanded,  This  grammar 
is  called  SPEECHGRAMMAR , and  is  listed  in  Appendix  II. 
Many  of  the  examples  in  Chapter  Six  were  produced  using 
this  grammar. 

For  some  illustrative  purposes,  SPEECHGRAMMAR  is  too 
big  and  complex,  so  we  have  produced  a MINIGRAMMAR  which 
will  be  used  to  show  the  basic  operation  of  the  speech 
parser . A detailed  listing  is  given  in  Appendix  I,  but 
the  diagram  in  Figure  3.2  probably  shows  the  structure 
more  clearly.  Two  copies  of  Figure  3.2  are  given,  so  that 
one  may  be  torn  out  for  easy  reference  when  reading  the 
following  two  chapters. 


I 


I 


1 


-7^- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


3.4  THE  GRAMMAR  INDEX 

When  an  ATN  parser  begins  to  parse  a sentence,  it 
knovrs  that  it  has  to  begin  in  the  initial  state  of  the 
grammar  with  the  first  word  of  the  sentence.  A speech 
parser,  however,  may  not  be  able  to  parse  left  to  right 
through  the  utterance.  This  implies  that  given  a word 
somewhere  in  the  middle  of  an  utterance  the  parser  must  be 
abi«  to  figure  out  the  state  (or  states)  in  which  to 
begin.  Then  in  order  to  move  from  right  to  left  (to 
predict  what  could  precede  that  first  given  word)  the 
parser  must  be  able  to  determine  for  any  state  which  arcs 
can  enter  it,  and  for  any  arc  which  state  it  comes  from. 
Since  the  grammar  is  organized  for  normal  parsing  in  just 
the  opposite  fashion,  i.e.  for  any  state  one  can 
determine  what  arcs  leave  it  ai.d  for  any  arc  (except  POP) 
one  can  determine  which  state  it  terminates  on,  it  is 
necessary  to  build  an  index  into  the  grammar. 

This  index  consists  of  a number  of  tables  which 
contain  pre-computed  information  about  a number  of  aspects 
of  the  grammar.  For  example,  cne  table  associates  with 
each  state  of  the  grammar  the  list  of  pop  arcs  which  can 
be  reached  on  that  level.  When  accessing  information 
"backward"  in  the  grammar,  i.e.  looking  for  an  arc  which 
has  some  property  relative  to  the  state  on  which  it 
terminates,  it  is  always  necessary  to  know  the  state  from 

-77- 


li  iiT~7iBT r ~ Tf 


r 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


which  the  arc  originated  in  order  to  extend  the  parse  path 
from  right  to  left,  so  in  all  such  cases  not  just  the  arc 
alone  but  a state/arc  pair  is  returned.  Such  a state/arc 
pair  is  hereafter  called  a stare  and  is  endowed  with  the 
properties  of  the  arc  it  contains  (so  that  we  can  talk 
about  a stare  which  PUSHes  or  JUMPs,  for  example). 

The  indexing  function  operates  by  walking  rec u rs i vely 
through  the  grammar,  filling  in  various  tables  as  it  goes. 
For  example,  if  A is  a PUSH  arc  from  state  SI  which 
terminates  on  state  S2  and  PUSHes  to  state  S3,  then  the 
following  actions  are  performed; 

1)  The  stare  (SI  A)  is  associated  with  the  entry  S2  in  a 
table  which  shows  for  every  state  the  stares  with  PUSH 
arcs  v/hich  terminate  there. 

2)  The  stare  (SI  A)  is  associated  with  the  entry  S3  in  a 
table  which  shows  for  every  state  the  stares  which  can 
PUSH  to  it. 

3)  The  state  S3  is  added  to  the  global  list  PUSHSTATES,  if 
it  is  not  already  there.  (The  parser  can  use  this  list 
when  processing  right  to  left  to  determine  when  it  has 
come  to  the  beginning  of  a constituent.) 

Once  these  tables  are  set  up,  they  are  used  to 
produce  another  table  which  shows  for  any  state  all  the 
possible  paths  (sequences  of  stares)  which  can  terminate 
on  that  state  without  jsing  the  previous  word  of  input. 


-78- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 


The  utility  of  this  ta«>^t  .1  be  shown  in  the  next 
chapter . 

The  retrieval  functions  which  return  the  pre-computed 
values  stored  in  the  tables  are  the  following: 

(ARCSJUMPTOS  state)  — returns  a list  of  stares  which  jump 
to  the  given  state  v/ithout  looking  at  the  current 
input . 

( ARCS JUMP*T0S  state),  — returns  a list  of  stares  which 
jump  to  the  given  state  and  perform  some  test  on  the 
input  on  the  way. 

(ARCSPUSHTOS  state)  wl ich  returns  a list  of  the  stares 
which  can  PUSH  to  the  given  state. 

(ARCPOPSTOS  arc)  — for  a POP  arc,  returns  the  list  of 
states  which  terminate  PUSH  arcs  where  there  is  a path 
from  the  state  PUSHed  to  to  the  POP  arc  given. 

( ARCSPUSHJUMPTOS  state)  — returns  the  stares  with  PUSH 
arcs  which  terminate  on  the  given  state. 

(ARCSTOS  state)  — returns  the  list  of  input-using  stares 
which  terminate  on  the  given  state. 

(ARCSUSING  wrd/cat)  — returns  the  list  of  WRD  or  CAT 
starcs  which  will  accept  the  given  word  or  syntactic 
category. 

( STATESSTARTPUSH  state)  — returns  the  list  of  states 
which  have  PUSH  arcs  to  the  given  state. 

(POPSTOS  arc)  — returns  the  list  of  states  which 

-79- 


I 


I 


1 

I i 

I 

I ; 

a 

i ; 

1 

4 

^ i 

4 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Report  No . 3116 

terminate  PUSH  arcs,  where  the  lower  le'^ei  path 
initiated  by  the  PUSH  can  end  with  the  given  POP  arc. 

The  following  chapter  will  show  how  these  retrieval 
functions  are  used  to  guide  the  parser  and  to  make 
syntactic  predictions  to  fill  in  gaps  in  the  utterance. 


Chapter  4 


Overview  of  SPARSER 

4.1  INTRODUCTION 

SPARSER  is  composed  of  two  main  parts,  a parser  and  a 
grammar.  The  form  of  the  grammar  has  already  been 

discussed  in  Chapter  Three.  This  chapter  will  outline  the 
operation  of  the  parser  and  will  describe  the  data 
structures  it  constructs  and  uses. 


4.2  INPUl 

The  input  to  the  parser  is  assumed  to  be  a set  of 
words  together  with  their  boundary  points  (which  may  or 
may  not  be  related  to  points  in  time).  A v?o’'d  together 
with  its  boundaries  is  termed  a word  match.  A word  match 
also  Includes  a score  which  indicates  how  well  the  ideal 
phonemic  representation  of  the  word  matched  the  acoustic 
analysis  of  the  utterance  (but  as  we  shall  see  the  parser 
has  little  need  of  this  information).  Since  the  same  word 
may  match  at  several  sets  of  boundary  points  or  may  match 
in  several  ways  between  the  same  boundary  points,  each 
word  match  is  also  given  a unique  number  to  help  identify 


a 


Report  Mo.  31 -6 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


it.  Thus  the  structure  for  a basic  word  match  is 


(number  word  leftboundary  rightboun  iary  lexicalscore ) 
e.g.  {U  TRAVEL  5 11  9^),  or  TRAVEL  5 11  (9^  110)) 


where  the  score  is  given  as  a pair  of  numbers  representing 


the  actual  and  maximum  scores,  or  TRAVEL  5 11)  where 


the  score  is  omitted. 


How  is  the  input  to  the  parser  to  be  constructed?  We 


assume  that  acoustic  processing  and  lexical  scanning 


components  can  operate  on  a digitized  waveform  to  produce 


a number  of  word  matches  such  as  previously  shown  in  the 


word  lattice  of  Figure  1.1.  (That  this  is  pcssible  has 


been  demonstrated  by  Woods  [9^»]).  Allowing  the  parser  to 


operate  unrestricted  on  the  entire  word  lattice  would 


probably  net  be  fruitful  because  of  the  large  number  of 


locally  syntactically  correct  combinations  of  words,  but 


one  possibility  for  input  to  the  parser  would  be  to  take  a 


set  of  the  best-matching,  non-overlapping  word  matches  in 


the  lattice,  such  as  those  in  Figure  ^.1 


A set  of  non-overlapping  word  matches  is  a hypothesis 


about  the  content  of  t.b-  utterance.  In  order  to  avoid 


creating  large  numbers  of  sucti  sets  which  are  put  together 


combinatorially  with  no  basis  except  local  acoustic  match. 


semantic  or  pragmatic  processes  can  be  used  to  group  word 


matches  based  on  what  is  meaningful  or  likely  to  be  heard. 


For  example,  if  a dialogue  has  been  about  various  nickel 


-32- 


I 


V 

k 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


compounds,  the  combination  ’’nickel  analyses"  may  be  mere 
likely  than  "chemical  analyses"  even  though  the  word  match 
for  "chemical"  has  a higher  score  than  hat  for  "nickel"". 
We  will  not  attempt  to  derail  here  how  this  semantic 
g’^ouping  could  be  done  and  how  the  sets  could  be  scored, 
since  it  has  been  described  elsewhere 


DO  MANY  PEOPLE  DONE  CHEMICAL  ANALYSES 

0 2 6 11  14  22 

GIVE  EIGHTY  PEOPLE  DONE  TEN  MODAL 

° ^ 6 M 14  15  18  21  26 

WERE  ANY  PEOPLE  METAL 

° 3 6 11  17  21 


ROCK 
35  38 


determination  rock 

35  38 


SEVEN 

27  32 


Figure  ^.1 

Sample  Word  Match  Sets 


Borrowing  some  more  terminology  from  the  BBN  speech 
system,  we  will  use  the  word  theory  to  denote  a set  of 
word  matches  such  as  we  have  just  described  together  with 
(possibly  empty)  slots  for  information  from  each  of  the 
possible  knowledge  sources  in  the  system.  From  the  point 
of  view  of  SPARSER,  usually  only  the  word  match  portion  of 
a theory  is  of  interest,  hence  we  shall  fall  into  the 
hab.  t of  using  tf e 7ord  "theory"  to  refer  to  the  word 
match  set  •' t contaiis.  When  speaking  of  the  syntactic 


-83- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


component  of  a theory,  however,  we  are  refering  to  the 
information  slot  for  syntax  which  accompanies  each  word 
match  set. 

Theories  have  the  following  characl eristics : 

1)  They  contain  a set  of  basic,  non-overlapping  word 
matches . 

2)  They  tend  at  first  to  contain  long  content  words 
and  not  many  short  function  words.  This  is  because  long 
words  are  more  reliably  acoustically  verified  and  content 
words  are  easier  to  relate  semantically  and  pragmatically. 
Since  small  words  such  as  "am",  "do",  "the",  "one", 
"have",  "of",  "in",  etc.  may  be  represented  by  very 
little  acoustic  information,  they  would  tend  to  match  at 
many  places  in  the  utterance  where  they  do  not  really 
occur.  Consequently  they  are  not  searched  for  by  the 
initial  word  match  scan,  nor  are  they  proposed  in  the 
semantic  stages  of  hypothesis  formation. 

3)  They  need  not  (and  generally  do  not)  completely 
span  the  utterance,  but  have  numerous  gaps  of  varying 
sizes  (e.g.  for  the  function  words). 

4)  They  tend  to  contain  some  sequences  of  contiguous 
word  matches.  Such  a sequence  is  called  an  Island . 

That  such  a set  of  theories  can  be  created  has  been 
demonstrated  by  the  BBN  SPEECHLIS  system.  The  syntactic 
component,  SPARSER,  is  expected  to  process  these  theories 


-84- 


\ I 


r; 

i; 

r. 

V. 

i. 

V 


i 

• » 


<1 


m 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

one  at  a time.  In  certain  circumstances  which  will  be 
detailed  later,  the  input  to  SPARSER  will  be  a theory 
together  wi'.h  one  or  more  word  matches  which  are  to  be 
added  in  order  to  create  a new  larger  theory  which  is  then 
to  be  syntactically  analyzed. 

We  will  assume  that  there  exists  a control  component 
like  that  described  in  Section  2.4.7  and  in  [70]  which 
presents  SPARSER  with  theories  to  process  and  to  which 
SPARSER  can  communicate  predictions  and  reuults. 

4.3  OPERATION 
4.3.1  Preliminaries 

Given  a theory,  what  is  to  be  done  with  it?  We  begin 
by  considering  a subset  of  the  question:  Given  an  island 
of  word  matches,  what  is  to  be  done  with  it?  The  answer 
is  to  create  one  or  more  parse  paths  through  the  island 
and  to  predict  what  words  or  syntactic  claiises  could 
surround  the  island.  A parse  path  is  the  sequence  of  arcs 
in  the  grammar  which  would  be  used  by  a conventional  ATN 
parser  to  process  the  words  in  the  island,  if  the  island 
were;  embedded  in  a complete  sentence. 


-85- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


For  example,  consider  the  way  a parser  might  process 
an  island  of  word  matches  such  as  (1  CHEMICAL  22) 
(2  ANALYSES  22  30)  using  the  MINIGRAMMAR  of  the  previous 
chapter.  Beginning  in  state  NP/  of  the  grammar  (omitting 
for  the  moment  the  problem  of  how  it  is  known  that  NP/  is 
the  right  place  to  begin)  the  sequence  of  arcs  which  would 
be  taken  to  parse  "chemical  analyses"  as  a noun  phrase  is 
that  shown  below  in  Figure  4.2. 


CAT  ADJ 


POP 


Figure  4.2 

Portion  of  MINIGRAHHAR  needed  to  parse  "chemical  analyses" 

Let  us  define  a configuration  to  be  a representation 
of  the  parser  being  in  a given  state  (say  NP/QUANT)  at  a 
given  point  in  the  utterance  (say  14).  We  will  write 
configurations  as  STATE : POSITION  in  text  (e.g. 
NP/QUANT: 14)  and  schematically  as  a box  within  which  are 
written  the  state  and  the  position.  If  a configuration 
represents  a state  which  is  either  the  initial  state  of 
the  grammar  or  a state  which  can  be  PUSHed  to  (i.e.  a 


-86- 


i. 

m m 

1. 


i 


■» 

I 


I 


! 


«• 

! 

m 


m 

! 


« at 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc, 

state  which  can  begin  the  parsing  of  a constituent),  it  is 
called  an  initial  configuration,  and  is  indicated 
schematically  by  a filled-in  semi-circle  attached  to  the 
left  edge  of  the  box.  Note  that  a configuration 
NP/QUANT:1^  is  quite  distinct  from  a configuration 
NP/QUANT.22  since  they  are  at  different  positions  in  the 
input.  In  SPARSER,  each  configuration  is  also  assigned  a 
unique  number  which  is  a convenient  internal  pointer. 

The  process  of  traversing  an  arc  of  the  grammar  using 
a particular  word  is  represented  by  a transition  from  one 
configuration  to  another.  A transition  can  be  made  only 
if  the  arc  type  is  compatible  with  the  current  item  of 
input  and  if  the  context-free  test  on  the  arc  is 
satisfied.  (The  context-sensitive  tests  are  evaluated 
later.)  A transition  carries  with  it  information  about  the 
arc  which  it  represents  and  the  item  of  input  it  uses. 
The  item  of  input  is  usually  the  word  match  which  the  arc 
uses,  but  it  is  NIL  in  cases  such  as  JUMP  arcs  which  do 
not  use  input,  and  it  is  a complete  constituent  for  PUSH 
arcs.  A unique  identifying  number  and  the  list  of 
features,  if  any,  which  is  associated  with  the  input  word 
or  constituent  are  also  recorded  on  the  transition  in 
SPARSER,  but  they  are  not  shown  schematically,  A 
transition  is  represented  schematically  by  an  arrow  from 
one  configuration  to  another  with  an  abbreviated  form  of 


( 


U! 

M 


I 

i 


.i. 


-87- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


tlie  arc  written  abo  'e  the  arrow  and  the  item  of  input 
under  it . 

The  syntactic  part  of  any  theory  which  SPARSER  l_l 

processes  contains,  among  other  things,  lists  of  tne  j 

transiti<^ns  and  configurations  which  are  created  or  used 
by  the  theory.  Thus  when  we  talk  about  creating  a 
configuration  or  transition  it  is  implicitly  understood 
that  SPARSER  also  adds  it  to  the  appropriate  list,  and 
when  we  talk  of  adding  an  existing  configuration  or 

j 

transition  to  a theory  we  mean  adding  it  to  the 

appropriate  list.  Therefore,  removing  a configuration  or 
transition  from  a theory  means  removing  it  from  the 

syntactic  part  of  the  theory,  not  removing  it  entirely 
from  SPARSER 's  data  base. 

Like  configurations,  transitions  are  unique,  so  only 
one  transition  is  ever  constructed  from  point  A to  point  B 
for  arc  X and  input  Y.  We  will  frequently  speak  of 
creating  a transition  or  a configuration,  but  the  reader 
must  bear  in  mind  that  if  such  a configuration  or 

transition  already  exists,  this  fact  will  be  recognized 

i 

and  the  pre-existing  configuration  or  transition  will  be  1 ■ 

used.  (Timing  measurements  indicate  that  it  takes  about  | ’ 

.052  seconds  to  create  a configuration  and  only  .01 
seconds  to  test  if  a particular  configuration  already 
exists.  For  transitions,  creation  takes  about  .5^  seconds 


-88- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 


IJ 

LI 


\ 

I 

I , 


1 

m m 

•»  m 

I 

m m 

L 

m M 

L 

•mm 

* 

m m 


and  recognition  .012  seconds. 

The  sequence  of  configurations  and  transitions  which 
would  parse  the  above  example  is  displayed  in  Figure  4.3. 


I 


f NP/ 

JUMP 

NP/ART 

JUMP 

N P/QUANT 

JUMP 

NP/ADJ 

CAT  N 

NP/ADJ 

CAT  N 

NP/N 

POP 

NIL  * 

14 

NIL 

14 

NIL  * 

14 

CHEMICAL  * 

22 

ANALYSES* 

30 

NIL  * 

Figure  4.3 

Path  for  parsing  "chemical  analyses" 

t connected  sequence  of  transitions  and 
configurations  is  called  a path . If  the  sequence  begins 
with  an  initial  configuration  and  ends  with  a transition 
representing  a POP  arc,  it  is  a complete  path,  otherwise 
it  is  a partial  path.  Paths  are  assumed  to  be  partial 
unless  otherwise  specified. 

The  following  two  sections  describe  how  SPARSER 
creates  paths  such  as  that  in  Figure  4.3. 


1 

I 

T 


-89- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


^•3.2  Beginning  to  Parse  an  Island 

SPARSER  processes  an  island  of  words  by  beginning 
with  the  leftmost  word  and  determining  its  possible  parts 
of  speech.  (This  determination  is  currently  made  solely 
from  a dictionary  lookup  but  it  could  be  modified  by 
information  provided  by  some  other  source  such  as 
semantics  or  pragmatics  which  knows,  for  example,  that 
"budget"  is  more  likely  to  be  used  as  a noun  than  as  a 
verb.)  Then  the  arcs  of  the  grammar  which  can  process  the 
word  are  found  ^by  looking  in  the  previously  constructed 
index  via  the  ARCSl'SING  function  described  in  Section 
3.^).  For  each  arc,  two  configurations  are  constructed, 
one  for  the  state  at  the  tail  of  the  arc  and  one  for  the 
state  at  the  head,  using  the  left  and  right  boundary 
positions  of  the  word  match,  respectively,  and  a 
transition  for  that  arc  using  the  current  word  match  is 
also  built.  Schematically,  we  have  for  our  example  a 
situation  which  looks  like  that  of  Figure  4.4  (such  a 
display  of  all  or  some  of  the  transitions  and 
configurations  which  the  parser  has  constructed  is  called 
a Iliaji) . Notice  that  a configuration  may  have  any  number 
of  transitions  entering  or  leaving  it. 


-90- 


Report.  No.  3116 


NP/ADJ 

14 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


NP/ADJ 

22 


NP/N 

22 


Figure  ^.4 

Initial  map  for  parsing  "chemical  analyses" 


The  idea  of  this  process  is  to  begin  to  set  up  paths 
which  may  be  used  to  parse  the  island.  However  it  is  not 
necessarily  the  case  that  the  only  configurations  which 
could  start  paths  through  the  island  are  those  which  have 
just  been  obtained,  since  it  may  be  possible  to  create 
transitions  which  enter  them  Via  JUMP  arcs  or  TST  arcs. 
For  each  state,  the  sequence  of  arcs  which  can  reach  it 
without  using  the  previous  word  of  input  have  been  be 
pre-calculated  by  the  grammar  indexing  package  and  are 
retrievable  by  the  functions  ARCSJUMPTOS  and  ARCS JUMP»TOS , 
so  the  appropriate  configurations  and  transitions  may  be 
constructed.  These  transitions  are  tailed  lead-in 
transitions.  Thus  the  map  becomes  that  in  Figure  4.5 


-91- 


ij 


Kmm-  -I 


i 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inn. 


Figure  4.5 

Lead-in  transitions  for  parsing  "chemical  analyses" 


Note  that  any  of  the  configurations  (except  for 
NP/ADJ;22  and  NP/N;22)  could  actually  be  the  correct 
leftmost  configuration  for  this  island,  depending  upon 
what  the  (currently  unknown)  left  context  of  the  island 
is. 


By  looking  in  the  grammar  index,  SPARSER  can 
determine,  for  each  configuration  which  could  start  the 
island,  just  what  sort  of  left  context  could  be 
appropriate.  For  example,  the  CAT  ADJ  arc  in  MINIGRAMMAR 
which  enters  state  NP/QUANT  implies  that  an  adjective 
could  precede  the  island  and,  if  it  did,  the  transition 
which  would  process  it  would  terminate  on  configuration 
NP/ADJ; 14. 

Because  the  initial  configuration  NP/:14  could  start 
the  island , anything  which  could  precede  a noun  phrase 
could  occur  to  the  left;  again  the  grammar  index  provides 


I 

J 


I 


! 1 


IJ 

[| 


-92- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

the  information  that  the  CAT  PREP  ar’c  could  lead  to  a 
configuration  which  could  accept  a noun  phrase  (via  the 
PUSH  NP/  arc),  so  a preposition  could  also  prefix  the 
island.  If  the  index  functions  indicate  that  a 
constituent  could  be  picked  up  by  a PUSH  arc  which  could 
terminate  on  the  configuration  under  consideratiorj , an 
indicatiion  is  made  in  the  WEST  so  that  any  time  a 
constituent  of  the  desired  type  is  built  which  ends  at  the 
proper  location,  it  may  be  tried  here. 

Because  of  the  highly  recursive  nature  of  A^’N 
grammars,  it  is  very  likely  that  as  we  chain  back  through 
the  possible  sequences  of  PUSHes  which  could  lead  to  the 
beginning  of  the  current  constituent  (or  the  sequence  of 
POPs  which  could  be  initiated  by  the  completion  of  the 
current  constituent)  a large  number  of  predictions  will  be 
made.  Rather  than  make  all  these  predictions 
automatically,  uefore  we  are  even  sure  that  there  is  in 
fact  a constituent  at  the  current  level,  the  possible 
configurations  which  could  make  predictions  on  other 
levels  are  saved  to  be  activated  iater  if  the  predictions 
from  the  current  set  of  active  configurations  are  not 
sufficient . 

The  predictions  which  are  made  (not  saved)  are  not 
acted  upon  at  this  time,  but  are  kept  internally  by  [ 

SPARSER  until  all  the  islands  of  the  theory  have  been 


-93- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


processed.  We  shall  see  in  Section  1<.3.5  what  then 
becomes  of  the  predictions. 

^.3.3  Parsing  Through  an  Island 

Once  processing  has  proceeded  this  far,  we  can  go 
back  and  consider  the  set  of  configurations  which 
represent  states  the  parser  could  be  in  just  after 
processing  the  first  word  of  the  island.  In  our  example, 
these  are  configurations  NP/ADJ:22  and  NP/N:22. 
Configurations  such  as  these  which  are  waiting  to  be 
extended  to  the  right  are  called  active  configurations. 
SPARSER  selects  a subset  of  the  set  of  active 
configurations  (how  this  subset  is  selected  will  be 
discussed  in  the  next  chapter)  and  for  each  configuration 
tries  to  extend  it  bv  trying  to  parse  the  rest  of  the 
island  beginning  in  that  configuration.  When  the  parser 
is  considering  a v,onfiguration  at  some  position,  the  input 
pointer  is  set  to  the  word  match  of  the  island,  if  any, 
which  begins  at  the  same  position  in  the  input.  If  there 
is  no  such  word  match,  i.e.  at  the  end  of  an  island,  the 
input  pointer  is  NIL. 

The  grammar  associates  with  the  state  of  the 
configuration  a list  of  arcs  which  may  be  tested  (using 
the  arc  type,  the  context  free  test  on  the  arc,  and  the 
current  input)  to  determine  whether  a transition  can  be 


-9/4. 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


made  to  extend  the  path.  We  will  consider  each  type  of 
arc  in  turn,  since  the  effects  of  taking  various  types  of 
arcs  are  different,  and  explain  for  each  case  what  happens 
if  the  arc  is  taken.  Whether  just  one  transition,  or 
several,  or  all  possible  transitions  are  made  from  an 
active  configuration  is  a matter  to  be  discussed  in 
Chapter  Five. 

A.  Arcs  which  do  not  use  the  current  input  item. 

Some  JUMP  arcs  do  not  look  at  the  current  item,  so 
they  may  be  taken  whether  the  input  pointer  is  set  to  a 
word  match  or  to  NIL.  The  transition  which  results  from 
taking  an  arc  of  this  type  has  a null  item  associated  with 
it,  even  if  there  is  a word  match  in  the  theory  at  this 
point.  The  positions  of  the  configurations  at  each  end  of 
the  transition  are  the  same;  this  corresponds  to  the  fact 
that  an  ATN  parser  would  not  move  the  input  pointer  as  a 
consequence  of  taking  this  arc. 

B.  Arcs  which  use  the  current  item  but  do  not  consume  it 

Rarely,  a JUMP  arc  may  test  the  current  item  in  some 
way,  for  example,  to  make  a feature  check.  If  there  is  no 
word  match  for  input,  an  arc  of  this  type  cannot  be  taken. 
If  there  is  a word  match,  it  is  noted  on  the  transition 
which  is  created,  but  the  configurations  at  each  end  of 


-95- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


r 

I 


I \ 


the  transition  have  the  same  position.  (It  is  then  the 
case  that  the  next  input-using  or  input-consuming 
transition  on  the  path  including  this  transition  must  use 
the  same  word  match.) 

C.  Arcs  which  consume  input 

These  are  TST,  CAT,  and  WRD  arcs  which  end  in  a 
(TO  nextstate)  action.  The  operation  is  exactly  the  same 
as  that  in  B above  except  that  the  configuration  on  which 
the  transition  terminates  has  the  position  of  the  right 
boundary  of  the  current  word  match. 

D.  POP  arcs 

Taking  a POP  arc  results  in  the  creation  of  a 
transition  which  has  a null  item,  because  POP  arcs  are  not 
permited  to  look  at  input.  Although  in  Woods'  original 
ATN  formalism  POP  arc  was  a "pseudo"  arc  which  merely 
indicated  that  he  state  to  which  it  is  attached  could  be 
considered  a final  state,  here  they  are  just  as  "real"  as 
any  other  arc  type  and  cause  the  creation  of  a transition 
which  is  just  like  that  for  other  arc  types,  except  that 
it  has  a NULL  terminating  configuration. 


-96- 


I 


i 

I 

r 

I 


J 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


E.  PUSH  arcs 

When  a PUSH  arc  is  encountered,  a monitor  is  placed 
in  the  Well-Formed  Substring  Table  (WFST)  at  the  current 
position  to  await  the  occurrence  of  a constituent  of  the 
required  type.  If  one  or  more  such  constituents  are 
already  in  the  >able,  then  for  each  one  there  are  three 
possibilities:  it  may  be  composed  of  word  matches  which 
are  in  the  current  theory,  it  may  be  composed  of  word 
matches  some  of  which  are  not  in  the  current  theory  but 
which  could  be  added  wit^,out  violating  the  non-overlapping 
constraint,  or  it  may  be  composed  of  word  matches  some  of 
which  are  incompatible  with  the  current  theory. 

In  the  first  case  a transition  is  set  up  using  the 
constituent  as  the  current  word.  The  transition 
terminates  on  a configuration  whose  state  is  determined 
from  the  termination  of  the  PUSH  arc  and  whose  position  is 
that  of  the  right  boundary  of  the  rightmost  word  match  in 
the  constituent. 

In  the  second  case,  a notice  is  created  and  sent  to 
the  control  component  (see  Sections  H.2  and  2.4.7).  A 
notice  is  a request  that  SPARSER  be  called  to  enlarge  a 
theory  by  adding  some  new  information,  in  this  case,  some 
additional  word  matches  which  form  a constituent  that  the 
theory  can  use.  SPARSER  does  not  try  to  determine  when 


-97- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(or  even  whether)  the  theory  should 
is  an  issue  for  the  main  controller 
et.al.  [70]).  Section  H.3.7  will 
enlarges  a theory  if  called  upon  to 


be  so  enlarged 
to  decide  (see 
discuss  how 
do  so . 


That 
Rovner , 
SPARSER 


In  the  final  case,  if  there  are  no  usable 
constituents  in  the  WEST,  a new  configuration  is  set  up  to 
start  looking  for  one  and  is  added  to  the  list  of  active 
configurations.  Its  state  is  the  state  specified  bv  the 
PUSH  arc  and  its  position  is  the  same  as  the  current 
configuration . 


There  is  a considerable  amount  of  processing  that  can 
happen  any  time  one  of  the  transitions  just  discussed  is 
made.  Whenever  an  initial  configuration  is  constructed, 
this  fact  is  recorded  in  the  configuration.  Whenever  a 
transition  is  made  from  such  a configuration,  the 
information  that  there  is  a path  from  some  initial 
configuration  is  recorded  on  the  subsequent  configuration. 
Similarly,  whenever  a POP  transition  is  made,  the 
configuration  it  emanates  from  and  all  previous 
configurations  on  any  path  which  can  terminate  with  the 
POP  transition  are  marked  to  indicate  that  they  can  reach 
a POP  transition.  Whenever  a transition  is  made  which 
completes  a path  from  an  initial  configuration  to  a POP 
transition,  the  path  is  executed,  one  transition  at  a 
time,  and  the  register  setting  actions  aid  context 


-98- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


li 


i 

[ 

I 

\ 


I 

I 

f 

i I 


1 


u 

u 

IJ 

J 


L 

i; 


sensitive  tests  are  executed.  If  a test  fails  or  an  arc 
aborts,  the  transitions  and  configurations  of  the  path  are 
removed  from  the  list  of  configurations  and  transitions 
which  are  in  the  syntactic  part  of  the  current  theory 
(unless  they  are  used  by  another  pach  in  the  theory)  but 
not  removed  from  the  map.  if  the  execution  is  successful, 
a deep  structure  tree  is  produced.  That  structure 
together  with  its  features  is  given  a score,  which  may 
include  evaluations  by  other  components  such  as  semantics 
and  prosodies,  and  is  entered  in  the  WFST. 

It  is  quite  important  that  sources  of  knowledge  other 
than  syntax  be  called  upon  to  verify  and  to  rank  syntactic 
constituents.  This  is  because  there  are  likely  to  be  many 
combinations  of  plausible  words  from  the  word  lattice 
which  form  syntactically  reasonable  constituents  but  which 
may  be  ruled  out  on  other  grounds.  For  example,  multiple 
possible  placements  of  prepositional  phrases  frequently 
lead  to  ambiguous  parsings  (an  effect  frequently  produced 
by  text  parsers)  but  either  semantic  knowledge  or  prosodic 
contours  can  be  used  to  eliminate  (or  at  least  to  rank 
order)  erroneous  and  unlikely  constructions.  (For 
example,  "John  shot  the  bird  in  the  tree"  vs  "John  shot 
the  bird  in  the  wing"  and  "Give  me  the  chair  by  the 
fireplace"  vs  "Give  me  the  chair  by  tomorrow".)  To  allow 
immediate  use  of  this  information  which  syntax  cannot 


N 


I 


-99- 


LI 

Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

1 ' II 

i ' ^ 

j provide  alone,  SPARSER  has  an  interface  to  the  semantic 

f- 

; component  so  that  const/ ■ uents  can  be  verified  directly 

I 

I without  goins  through  the  centre  1 component.  It  will  be  a 

‘ trivial  modification  to  insert  verification  calls  to 

j 

i pragmatics  and  prosodies  when  they  become  available.  In 

* the  meantime,  even  semantic  knowledge  can  be  turned  off; 

if  the  parser  gets  no  information  from  the  call  to 

i. 

semantics,  it  proceeds  without  it. 


Placement  of  a constituent  in  the  WEST  causes  a 
number  of  things  to  happen.  First,  any  monitors  which 
have  been  set  by  the  current  theory  at  that  position  are 
activated.  That  is,  for  each  configuration  which  was 
waiting  for  this  constituent,  a PUSH  transition  is  made 
which  uses  the  constituent  as  its  input  item.  If  no 
monitors  have  been  set  which  can  use  this  constituent,  it 
is  treated  exactly  as  if  it  were  the  first  word  of  an 
island:  all  the  PUSH  arcs  which  can  use  it  are  found  in 
the  grammar  index  and  appropriate  configurations  and 
transitions  (including  lead-in  transitions,  if 
appropriate)  are  set  up.  Next,  if  there  are  any  monitors 
for  other  theories  which  can  use  the  constituent,  notices 
are  created  and  output  to  Control  as  was  described  above 
in  the  section  on  PUSH  transitions. 


-100- 


Li 


7 : 
i 


II 


ii 

Ll 


n 


I 


I 


B 


i; 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

Figure  4.6  shows  SPARSER 's  map  after  our  example 
island  has  been  completely  processed.  The  parsing  results  jjj 

in  the  creation  of  a CAT  N transition  to  configuration 
NP/N:30  using  the  word  "analyses".  The  I USH  PP/  arc  at 
state  NP/N  would  cause  configuration  PP/:30  to  be  created. 

Similarly,  PP/:22  would  be  created  when  the  configuration 
NP/N: 22  is  picked  up  to  be  extended.  The  POP  arc 
transitions  from  each  of  the  configurations  for  state  NP/N 
result  in  the  formation  of  complete  paths,  resulting  in 
the  creation  of  two  noun  phrases  ("chemical  analyses"  and 
"chemical").  Since  there  were  no  monitors  for  them,  they 
result  in  the  creation  of  configuration  PP/PREP:14  and  its 
subsequent  paths. 


-101- 


NP/ADJ  CATN  NP/N  POP 
22  ANALYSES*  30 


Figure 


1 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 
4.3.4  Ending  an  Island 

It  may  be  the  case  that  no  path  can  be  found  from  one 
end  of  an  island  to  the  other.  (This  would  occur  when  all 
active  configurations  block.)  In  this  case,  there  is  no 
possible  way  that  the  island  could  form  part  of  a 
grammatical  string,  so  SPARSER  can  inform  the  control 
component  that  the  theory  is  wrong. 

When  an  active  configuration  is  picked  up  to  be 
extended  and  there  is  no  word  match  at  that  point,  the  end 
of  the  island  has  been  reached.  That  does  not  mean  that 
no  more  transitions  can  be  made,  since  arcs  which  do  not 
test  the  input  word  can  be  taken  as  usual.  Arcs  which  do 
use  input  cannot  be  taken,  but  they  can  be  used  to  predict 
what  sort  of  input  would  be  acceptable  at  that  position. 
For  example,  a CAT  V arc  which  has  a test  requiring  the 
verb  to  be  untensed  would  allow  SPARSER  to  predict  an 
untensed  verb  beginning  at  the  position  of  the  current 
configuration.  CAT  and  WRD  arcs  cause  the  prediction  of 
syntactic  categories  and  specific  words,  respectively, 
modified  by  the  context-free  test  on  the  arc.  TST  arcs 
provide  only  the  test  which  must  be  satisfied,  and  PUSH 
arcs  cause  a monitor  to  be  set  in  the  WFST  as  well  as  t 
TST  monitor  for  the  the  look-ahead  test  (if  any)  on  the 
arc . 


-103- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


More  details  on  the  nature  of  these  predictions  is 
given  in  the  following  section. 


4.3.5  Ending  a Theor^ 


When  all  the  islands  of  a theory  have  been  processed 
in  the  manner  just  described,  it  is  time  to  deal  with  the 
gaps  between  the  islands.  As  we  have  seen,  arcs  in  the 
grammar  which  can  enter  configurations  at  the  left  end  of 
an  island  or  which  can  leave  configurations  at  the  right 
end  of  an  island  can  be  used  to  make  predictions  about 
words  that  may  be  adjacent  to  the  island.  The  prediction 
is  a list  of  the  arc,  the  configuration  it  would  connect 
to,  and  an  indication  of  whether  the  transition  caused  by 
the  arc  will  enter  the  configuration  from  the  left  or 
leave  it  to  the  right. 


If  a gap  between  two  islands  is  small  enough  that  it 
may  contain  just  one  word,  then  it  is  likely  that  the  arc 
which  would  process  that  word  may  have  caused  a prediction 
from  both  the  left  and  right  sides  of  the  gap.  If  this  is 
the  case,  and  if  the  predictions  intersect  in  a single 
possibility,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  word  (or 
syntactic  class)  so  predicted  is  correct.  If  the 
predictions  do  not  intersect,  parsing  is  continued  from 
the  active  configurations  which  were  not  tried  earlier 
because  of  their  scores  and  from  the  configurations  which 


-104- 


4 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

could  begin  constituents  at  the  right  end  of  an  island. 
This  continued  parsing  is  an  attempt  to  find  a path  which 
results  in  a common  prediction  across  the  ^ep,.  If  that 
too  fails,  then  the  configurations  which  were  saved 
because  they  could  lead  up  a chain  of  PUSHes  or  POPs  to 
new  configurations  are  tried.  If  no  possibilities  are 
left  to  try  and  there  is  still  no  prediction  to  fill  the 
gap,  this  information  is  noted,  but  it  does  not  definitely 
mean  that  the  islands  are  incompatible,  since  in  some 
cases  the  gap  could  actually  be  filled  by  two  words 
instead  of  one. 

SPARSER  has  two  kind  of  predictions  - those  which 
seem  highly  likely  and  those  which  seem  less  likely.  A 
highly  likely  prediction,  such  as  one  which  is  made  from 
both  sides  of  a small  gap,  is  output  in  the  form  of  a 
proposal . which  is  a request  to  the  rest  of  the  system  to 
find  a word  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  proposal.  A 
proposal  contains: 

1)  the  item  being  proposed,  which  is  either  a 
particular  word  or  ist  of  words  (from  a WRD  arc),  or  a 
syntactic  class  (from  a CAT  arcy,  or  NIL,  meaning  any  word 
(from  a TST  arc) 

2)  the  left  and/or  right  boundary  point(s)  of  the  item 

3)  a test  which  the  item  must  satisfy  (the  context 
free  test  from  the  arc) 


m 


-105- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


4)  the  context  of  the  proposal,  i.e.  the  word 
match(es)  on  the  left  and/or  right  side  of  the  item  being 
proposed.  (This  is  to  help  the  lexical  retrieval 
component  take  into  account  phonological  phenomena  which 
may  occur  across  word  boundaries.) 


u 


All  predictions  whether  or  not  they  are  confident 
enough  to  become  proposals  are  output  as  monitors . A 
monitor  is  a notification  to  the  control  component  that  if 
a word  meeting  the  requirements  of  the  monitor  is  somehow 
found  (perhaps  by  the  action  of  a proposal)  , it  may  be 
added  to  the  theory.  Thus  a monitor  acts  like  a demon 
which  sits  at  a particular  point  in  the  word  lattice  and 
watches  for  the  appearance  of  a word  match  which  it  can 
use.  A monitor  contains: 

1)  the  item  being  monitored  for  (generally  a syntactic 
category,  but  may  be  a word  or  a test) 

2)  the  left  or  right  boundary  position  of  the  item 
being  monitored  for 

3)  a test  which  the  item  must  satisfy  (same  a?  for 
proposals ) 

4)  the  theory  which  generated  the  monitor 

5)  the  arc  in  the  grammar  which  will  process  the  item 
if  found 

6)  the  configuration  from  which  the  prediction  was 

made 


-106- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


7)  a score,  indicating  roughly  how  important  the 
monitor  is,  i.e.  how  much  information  is  likely  to  be 
gained  by  processing  an  event  for  that  monitor. 

(Notice  that  monitors  which  are  sent  to  the  control 
component  are  very  much  like  monitors  which  are  set  in  the 
WFST  by  the  occurrence  of  PUSH  arcs.) 

Once  the  proposals  have  been  made  and  the  monitors 
have  been  set,  SPARSER  bundles  up  the  information  it  knows 
abouc  the  current  theory,  such  as  the  configurations  and 
transitions  in  the  theory,  any  configurations  which  are 
still  candidates  for  expansion,  the  constituents  in  the 
theory,  the  notices,  proposals,  and  monitors  which  have 
been  created,  etc.  and  associates  the  bundle  with  the 
theory  number.  This  insures  that  SPARSER  will  be  able  to 
pickup  where  it  left  off  if  it  is  later  given  the  theory 
to  process  further. 


^•3.6  Processini 


Theorie; 


Thus  far  we  have  seen  only  the  operations  which 
SPARSER  performs  on  a single  theory,  but  we  made  the 
assumption  in  Section  i<.1  that  SPARSER  would  be  given  a 
number  of  theories  to  process  in  sequence.  Let  us  now 
examine  what  will  happen  when  the  second  (or  nth)  theory 
is  processed. 


-107- 


BIB 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


SPARSER  will  no  longer  have  a blank  map  and  WEST; 
instead  it  will  have  all  the  configurations,  transitions, 
and  constituents  which  have  been  constructed  by  all 
previous  theories.  For  concreteness,  let  us  imagine  that 
the  theory  (1  CHEMICAL  1l»  22)  (2  ANALYSES  22  30)  has  been 
processed,  resulting  in  the  map  shown  in  Figure  4.6.  Now 
we  are  going  to  process  a theory  containing  the  island 
(4  NICKEL  16  22)  (2  ANALYSES  22  30),  which  results  in  the 
map  of  Figure  4.7  where  the  configurations  and  transitions 
added  by  this  theory  are  shown  in  dotted  lines. 


The  process  begins  as  usual  with  the  creation  of 
configuration  NP/ADJ:16  and  three  possible  lead-in 
transitions.  The  transitions  for  the  two  CAT  N arcs, 
however  terminate  on  configurations  which  already  existed 
in  the  map,  so  the  complete  paths  from  configuration 
NP/-16  to  configurations  NP/N:30  and  NP/N:22  will  be 
discovered  and  processed,  resulting  in  the  construction  of 
two  new  noun  phrases.  Those  new  constituents  would  then 
result  in  the  creation  of  configuration  PP/PREP:16  and 
two  new  transitions.  Thus  we  have  constructed  only  five 
new  configurations  and  seven  new  transitions  and  have  been 
able  to  take  advantage  of  six  old  configurations  and  six 
old  transitions. 


-108- 


PP/PREPI'  puSHMP/... 

.j? rwicisr 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


In  this  fashion  any  information  which  has  once  been 


discovered  about  a possible  parse  path  is  made  available 


to  any  other  path  which  can  use  it.  No  reparsing  is  ever 


done  SPARSER  merely  realizes  the  existence  of  relevant 


configurations  and  transitions  and  incorporates  them  into 


the  current  theory. 


If  the  new  word  (or  words)  in  a theorv  are  at  the  end 


(or  in  the  middle)  of  an  island,  when  SPARSER  begins  to 


parse  the  island  it  will  discover  the  existing 


coni igurations  and  transitions  from  the  previous  theory. 


Whenever  a transition  which  can  be  used  in  the  current 


theory  is  discovered  in  the  map,  it  and  its  terminating 
configuration  are  added  to  the  syntactic  part  of  the 


current  theory.  This  is  called  tracing  the  transition. 


In  addition,  all  paths  beginning  with  that  transition 


which  do  not  require  the  next  word  of  input  are  also 


included  in  the  syntactic  part  of  the  theory.  This  is 
accomplished  by  tracing  from  the  terminating  configuration 
all  transitions  which  use  either  the  same  word  of  input  as 


the  previous  transition  or  no  input  word  at  all.  (A 


similar  process  is  used  to  trace  backwards,  i.e.  right  to 
left,  when  necessary.)  When  a configuration  is  reached 


which  has  no  traceable  transitions  emanating  from  it,  the 


tracing  process  stops.  Since  both  transitions  and 


configurations  are  stored  in  such  a way  as  to  facilitate 


-110- 


m 


I 

I I . 


f 

1_. 


t I 

I 

I I 

I I 


I 


I 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

tracing  (for  example,  each  transition  has  a code  attached 
to  indicate  whether  or  not  it  consumes  or  tests  input), 
this  process  is  considerably  faster  than  creating  that 
portion  of  the  map  in  the  first  place.  (To  illustrate 
this,  a theory  was  processed  twice,  once  with  an  empty  map 
and  once  starting  with  the  map  previously  created;  the 
time  required  for  processing  the  theory  fell  from  47.5 
seconds  to  16.5.) 

Configurations  which  can  end  traced  paths  are  put  on 
the  active  configurations  list.  If,  when  one  of  them  is 
picked  up  for  extension,  it  is  discovered  that  the  next 
word  of  input  was  used  on  a transition  already  in  the  map, 
the  tracing  process  is  repeated.  If  the  next  word  of 
input  is  new  (or  at  least  has  not  caused  any  transitions 
from  the  configuration  being  considered)  then  parsing 
continues  in  the  normal  manner. 

4.3.7  Processing  Events 


r 


As  was  mentioned  earlier,  SPARSER  can  be  called  upon 
to  add  some  new  word  matches  to  a theory  it  has  previously 
processed.  In  this  case,  SPARSER  is  said  to  process  an 
event.  An  event  may  be  thought  of  rather  abstractly  as 
the  discovery  of  a piece  of  information  that  has  been 
syntactically  proposed,  monitored  for,  or  noticed. 
Concretely,  an  event  is  a piece  of  data  consisting  of; 


-111- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


1 ) the  old  theory  that  proposed  or  set  a monitor  for 
the  event 

2)  something  to  be  added  to  the  theory  (a  new  word 
match  or  constituent) 

4)  the  arc  in  the  grammar  which  will  process  the  new 
inf ormc  tion 

4)  the  configuration  in  the  old  theory  which  will  be 
at  one  end  of  the  transition  created  by  the  above  arc. 

When  SPARSER  is  given  an  eve.it,  it  retrieves  from  its 
tables  the  bundle  of  configurations,  transition,  etc.  in 
the  old  theory.  Then  using  the  arc  and  the  new  word  or 
constituent  in  the  event,  it  creates  the  appropriate 
transition (s ) . Then  processing  continues  as  usual,  that 
is,  any  complete  paths  are  noticed  and  processed,  and  any 
new  active  configurations  are  extended,  if  possible. 

New  predictions  may  be  made  as  a result  of  this 
increased  information.  (A  record  is  kept  of  previous 
predictions  so  none  are  remade  unless  with  a more  liberal 
score.)  Finally  SPARSER  returns  the  new,  larger  theory. 
This  new  theory  may  be  processed  as  part  of  another  event 
at  some  later  time,  thus  gradually  reducing  the  number  and 
size  of  the  gaps  in  the  theory. 


!i 


LI 

IJ 


11 

11 


I . 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

If  an  event  results  in  filling  the  final  gap  in  a 
theory,  and  if  the  resulting  complete  sequence  of  words 
can  be  parsed  (as  evidenced  by  the  creation  of  a 
constituent  which  spans  the  utterance  and  which  is  parsed 
beginning  in  the  initial  state  of  the  grammar,  SPARSER 
notifies  the  control  component  of  this  fact,  since  the 
entire  utterance  may  have  been  discovered.  Of  course, 
this  may  not  be  the  correct  solution  — it  is  up  to  the 
control  component  to  look  at  the  acoustic  goodness, 
semantic  meaningfulness,  pragmatic  likelihood,  etc.  of 
the  result  as  well  as  the  syntactic  structure  before 
declaring  the  utterance  to  have  been  understood.  If  for 
reasons  other  than  syntactic,  the  utterance  appears  to  be 
bad,  the  control  component  of  the  system  could  go  on  to 
try  to  find  another,  more  suitable,  possibility. 


■ I 


^.3.8  Summary 

We  have  presented  an  overview  of  SPARSER  together 
with  several  examples  of  its  processing.  The  next  chapter 
will  delve  more  deeply  into  issues  which  have  been  ignored 
or  glossed  over  so  far,  such  as  the  relative  scoring  of 
configurations,  predictions,  and  constituents  and  the 
various  control  strategies  which  nif  y be  used. 


-113- 


Chapter  5 


f 


More  Details  of  the  Parsing  Process 

■ 


5.1  INTRODUCTION 

This  chapter  details  the  control  strategy  used  by 
SPARSER  to  try  to  develop  the  most  likely  partial  paths 
through  an  island.  The  problems  of  scoring  the  partial 
paths,  monitors,  proposals,  and  events  are  also  discussed. 

5.2  DEPTH  vs.  BREADTH 

Chapter  Two  explored  some  of  the  arguments  of  top 
down  vs.  bottom  up  parsing  methods,  concluding  that  some 
mixture  of  the  two  would  be  best  for  processing  speech. 
The  parsing  strategy  used  by  SPARSER  which  was  outlined  in 
the  previous  chapter  works  bottom  up  when  beginning  to 
parse  an  island  and  when  a constituent  is  created  which 
was  not  monitored  for  by  the  current  theory.  It  works  top 
down  after  an  island  has  been  started  and  to  make 
syntactic  predictions  at  the  ends  of  islands. 


j 


I 

t 


-114- 


IJ 

IJ 


IJ 


nwiwii 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

Both  top  down  and  bottom  up  techniques  can  be  either 
depth  or  breadth  first.  Depth  first  processing  takes  at 
every  step  the  first  piece  of  information  available  (e.g. 
the  first  rule  for  the  leftmost  leaf  of  the  parse  tree  so 
far  constructed,  or  the  first  arc  from  the  current  state 
of  an  ATN  grammar)  and  pursues  its  consequences.  Breadth 
first  processing  considers  at  every  step  every  possible 
next  step  of  every  alternative  and  pursues  all  paths  in 
parallel . 


Concretely,  consider  depth  and  breadth  first 
processing  using  an  ATN  or  MAIN  grammar.  A top  down, 
depth  first  parser  (such  as  that  which  was  described  in 
Section  2. 3.^1  has  only  one  state  current  at  a time,  and 
only  one  arc  from  that  state  is  pursued  at  a time. 


A top  down,  breadth  first  process  for  the  same 
grammar  would  start  with  the  initial  state  and  try  all  the 
arcs  emanating  from  it.  Then,  either  by  splitting  into 
parallel  processes  or  by  keeping  a list  of  subsequent 
states  and  processing  them  serially,  all  possible  second 
steps  would  be  made,  then  the  process  would  be  repeated 
until  a parsing  was  found  or  all  paths  were  exhausted. 
This  would  generally  take  much  more  space  than  the  depth 
first  process  since  many  paths  would  have  to  be  remembered 
at  once  instead  of  having  just  one  stack  which  could  be 
popped  and  reused  when  necessary. 


-115- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  I 


no 


P 


The  breadth  first  process  might  save  some  computation 
steps  and  might  produce  several  ambiguous  parsings 

simultantoisly  while  the  depth  first  process  would  find 
one  before  the  others  (the  latter  is  a small  difference, 
since  both  processes  would  have  to  be  run  to  exhaustion  to 
Insure  that  all  possible  parsings  had  been  found).  In 
parsing  speech,  some  mixture  of  breadth  first  and  depth 
first  processing  can  be  extremely  useful. 

To  Illustrate  an  advantage  of  breadth  first 
processing  in  the  speech  environment,  consider  what  might 
happen  if,  during  the  processing  of  an  island  the  parser 
Picks  up  a configuration  to  extend  which  has  several 
possible  arcs  emanating  from  it.  If  one  arc  is  chosen  and 
all  the  others  are  held  as  alternatives  (l.e.  depth 
first),  but  the  chosen  arc  is  wrong,  all  subsequent  paths 
beginning  with  that  arc  would  have  to  block  before  the 
alternatives  would  be  tried.  However,  if  the  end  of  the 
island  were  reached  before  the  success  or  failure  of  the 
first  choice  were  confirmed,  the  only  way  that  backup 
would  ever  take  place  would  be  to  have  one  or  more  events 
add  words  to  the  theory  so  that  the  path  could  be  extended 
until  It  failed.  Since  the  gap  would  be  likely  to  be 
filled  by  (incorrect)  words  predicted  by  the  erroneous 
path,  or  by  no  words  at  all  if  the  (Incorrect)  predictions 
were  not  satisfied,  it  is  not  at  all  clear  how  the  process 


iJ 

II 

0 

0 


-116- 


Report  No.  3116 


'^olt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


i 

\ 


1 

1... 


1 

[ 

I 


would  ever  know  to  back  up. 

This  problem  cannot  be  eliminated  completely  without 
pursuing  all  alternatives  to  their  fullest  extent  (a 
combinatorially  unacceptable  solution)  but  it  can  be 
modified  to  a great  extent  by  a judicious  combination  of 
depth  and  breadth  first  processing  to  find  the  best  path, 
not  just  the  first  one,  through  the  island.  This  "best 
path"  is  not  guaranteed  to  be  the  correct  one,  so  it  is 
possible  to  continue  processing  by  extending  paths  with 
were  suspended  earlier. 

SPARSER  handles  the  problem  by  assigning  a score  to 
every  configuration  which  reflects  the  likelihood  of  the 
path  which  terminates  on  that  configuration  to  be  correct. 
(What  this  likelihood  means  and  the  case  where  several 
paths  may  terminate  on  one  configuration  will  be 
considered  below. ) The  score  can  also  be  thought  of  as  a 
measure  of  how  good  that  configuration  looks  in  relation 
to  others  as  a candidate  for  extension.  One  question 
which  was  left  unanswered  in  Chapter  Four,  how  a subset  of 
the  active  configurations  is  chosen  for  extension,  can  now 
be  answered:  the  subset  of  maximally  scoring 
configurations  in  chosen  at  each  step  until  the  maximal 
score  of  active  configurations  begins  to  f.ll.  (The  score 
on  a configuration  and  the  score  of  a path  terminating  on 
that  configuration  are  the  same  thing  — we  will  use  which 


-117- 


W 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


ever  terminology  seems  most  natural  at  the  time.  The 
reader  should  bear  in  mind  that  there  is  really  no 
difference  between  the  two.) 

The  result  of  this  process  is  a sort  of  modified 
breadth  first  approach,  where  at  one  step  all  the 
alternatives  are  tried  but  at  the  next  step  only  the  best 
ones  are  chosen  for  further  extension.  This  is  similar  to 
the  best-first  parser  described  by  Paxton  in  [59]  but  it 
can  be  applied  to  the  sort  of  partial  paths  which  SPARSER 
generates  rather  than  requiring  the  perfect  information 
resulting  from  a strictly  left  to  right  approach.  The 
success  of  this  method  is  directly  dependent  on  the 
relative  accuracy  of  the  scores  which  are  assigned  to  the 
paths . 


5.3  SCORING  PATHS 

Several  attempts  have  been  made  to  develop  rigorous 
systems  for  parsing  errorful  or  speech-like  input  based  on 
probabilities  [4,  5,  50,  76].  These  attempts  have  all 
simplified  the  problem  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  no 
longer  realistic  or  extendible,  e.g.  by  assuming  the 
input  is  a seque.ice  (rather  than  a lattice)  of  probability 
distributions,  by  assuming  that  all  the  necessary 
information  is  present  in  the  search  space  to  begin  with 


-118- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


♦ - 
I 

1 . 


so  the  only  problem  is  to  find  an  optimal  path  through  the 
space,  by  requiring  a small  vocabulary,  and/or  by  limiting 
the  grammar  to  be  context  free. 

The  ideal  scoring  mechanism  for  SPARSER  would  be  one 
which  accurately  reflected  at  every  step  the  probability 
that  the  path  was  correct.  That  is,  given  a path  p^  which 

terminates  on  a state  which  has  arcs  a^ emanating 

from  it,  one  would  want  to  choose  the  arc  which 

maximizes  the  probability  that  the  resulting  path  is 
correct  using  Bayes'  rule:  P(a^!p.)  . P(a.np.)/P(p  ) 

1 j 1 ■> 

Taking  the  arc  a.  would  result  in  an  extended  path  d. 
whose  probability  would  be  used  at  the  next  step.  In 
order  to  do  this,  it  would  be  necessary  to  know,  at  any 
point  in  the  parsing  process,  what  the  probability  is  that 
the  next  arc  under  consideration  is  correct,  given  that 
the  entire  path  up  to  the  current  step  is  correct.  In 
order  to  use  this  application  of  Bayes'  rule  it  would  be 
necessary  to  pre-calculate  the  probabilities  for  every 

possible  path  and  partial  path  which  could  be  generated  

a clearly  impossible  task  since  there  are  an  infinite 
number  of  such  paths. 

As  an  approximation  to  this  task,  one  might  consider 
parsing  a large  number  of  randomly  chosen  sentences  and 
keeping  statistics  on  the  parse  paths  taken  in  order  to 
determine  the  frequency  of  the  partial  parse  paths  which 


-119- 


Heport  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


eventually  lead  to  a correct  parse.  (The  probability  of 
paths  not  encountered  during  the  statistics  gathering 
could  then  be  set  to  zero,  or  some  appropriately  small 
number.)  Even  this  would  be  a formidable  task,  and  would 
not  really  convey  information  about  the  best  arc  to  take 
at  a given  point  since  the  most  probable  arc  could  lead  to 
a long  path  before  blocking  while  it  may  cost  relatively 
little  to  try  a less  probable  arc  first  because  it  will 
lead  to  a block  very  quickly  if  it  is  incorrect. 

Given  that  we  cannot  calculate  the  probabilities  we 
need  ejactly,  what  is  the  next  best  option?  If  we  ignore 
the  effect  of  the  path  traversed  up  to  the  current  point, 
but  can  say  for  any  given  state  how  likely  each  arc 
emanating  from  that  state  is  to  be  correct,  we  would  have 
a model  which  uses  only  local  information  rather  than  one 
which  takes  into  account  accurately  all  the  left  context 
which  is  available. 

Since  it  was  not  practical  to  run  large  amounts  of 
data  through  a parser  in  order  to  obtain  accurate 
measurements  even  for  the  limited  model,  the  author  relied 
on  considerable  experience  with  ATN  grammars  to  assign  a 
weight  to  each  arc  of  the  grammar  representing  the 
intuitive  likelihood  that  the  arc  (if  it  can  be  taken)  is 
the  correct  one  to  choose  from  that  state.  These  weights 
are  small  integers  (0  through  5)  — the  larger  the  weight 


-120- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


the  more  likely  the  arc. 


The  question  might  arise  as  to  why  the  score  of  the 
word  match  used  by  an  arc  should  not  be  used  to  influence 
the  score  of  the  path  using  it.  SPARSER  tries  to  treat 
each  theory  as  independently  as  possible  and  to  assign 
scores  based  only  on  the  syntactic  information  which  is 
available.  The  one  exception  to  this  rule  is  the  semantic 
information  which  is  used  to  score  constituents.  If 
lexical  word  match  scores  were  used,  the  control  compon'/nt 
would  not  be  able  to  separate  the  lexical  goodness  from 
the  syntactic  goodness  of  the  theory  and  make  judgments  as 
to  their  relative  importance.  In  a synts x-driven  speech 
understanding  system,  however,  it  would  probably  be  useful 
uo  combine  lexical  scores  with  syntactic  information. 

As  was  described  in  the  previous  chapter,  when 
SPARSER  begins  to  parse  an  island  each  possible  partial 
path  is  begun  by  creating  a configuration  at  the  head  of  a 
transition  for  an  arc  which  can  use  the  current  word. 
Rather  arbitrarily,  it  was  decided  to  give  this 
configuration  a score  of  one.  This  starts  all  partial 
paths  out  equally,  a technique  which  is  not  quite 
accurate,  since  some  contexts  are  more  likely  than  others. 
For  example,  the  words  "to"  and  "for"  are  more  likely  to 

occur  in  prepositional  phrases  than  in  sentential 
complements.  If  this  simplification  appears  to  harm  the 


-121- 


P 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


overall  performance  of  SPARSER,  it  could  be  remedied  by 
giving  each  state  an  a priori  score  similar  to  the  weights 
on  arcs.  Configurations  on  lead-in  paths  are  also  given  a 
score  of  one. 

After  the  initial  step,  whenever  a transition  (other 
than  a PUSH  or  PUP)  is  made,  the  score  of  the  subsequent 
^o^f'iP)Ui^3tJ.on  is  set  to  be  the  sum  of  the  score  of  the 
configuration  being  extended  and  the  weight  on  the  arc 
being  used.  If  the  scores  were  actual  probabilities,  they 
would  be  multiplied;  since  they  are  not,  was 
arbitrarily  decided  to  add  them. 

When  attempting  to  create  a configuration  W’hich 
already  exists  (a  situation  encountered  whenever  two  or 
more  parse  paths  for  the  same  theory  merge),  the 
configuration  is  given  the  maximum  of  the  existing  score 
and  the  score  which  would  have  been  assigned  had  the 
configuration  been  created  anew. 

When  a PUSH  arc  is  encountered  and  a configuration 
created  to  begin  the  search  for  the  required  constituent, 
the  score  of  that  configuration  is  set  to  be  the  sum  of 
the  score  of  the  configuration  causing  the  PUSH,  and  the 
value  (if  any)  of  the  look-ahead  test  on  the  PUSH  arc. 
For  example,  upon  encountering  an  arc  such  as 
(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART)  T T)  ...)  the  look-ahead  function 


-122- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


NPSTART  returns  a high  integer  value  if  the  next  word  is  a 
noun  and  a lower  value  if  it  is  a verb  (e.g.  "accounting 
costs"),  returns  0 if  there  is  no  next  word,  and  returns 
an  indication  of  failure  if  the  next  word  cannot  start  a 
noun  phrase.  The  score  of  the  initial  configuration  for 
state  NP/  will  be  slightly  higher  if  the  next  word  of 
input  is  a noun  than  if  it  is  a verb.  Of  course,  if  the 
look-ahead  function  fails  altogether,  the  configuration  is 
not  set  up,  although  the  monitor  in  the  WFST  remains.  If 
there  is  no  next  word  (i.e.  at  the  end  of  an  island)  no 
extra  term  is  added  to  compute  the  score  of  the  new 
configuration . 

When  a constituent  is  completed  (or  found  in  the 
WFST)  and  a PUSH  transition  is  about  to  be  made,  the  score 
of  the  configuration  on  which  the  transition  terminates  is 
the  sum  of  the  score  of  the  configuration  being  extended 
and  half  the  sum  of  the  weight  on  the  arc  and  the  score  of 
the  constituent  itself.  The  score  of  the  constituent  is 
currently  very  ad  hoc,  being  a function  of  the  number  of 
words  in  the  constituent  (less  a function  of  the  number  of 
sub-constituents  subsumed  by  this  constituent,  boosted  if 
the  constituent  is  a major  one)  and  the  score  wnich  is 
determined  by  semantic  verification.  (In  the  BBN  system, 
the  semantic  component  may  assign  several  scores  for 
various  contexts  in  which  the  constituent  may  be  used; 


-123- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


the  maximum  of  these  scores  is  used.)  Thus  semantically 


"good"  constituents  will 

boost 

the  scores  of 

the 

paths 

which  use 

them  more 

than 

semantically  " 

bad" 

ones . 

Currently  all 

constituent 

scores  are  positive; 

it 

would 

be  interesting  to  experiment  with  negative  scores  as  well 
in  order  to  avoid  incrementing  even  slightly  scores  of 
paths  with  unlikely  (i.e.  "bad”)  constituents. 

Hue  to  the  level  of  effort  required  to  gather 
accurate  statistics  on  the  relative  frequencies  of  arcs, 
the  current  scores  are  admittedly  ad  hoc.  It  is  not  clear 
whether  different  scoring  mechanisms  would  be  better, 
however  it  is  clear  that  the  current  scoring  strategy  is 
better  than  no  scoring  at  all,  as  preliminary  measurements 
indcate  that  the  number  of  transitions  created  (as  well  as 
the  number  of  configurations  and  predicions)  is  reduced 
about  25?  by  the  current  strategy. 

(It  is  reasonable  to  ask  why  semantic  scores  are  used 
to  influence  parse  paths,  since  it  was  just  argued  that 
lexical  scores  should  not  be  used  in  this  way.  Semantic 
scores  may  be  more  reliable  than  lexical  ones  because  we 
are  assuming  that  the  utterance  is  semantically 
meaningful.  Under  this  assumption,  a constituent  like 
"range  remainder"  as  a noun-noun  modifier  analogous  to 
"surplus  money"  should  be  ruled  out  as  early  as  possible. 
Since  such  constituents  cannot  be  ruled  out  on  syntactic 


-124- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


grounds  alone,  since  prosodic  information  (which  night 
help  to  rule  them  out)  is  not  available  (see  discussion  in 
Section  7.2),  and  since  they  would  seriously  overrun  the 
par.'ser  with  a plethora  of  false  paths  if  they  were  not 
rejected,  it  seems  reasonable  to  permit  semantics  to 
influence  the  parser.) 

Examples  of  parsing  using  this  system  of  weighted 
configurations  will  be  given  in  Chapter  Six. 


5.4  SCORING  PREDICTIONS 

The  previous  chapter  discussed  three  ways  in  which 
SPARSER  can  make  predictions  about  what  could  fill  in  gaps 
between  islands.  Monitors  wait  for  the  occurrence  of  a 
word  in  the  word  lattice  (or  a constituent  in  the  WEST), 
proposals  request  a search  for  a particular  set  of  words, 
and  notices  indicate  the  presence  of  a usable  word  in  the 
word  lattice  (or  a constituent  in  the  WEST).  Since  the 
processing  of  a typical  theory  is  likely  to  result  in  a 
number  of  predictions  (see  examples  in  Chapter  Six),  it  is 
necessary  to  be  able  to  order  them  so  that  predictions 
most  likely  to  be  correct  or  most  likely  to  ''ield 
important  information  will  be  acted  upon  first.  Eor 
example,  it  is  more  important  to  fill  a gap  between  two 
islands  than  to  extend  a single  island,  since  by  filling 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


the  gap  one  can  check  the  consistency  of  information  which 
was  locally  good  in  each  island  individually  but  may  not 
be  consistent  when  they  are  joined.  Since  two  words  can 
occur  together  in  (usually)  many  contexts  but  longer 
sequences  are  generally  more  restrictive,  adding  a woi  d to 
a one  word  island  is  likely  to  be  less  profitable  in  terms 
of  the  number  of  possible  paths  which  are  eliminated  by 
the  addition  than  adding  a word  to  a multi^-word  island. 

It  is  up  to  the  syntactic  component  to  indicate  to 
the  control  component  the  relative  importance  attached  to 
each  notice  and  monitor;  the  higher  the  score,  the 
stronger  the  prediction. 

Jeveral  factors  influence  the  score  attached  to 
predictions.  One  is  the  length  of  the  island  to  which  the 
prediction  is  attached.  One  word  islands,  if  they  are 
processed  at  all,  yield  very  little  information  and  many 
predictions,  hence  the  predictions  are  not  scored  high. 
Proposals  are  less  important  if  there  is  already  a 
noticeable  worn  ’n  the  word  lattice  (since  that  word  is 
acoustically  better  than  the  word  to  be  proposed,  else  it 
would  have  been  found  earlier.  However,  if  a proposal 
fills  a gap  between  two  islands,  it  is  given  a higher 
score.  Notices  are  boosted  in  importance  if  an  entire 
constituent  may  be  added  and  penalized  if  they  will  add 
onto  a one  word  island.  A table  showing  the  current 


-126- 


I 


i; 


1 

4 • 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

scoring  strategy  for  predictions  follows: 


-127- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


PROPOSALS 

WORDS  no  score  needed 

CLASSES  0 if  only  one  gap  remains  to  be  filled 

95  if  something  has  already  been  noticed  in 
the  word  lattice  at  this  point 
70  if  the  word  will  fill  a gap 
80  otherwise 

30  if  noticed  from  both  sides  of  the  gap 
0 for  a one  word  island 
10  otherwise 

40  if  a constituent,  not  a word  was  noticed 

5 for  a one  word  island 
15  otherwise 
CLASSES  0 for  a one  word  island 
10  otherwise 
TESTS  10  in  any  case 

These  scores  appear  to  work  fairly  well  wiuh  the  rest 
of  the  BBN  SPEECHLIS  system,  but  have  been  developed  by  a 
process  of  interaction  with  the  other  components  (in  order 
to  make  the  scores  of  syntactic  predictions  commensurate 
with  those  of  semantic  predictions)  and  may  be  changed 
considerably  as  the  entire  system  evolves. 

-128- 


NOTICES 


I 

MONITORS 

I WORDS 


( 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Small  syntactic  classes  (e.g.  determiners  and 
prepositions)  are  proposed  in  their  entirety  (that  is, 
their  elements  are  to  be  enumerated  and  given  to  the 
lexical  matching  component  for  verification)  if  the  island 
which  monitored  for  them  is  more  than  one  word  long.  If  a 
gap  between  two  islands  is  small  enough  for  just  one  word 
and  if  a syntactic  class  has  been  monitored  for  from  both 
sides  of  the  gap,  it  is  proposed  in  its  entirety  also. 


5.5  STRATEGY 

Let  us  digress  a bit  to  consider  an  important  global 
issue.  Why  is  it  advantageous  to  process  theories  in  the 
mannner  described  in  Section  ^.3?  That  is,  v;hy  parse  each 
island  separately  and  attempt  to  predict  from  right  to 
left  as  well  as  from  left  to  right?  It  would  seem  that  if 
two  islands  of  words  were  separated  by  a gap  large  enough 
for  several  more  words  it  might  be  reasonable  to  process 
left  to  right  using  a predictive  method  to  find  words  to 
fill  the  gap.  This  would  result,  when  the  words  found  by 
prediction  filled  the  gap,  with  a complete  left  context  in 
which  to  parse  the  second  island,  thus  constraining  the 
processing  of  the  second  island  instead  of  setting  up 
partial  parse  paths  for  every  possible  context.  Several 
arguments  may  be  made  against  this  seemingly  plausible 


Report  No.  316 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 

■ 

i 

I 

I 

■ 

I 


approach . 


First,  consider  what  would  happen  if  the  first  island 
in  a theory  were  near  the  middle  of  the  utterance.  By  the 
process  outlined  above,  the  parser  would  have  to  parse  the 
entire  word  lattice  (including  predictions  made  along  the 
way)  up  to  the  point  of  the  first  island.  In  the  limit 
this  would  result  in  parsing  the  complete  word  lattice,  so 
why  bother  with  the  island  at  all?  Arguments  against  such 
a completely  predictive  parser  were  given  in 
Section  2.2.1;  basically  it  would  result  in  serious 
combinatorial  problems  if  one  or  more  words  at  or  near  the 
beginning  of  the  utterance  were  poor  matches  acoustically 
(a  very  likely  happening). 


Now  consider  the  case  where  the  first  of  two  islands 
is  wholly  or  partly  wrong.  The  predictions  made  by  the 
path  through  the  first  island  might  then  result  in  more 
incorrect  words  being  drawn  into  the  theory  and  the  error 
would  not  be  discovered  until  the  parser  blocked 
completely  (which  it  would  not  do  if  a consistent 
interpretation  could  be  constructed  from  erroneous  words). 
Even  if  the  error  were  detected  and  the  erroneous  word 
replaced  (a  non-trivial  task),  the  parsing  from  that  word 
on  (including  the  predictions)  would  have  to  be  redone. 


u 


-130- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


i • 


It  may  also  be  the  case  that  the  missing  word 
immediately  following  the  first  island  Is  a particularly 
bad  match  acoustically.  It  would  take  considerable  backup 
for  the  poor  but  correct  word  to  be  proposed  from  the 
left,  but  if  the  gap  were  to  be  filled  from  right  to  left 
a stronger  prediction  could  be  made  from  both  sides, 
resulting  in  acceptance  of  the  correct  word  in  that 
position  before  other  better  scoring  but  less 
syntactically  consistent  words  at  the  same  place. 

Of  course,  pathological  examples  can  be  constructed 
to  make  either  scheme  look  bad.  Let  us  see  if  we  can 
quantify  the  problem.  Let  us  assume  that  at  the  end  of  an 
average  island  there  are  n possible  predictions  about  the 
word  which  can  follow,  and  that  when  any  one  of  these 
predictions  is  satisfied  it  will  generate  n more 
predictions  for  the  next  word,  and  so  on.  Then  in  order 
to  find  a sequence  of  3 words  to  fill  the  gap  to  the  next 
island  it  would  require  n+n  +n-^  steps  (see  Figure  5.1). 


-131- 


T 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


ISLAND  2 

Figure  5 . 1 
The  Left  to  Right  Approach 

If  the  search  proc-  led  from  both  sides  of  the  gap, 
however,  and  a S^P  of  one  word  could  be  filled  in  one  step 
(by  identicaj  predictions  from  left  and  right  since 
non-identical  predictions  would  not  be  useful  in 

completing  the  path),  it  would  require  only  n+pm+1  steps 
(where  there  are  m predictions  on  the  average  from  the 
left  end  of  an  island  and  p partial  paths  begun  for  an 
average  island;  see  Figur*e  5.2). 


-132- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 


IJ 

IJ 


i. 

i. 

i; 

r 
• • 

i' 
• • 


Figure  5.2 

The  Ends  Toward  Middle  Approach 


It  is  a good  heuristic,  though  not  a theorem  (see 
Pohl  [65])  that  the  best  way  to  fill  such  a gap  is  to 
proceed  from  both  ends  toward  the  middle  in  breadth  first 
fashion,  not  strictly  alternating  sides  but  choosing  for 
extension  whichever  side  has  fewer  nodes  to  be  extenJed. 
Of  course  this  technique  assumes  that  all  branches  are 
equal  and  does  not  take  into  account  that  some  branches 
may  actually  be  much  more  reliable  than  others  (by  virtue 
of  a good  lexical  score,  for  example),  but  it  illustrates 
the  advantage  of  being  able  to  work  from  what  ever 

reliable  word  are  present  in  the  utterance  either  forward 
or  backward  to  fill  in  the  gaps. 


-133- 


J 


Chapter  6 


Examples  an-  Results 


6.1  INTRODUCTION 


SPARSER  is  written  in  INTERLISP  [79]  and  runs  on  a 
PDP-10  under  the  TENEX  operating  system  [11].  The  program 
and  initial  data  structures  occupy  approximately  90000 
words  of  virtual  memory.  (The  cont>-ol  component  and  the 
lexical  retrieval  and  match  component  of  the  BBN  speech 
understanding  system  occupy  separate  forks  from  the 
syntactic  component.) 


At  the  time  of  this  writing,  the  algorithm 
controlling  the  deci sion-makine  process  in  the  control 
component  was  undergoing  revision  and  was  not  solidified 
into  a function  which  could  operate  automatically. 
Rather,  there  were  a number  of  primitive  operations  such 
as  scanning  an  utterance  (or  some  specified  portion  of 
it),  creating  theories,  calling  SPARSER  with  a theory  or 
event,  calling  for  the  processing  of  proposals,  etc., 
which  could  be  invoked  by  a human  simulator.  The 
following  examples  were  all  produced  in  this  mode,  with 
the  user  acting  as  the  control  component  in  a v/ay  which 
could  be  modelled  by  later  implementation. 


-13^- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Several  conventions 

have  been 

used  in 

tracing 

the 

operation  of 

SPARSER. 

Configurations  are 

represented 

as 

NUMBER  ; STATE 

: POSITION  (SCORE). 

For 

example , 

the 

configuration 

written 

as  30 : 

NP/HEAD:23(39)  is 

the 

configuration 

for  state 

NP/FEAD  at 

position 

23  which 

has 

been  given  the  (unique)  number  30  and  which  currently  has 
a score  of  39.  The  creation  of  a transition  is  indicated 
by  naming  the  type  of  arc  causing  the  transition,  the 
(unique)  number  of  the  transition,  and  the  configurations 
at  each  end  of  the  transition.  For  example, 

CAT  N TRANS  #9  FROM  1 4 : NP/DET : 6 ( 1 ) TO  1 5 : NP/DET : 1 9 ( 4 ) . 

Annotations  have  been  inserted  within  brackets  { }; 
typeout  in  upper  case  was  produced  by  the  program. 


6.2  EXAMPLE  1 

This  example  parallels  that  given  in  Chapter  Four.  A 
word  lattice  was  artificially  created  which  contained  only 

the  following  three  word  matches: 

(1  SUMMER  12  16  100) 

(2  WINTER  12  16  100) 

(3  TRIP  16  21  100  -S) 

(In  this  version  of  the  system,  regular  inflectional 
endings  are  included  in  word  matches  after  the  element 
representing  the  score,  hence  the  somewhat  peculiar  word 
match  for  the  word  "trips".)  Two  theories  were 


-135- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


constructed,  one  for  word  matches  2 and  3,  the  other  for  1 
and  3.  What  follows  is  an  annotated  (but  otherwise 
unedited  except  for  considerations  of  spacinp)  transcript 
of  SPARSER  processing  these  two  theories  in  sequence, 
using  the  MINIGRAMMAR  of  Figure  3-3  nnd  Appendix  I. 


SPARSER  PROCESSING  THEORY  i: 

0 12  WINTER  16  TRIP  -S  21  30 

{This  is  a linear  representation  of  the  theory 
being  processed.  The  endpoints  are  0 and  30, 
but  the  words  occupy  only  the  middle  part  of 
the  utterance . } 

STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

"WINTER"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/ADJ 

(This  is  the  first  of  two  arcs  retrieved  from 
the  index  tables . } 

CAT  N TRANS  //I  FROM  1 : NP/ADJ  : 1 2 ( 1 ) TO  2 : NP /ADJ  ; 1 6 ( 3 ) 

(The  first  transition  is  created,  and  since 
there  is  a CAT  N arc  which  enters  state  MP/ADJ, 
a monitor  is  set  up  to  monitor  for  nouns  which 
end  at  bosition  12.} 

ENDING  AT  12: 

MONITORING  [ N 1 

JUMP  TRANS  #2  FROM  3 :NP/QUANT:  )2( 1 ) TO  1 : NP /ADJ : 1 2 ( 1 ) 

(Now  the  lead-in  transitions  are  being  created, 
along  with  the  monitors  for  syntactic 
categories  which  may  precede  the  newly 
constructed  configurations.  Configurations 
along  the  lead-in  path  are  all  assigned  a score 
of  1 . } 

ENDING  AT  12: 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #3  FROM  4 : NP /ART : 1 2 ( 1 ) TO  3 : NP/QUANT : 1 2 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  12: 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

JUMP  TRANS  FROM  5:NP/:1?(1)  TO  : NP/AP  T : 1 2 ( 1 ) 

(The  lead-in  transitions  are  all  made.  Now  the 
second  arc  which  can  use  the  noun  is  about  to 
be  processed . } 


"WINTER"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/N 


-136- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


CAT  N TRANS  #5  FROM  1 : NP/ADJ : 1 2 ( 1 ) TO  6:NP/N;16(6) 

{This  is  the  second  of  the  two  arcs  obtained 
from  the  index  table  for  "winter”.  The  lead-in 
transitions  to  configuration  1 have  already 
been  constructed,  so  they  are  not  remade.  Now 
we  are  ready  to  choose  configurations  to 
extend.  The  pool  of  candidates  for  extension 
contains  configurations  2 and  6.} 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (6)  FOR  EXTENSION 

(Only  this  one  is  chosen  because  it  has  a 
higher  score  than  configuration  2,  since  the 
use  of  a noun  as  a head  noun  cf  a noun  phrase 
is  more  likely  than  its  use  as  a modifier.} 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  6:NP/N:16(6)  WITH  WORD  TRIP 
TRYING  PUSH  PP/  ARC 

(No  action  is  taken  about  starting  a 
configuration  for  state  PP/  because  the 
look-ahead  test  which  checks  that  the  next  word 
can  begin  a prepositional  phrase  fails  on  the 
word  trip . } 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #6  FROM  6:NP/N;16(6) 

(Creating  the  POP  transition  completes  a path 
from  configuration  5.  The  path  is  expressed  as 
a list  of  transition  numbers.  We  are  about  to 
execute  the  path,  that  is,  check  the 
context-sensitive  tests  and  do  the  register 
building  actions  along  it.) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (43256) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  4,  CONFIG  5 

(We  must  begin  executing  the  path  at  the  first 
transition,  because  no  part  of  it  has  been 
executed  before.  Later  we  will  see  that  it  is 
possible  to  begin  execution  of  a path  in  the 
middle,  since  the  register  contents  are  stored 
at  each  step . } 

DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  5:NP/  TO  4;NP/ART 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  4;NP/ART  TO  3:NP/QUANT 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  3:NP/QUANT  TO  1:NP/ADJ 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  WINTER  FROM  1:NP/ADJ  TO  6:NP/N 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  6:NP/N 
TEST  FAILED 

(The  test  failed  because  there  is  no 
determiner,  and  MINIGRAMMAR  requires  that 
singular,  undetermined  nouns  can  be  complete 
noun  phrases  only  if  they  are  mass  nouns. 
"Wint^^r"  is  not  marked  as  a mass  noun  in  our 
dictionary,  hence  it  will  not  parse  as  a 
complete  noun  phrase.} 


-137- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


did  not  do 
try  the  lower 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (2)  FOR  EXTENSION 

{Since  extending  configuration  6 
much  for  us,  we  go  back  to 
scoring  configuration  2.} 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  2 : NP/ADJ  : 1 6 ( 3 ) WITH  WORD  TRIP 
TRYING  CAT  N ARC 

CAT  N TRANS  #7  FROM  2 : NP/ADJ ; 1 6 ( 3 ) TO  7:NP/N:21(8) 
TRYING  CAT  N ARC 

CAT  N TRANS  #8  FROM  2 : NP/ADJ  ; 1 6 ( 3 ) TO  8 : NP/ADJ : 2 1 ( 5 ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (7)  FOR  EXTENSION 

{Again,  the  higher  scoring  of  the  two  active 
configurations,  7 and  8,  is  chosen.} 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  7:NP/N:21(8) 

STARTING  AT  21: 

MONITORING  [ PP/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  9:PP/:21(8) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

(Since  there 
configuration 
prepositional 
categories 
this  case, 

TRYING  POP  ARC 
POP  TRANS  #9  FROM  7:NP/N:21(8) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (432179) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  1 , CONFIG  1 

{Creation  of  the  POP  trans  completed  a path, 
che  first  part  of  which  has  already  been 
executed.  We  can  therefore  pick  up  in  the 
middle  of  the  path  and  execute  only  the  last 
three  transitions.} 

DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  WINTER  FROM  1 ;NP/ADJ  TO  2:NP/ADJ 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  TRIP  FROM  2:NP/ADJ  TO  7:NP/N 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  7:NP/N 


is  no  next  word  to  test,  a 
is  set  up  to  begin  processing  a 
phrase,  and  the  syntactic 
which  can  begin  such  a phrase  — in 
only  one  — are  monitored  for.} 


MADE  in  FROM  12  TO  21: 

NP  ADJ  NP  N WINTER 
NU  SG 

N TRIP 
NU  PL 

{The  path  succeeds  — no  determiner  is  needed 
since  the  head  noun  is  plural  — and  a 
constituent  is  constructed.  The  semantic 
component  has  been  turned  off  for  this  example, 
so  it  adds  nothing  to  the  score  which  SPARSER 

as.®’''gns  --  5 points  for  each  word  in  the 
cons  ituent.} 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SSL  WT  = 10  + 0 = 10 


-138- 


I 

Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


{No  monitor  exists  in  the  WFST  for  a NP/  at 
this  place,  so  the  arcs  (in  MINIGRAMMAR  there 
is  only  one)  which  could  push  for  a NP  are 
processed  bottom  up  in  exactly  the  same  manner 
as  the  two  arcs  which  could  use  a noun  at  the 
beginning  cf  the  island.) 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #10  FROM  1 0 : PP/PREP : 1 2 ( 1 ) 

TO  1 1 :PP/NP:21 (7) 

ENDING  AT  12: 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 


!. 

i; 

i: 

i 


! 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (11)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 1 : PP/NP : 21 ( 7 ) 
TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #11  FROM  1 1 : PP/NP : 2 1 ( 7 ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (8)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  8 : NP/ADJ :21 ( 5 ) 

STARTING  AT  21; 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

ALL  ARCS  TRIED  AT  THIS  CONFIG 

{Now  the  theory  has  been  processed.  There 
follows  a summary  of  the  proposals,  monitors, 
and  notices  constructed.  The  syntactic  score 
assigned  to  the  theory  is  given  — here  just 
the  score  of  the  constituent  constructed.  Then 
there  is  a summary  of  statistics.) 


PREDICTIONS: 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] STARTING  AT  21,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ N ] STARTING  AT  21,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ N ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  { QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ART  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ PREP  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
PROPOSING  (QUANT  ART  PREP)  ENDING  AT  12 


FINISHED  THEORY  1 WITH  SYN  SCORE  10 


i 

* 

m 

I 


10  MONITORS  SET 
0 WORDS 
7 CATEGORIES 
3 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

i 


-139- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


3 PROPOSALS  MADE 
0 WORDS 
3 CATEGORIES 
0 NOTICES  MADE 
0 WORDS 

0 CONSTITSCTHIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  TI'LURIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND  {in  the  WFST} 

1 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 

1 FOR  THIS  THEORY 

0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

(Exclusive  of  tracing  and  fork  interactions, 
this  processing  took  5.5  seconds.} 


(Now  we  are  ready  to  process  the  second  theory 
syntactically. } 

SPARSER  PROCESSING  THEORY  2: 

0 12  SUMMER  16  TRIP  -S  21  30 

STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

"SUMMER"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/ADJ 

CAT  N TRANS  //12  FROM  1 :NP/ADJ  : 12(  1 ) TO  2 : NP/ADJ  : 1 6 ( 3 ) 

(This  transition  completes  a path  which 
includes  transitions  and  configurations 
constructed  during  the  previous  theory. } 
EXECUTING  PATH  (4  3 2 12  7 9) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  12,  CONFIG  1 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  SUMMER  FROM  1:NP/ADJ  TO  2:NP/ADJ 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  TRIP  FROM  2:NP/ADJ  TO  7:NP/N 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  7:NP/N 

«««« 

MADE  #2  FROM  12  TO  21; 

NP  ADJ  NP  N SUMMER 
NU  SG 

N TRIP 
NU  PL 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 10  + 0 r 10 


NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  10 

(This  time  there  are  monitors  in  the  WFST,  one 
which  is  looking  for  a NP  starting  at  position 
12  and  one  which  is  looking  for  a NP  ending  at 
position  21.  One  transition  is  sufficient  to 
satisfy  both  of  these,  and  the  preposition 
needed  to  complete  a PP/  is  monitored  for.} 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #13  FROM  10  : PP/PREP : 12 ( 1 ) 


-140- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


TO  11 :PP/NP:21 (8) 

NP/  MAY  LEAD  TO  CONFIG  11 

{This  is  caused  by  the  fact  that  there  was  a 
monitor  for  a noun  phrase  ending  at 
configuration  11  — the  one  created  when 

constituent  1 was  made.  The  transition  which 
would  be  set  up  is  the  transition  just  created, 
so  it  is  not  remade. 

All  of  the  processing  which  resulted  from 
the  completion  of  a constituent  is  finished; 
however  there  are  monitors  still  to  be  set  for 
configurations  along  the  path.} 

ENDING  AT  12; 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

ENDING  AT  12; 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

ENDING  AT  12; 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

ENDING  AT  12: 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

(Since  each  monitor  consists  of  the  item  being 
monitored  for,  its  associated  test  (if  any), 
the  theory  which  is  to  be  notified  when  the 
monitor  is  satisfied,  and  the  configuration  and 
arc  causing  the  monitor,  monitors  must  be  made 
anew  each  time  one  of  the  elements  changes, 
although  some  of  the  list  structure  can  be 
shared,  hence  the  seeming  proliferation  of 
monitors . } 


!. 


(Now  SPARSER  processes  the  other  arc  which 
could  use  the  word  "summer".} 

"SUMMER"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/N 

CAT  N TRANS  #14  FROM  1 ;NP/ADJ ; 1 2 ( 1 ) TO  6;NP/N;16(6) 
EXECUTING  PATH  (4  3 2 14  6) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  14,  CONFIG  1 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  SUMMER  FROM  1;NP/ADJ  TO  6;NP/N 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  6;NP/N 
TEST  FAILED 

(Because  "summer"  cannot  be  a complete  noun 
phrase  in  this  grammar. } 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (11)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 1 ; PP/NP ; 2 1 ( 8 ) 

TRACING  POP  TRANS  11  FROM  1 1 ; PP/NP ; 2 1 ( 8 ) 

(This  transition  was  created  before,  but  is  now 
made  part  of  the  current  theory.  It  does  not 
complete  a path  or  cause  any  further  action. 
If  it  had  a terminating  configuration,  i.e.  if 


-141- 


a transition  other  than  a POP  transition  had 
been  traced,  the  terminating  configuration 
would  have  been  placed  on  the  list  of  possible 
configurations  to  extend.} 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  :6)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  6:NP/N:16(6)  WITH  WORD  TRIP 
TRACING  POP  TRANS  6 FROM  6:NP/N:16(6) 


i 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (2)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  2 : NP/AD J : 1 6 ( 3 ) WITH  WORD  TRIP 
TRACING  CAT  N TRANS  8 USING  ''TRIP”  FROM 
2:NP/ADJ:16(3)  TO  8:NP/ADJ:21 (5) 

STARTING  AT  21  : 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

{There  are  two  noun  arcs  leaving  state  NP/ADJ, 
hence  two  monitors.} 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (8)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  8 ;NP/ADJ  :21 (5) 

ALL  ARCS  TRIED  AT  THIS  CONFIG 


PREDICTIONS: 

MONITORING  [ N ] STARTING  AT  21,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ PREP  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ N ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ART  ] ENDING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
PROPOSING  (PREP  QUANT  ART)  ENDING  AT  12 

FINISHED  THEORY  2 WITH  SYN  SCORE  10 

6 MONITORS  SET 
0 WORDS 
6 CATEGORIES 
0 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

3 PROPOSALS  MADE 
0 WORDS 
3 CATEGORIES 


A 


-142- 


- ■ ■ '1 

Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

0 NOTICES  MADE 
0 WORDS 

0 CONSTITSdHIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 

1 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 

1 FOR  THIS  THEORY 

0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{The  processing  of  this  theory  took 
approximately  4.5  seconds.} 

This  example  has  shown  the  trace  produced  by  running 
SPARSER  on  input  which  is  analogous  to  the  example 
presented  with  illustrations  of  the  map  in  Chapter  Four. 

The  interested  reader  is  urged  to  draw  his  own  maps  while 
reading  the  following  examples  in  order  to  best  understand 
the  dynamic  operation  of  SPARSER. 


6.3  EXAMPLE  2 

This  example  also  uses  MINIGRAMMAR,  but  shows  how 
SPARSER  helps  to  put  together  an  entire  utterance  by 
noticing  words  in  the  word  lattice  and  creating  new 
theories  by  processing  events'.  A word  lattice  was 

artificially  created  which  contained  all  and  only  the 
words  in  the  utterance  "The  final  trip  of  the  year". 
Since  "trip"  and  "year"  have  a fairly  strong  semantic 
association,  a theory  was  created  for  those  two  words  in 
order  to  begin  processing. 

-143- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


In  order  to  prevent  the  reader  from  being  overwhelmed 
with  the  extensive  output  cf  the  trace,  less  relevant 
portions  of  the  output  in  this  and  subsequent  examples 
have  been  deleted  to  produce  a more  abbreviated  protocol. 


!Ji 


fj 


SPARSER  PROCESSING  THEORY  1; 
0 6 TRIP  10  U YEAR  16 


STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

{Each  island  in  this  theory  is  processed 
exactly  the  way  "winter”  was  processed  at  the 
beginning  of  Example  1.) 

"TRIP"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/ADJ 

CAT  N TRANS  #1  FROM  1 : NP/ADJ : 6 ( 1 ) TO  2 : NP/ADJ : 1 0 ( 3 ) 
ENDING  AT  6; 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #2  FROM  3 : NP/QUANT : 6 { 1 ) TO  1 : NP/ADJ : 6 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  6: 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

NOTICING  "FINAL" 

(The  word  "final"  is  in  the  word  lattice,  so  a 
notice  is  created  for  it.) 

JUMP  TRANS  #3  FROM  4 : NP/ART : 6 ( 1 ) TO  3 : NP/QUANT : 6 { 1 ) 
ENDING  ;T 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

JUMP  TRANS  FROM  5:NP/:6(1)  TO  4 : NP/ART : 6 { 1 ) 

(Now  that  the  first  transition  has  been  started 
up,  the  second  is  processed.) 


ii 

n 


"TRIP"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/N 

CAT  N TRANS  FROM  1 : NP/ADJ  : 6 ( 1 ) TO  6;NP/N:10(6) 


(Now  the  higher  scoring  jf  the  two  active 
configurations  is  chosen  for  extension.) 
SELECTED  CONFIGS  (6)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  6:NP/N:10(6) 

STARTING  AT  10: 

MONITORING  [ PP/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  7:PP/:10(6) 


Report  No.  31  l6 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


F 


I' 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

( NOTICING  "OF" 

I TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #6  FROM  6:NP/N:10(6) 

EXECUTING  PATH  3 2 5 6) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  4,  CONFIG  5 
‘ DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  5:NP/  TO  4:NP/ART 

DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  4:NP/ART  TO  3:NP/QUANT 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  3:NP/QUANT  TO  1:NP/ADJ 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  TRIP  FROM  1:NP/ADJ  TO  6:NP/N 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  6:NP/N 
j TEST  FAILED 

I {Because  ••trip”  cannot  be  a complete  noun 

phrase . } 


STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

"YEAR"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/ADJ 

CAT  N TRANS  #7  FROM  8 :NP/ADJ ; 14 ( 1 ) TO  9 : NP/ADJ : 1 6 ( 3 ) 
ENDING  AT  14: 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #8  FROM  10 :NP/QUANT: 14( 1 ) TO  8 : NP/ADJ : 1 4 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  14: 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #9  FROM  1 1 : NP/ ART : 1 4 ( 1 ) TO  10 : NP/QUANT : 1 4 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  14: 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

NOTICING  "THE" 

JUMP  TRANS  #10  FROM  12:NP/:14(1)  TO  1 1 : NP/ART : 1 4 ( 1 ) 


j "YEAR"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/ADJ  TO  NP/N 

*•  CAT  N TRANS  #11  FROM  8 :NP/ADJ : 1 4 ( 1 ) TO  1 3 : NP/N : 1 6 ( 6 ) 


I 


i 

P 


i 


I 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (13)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 3 :NP/N ; 1 6 ( 6 ) 

. TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #12  FROM  1 3 : NP/N : 1 5 ( 6 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (10  9 8 11  12) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  10,  CONFIG  12 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  12:NP/  TO  11:NP/ART 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  11:NP/ART  TO  10:NP/QUANT 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  10:NP/QUANT  TO  8:NP/ADJ 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  YEAR  FROM  8:NP/ADJ  TO  13:NP/N 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  13:NP/N 
TEST  FAILED 


-145- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


PREDICTIONS 

NOTICING  (2 

NOTICING  (3 

NOTICING  (5 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 


THE  12  in  100  0),  SCORE  0 
OF  10  12  100  0),  SCORE  0 
FINAL  2 6 100  0),  SCORE  -5 
[ N ] ENDING  AT  14,  SCORE  0 
[ QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  14,  SCORE  0 
[ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  14,  SCORE  0 

[ ART  ] ENDING  AT  14,  SCORE  0 

[ PREP  ] STARTING  AT  10,  SCORE  0 
[ N ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 
[ QUANT  1 ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 
[ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 

[ ART  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 

{No  syntactic  class  predictions 
hpoaiisp  words  in  the  relevant 


art  made, 
classes  were 


already  in  the  word  lattice  and  were  noticed.} 


FINISHED  THEORY  1 WITH  SYN  SCORE  0 

{The  score  of  0 does  not  mean  that  this  is  not 
a good  theory,  but  that  no  constituents  have 
been  constructed  thus  far.) 


10  MONITORS  SET 

0 WORDS 

9 CATEGORIES 

1 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

0 PROPOSALS  MADE 
0 WORDS 
0 CATEGORIES 
3 NOTICES  MADE 
3 WORDS 

0 CONSTITS(THIS  THEORY) 

0 C0NSTITS(0THER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
0 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 
0 FOR  THIS  THEORY 
0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{This  processing  took  5.9  seconds.} 


{The  three  words  in  the  word  lattice  which  were 
adjacent  to  the  words  in  the  theory  were  all 
noticed.  The  score  for  the  notice  for  "final” 
was  lower  in  weight  because  adjectives  are 
content  words  which  are  frequently  combined 
with  other  words  by  the  semantic  component.  If 
content  words  are  not  combined  by  Semantics,  it 
is  less  likely  that  the  combination  is  correct 
on  strictly  syntactic  grounds.  Even  though 


-146- 


f 


LI 

U 

LI 

IJ 


1. 

i‘ 


I 

m m 

r 

• m 


I 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Semantics  was  not  operating  in  this  example, 
SPARSER  gives  precedence  to  notices  which  could 
not  have  been  constructed  except  by  the  use  of 
syr.tactic  knowledge. 

The  event  notices  for  the  words  "of"  and 
"the"  were  given  identical  scores,  but  it 
chanced  that  the  event  for  "of"  was  first  on 
the  list  of  events  in  the  control  component,  so 
we  will  process  that  event  first.} 


SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THEORY/M 
WITH  NEW  WORD  (10  OF  12) 

TO  GET  NEW  THE0RY#2: 

0 6 TRIP  10  OF  12  14  YEAR  16 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (7)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  7:PP/:10{6)  WITH  WORD  OF 
TRYING  CAT  PREP  ARC 

CAT  PREP  TRANS  #13  FROM  7:PP/:10(6)  TO  14 : PP/PREP: 12( 1 1 ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (14)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 4 : PP/PREP : 1 2 ( 1 1 ) 

STARTING  AT  12: 

MONITORING  [ NP/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  1 5 : NP/ : 1 2 ( 1 1 ) 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

NOTICING  THE" 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

ALL  ARCS  TRIED  AT  THIS  CONFIG 

{No  more  work  need  be  done  for  this  event.  The 
predictions  made  for  the  previous  theory  which 
are  still  relevant  are  made  for  this  theory 
also . } 


PREDICTIONS: 

NOTICING  (2  THE  12  14  100  0),  SCORE  10 
NOTICING  (2  THE  12  14  100  0),  SCORE  0 

(This  word  match  was  noticed  from  both  sides  of 
the  gap.  The  higher  score  reflects  the  fact 
that  it  extends  a two  word  island.} 

NOTICING  (5  FINAL  2 6 100  0),  SCORE  5 


-147- 


w 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


MONITORING  [ N ] STARTING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] STARTING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ART  ] STARTING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] STARTING  AT  12,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ N ] ENDING  AT  U,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  U,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  14,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] ENDING  AT  14,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ N ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 

PROPOSING  (QUANT  ART)  ENDING  AT  6 


{Since  this  event  did  not  lead  to  a 
grammatically  impossible  sequence  of  words, 
SPARSER  notifies  the  control  component  that  it 
is  all  right  to  create  a new  theory  which 
incorporates  the  new  word.) 

CREATING  THEORY  2: 

0 6 TRIP  10  OF  12  14  YEAR  16 


WITH  SYN  SCORE  0 


13  MONITORS  SET 

0 WORDS 

12  CATEGORIES 

1 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

2 PROPOSALS  MADE 

0 WORDS 

2 CATEGORIES 

3 NOTICES  MADE 

3 WORDS 

0 CONSTITS (THIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
0 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 
0 FOR  THIS  THEORY 
0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

(It  took  only  2.15  seconds  to  process  this 
event . ) 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


{Now  the  best  event  in  the  control  component's 
queue  ij  the  one  which  adds  the  word  ”the”  to 
the  theory  just  created.  The  syntactic 
processing  here  is  especially  interesting.) 


SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THE0hY#2 
WITH  NEW  WORD  (12  THE  14) 

TO  GET  NEW  THE0RY#3: 

0 6 TRIP  10  OF  12  THE  14  YEAR  16 


U 


n 

1.! 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (15)  FOR  EXTENSION 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 5 :NP/ : 1 2 ( 1 1 ) WITH  WORD  THE 
TRYING  CAT  ART  ARC 

CAT  ART  TRANS  #14  FROM  1 5 : NP/ : 1 2 ( 1 1 ) TO  1 1 : NP/ART : 1 4 ( 1 6 ) 
EXECUTING  PATH  (14  9 8 11  12) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  14,  CONFIG  15 

{This  path  executes  successfully,  and  a 
constituent  is  built.) 

«««» 

MADE  #1  FROM  12  TO  16: 

NP  ART  THE 
N YEAR 
NU  SG 

«««« 

NOTIFYING  THE0RY#2  ABOUT  CONSTITUENT  #1 
{Since  a monitor  was  placed  in  the  WEST  during 
the  last  call  to  SPARSER,  a notice  is  created. 
In  this  case,  the  control  component  will 
recognize  that  this  event  adds  no  new  word 
matches  to  the  theory  being  created  now,  so  the 
event  will  never  be  processed.  It  might  have 
been  the  case,  however,  that  the  constituent 
just  constructed  included  word  matches  new  to 
this  theory;  in  that  case  the  notice  would  be 
useful . ) 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 10  + 0 = '0 


NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  14 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #15  FROM  1 4 : PP/PREP : 1 2 ( 1 1 ) 

, . TO  16:PP/NP: 16( 18 ) 

TRYING  JUMP  NP/ART  ARC 

‘ • JUMP  TRANS  #16  FROM  15 :NP/ : 12( 1 1 ) TO  17 :NP/ART: 12( 15  ) 

{This  JUMP  transition  was  made  as  a result  of 
continuing  to  try  the  arcs  from  configuration 
15.  The  creation  of  transition  #14  completed  a 
path  and  caused  all  the  bottomup  processing  on 
f the  constituent,  but  after  that  was  finished 

other  arcs  which  were  still  pending,  e.g.  the 
JUMP  arc,  were  tried.) 


-1  19- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (16)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 6 : PP/NP : 1 6 ( 1 8 ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #17  FROM  1 6 : PP/NP : 1 6 ( 1 8 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (13  15  17) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  13,  CONFIG  7 

»«»» 

MADE  #2  FROM  10  TO  16: 

PP  PREP  OF 
NP  ART  THE 
N YEAR 
NU  SG 

»»»» 

NOTIFYING  THEORY# 1 ABOUT  CONSTITUENT  #2 
NOTIFYING  THE0RY#2  ABOUT  CONSTITUENT  #2 
{Same  comment  as  above  applies  here.} 
SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 15  + 0 = 15 


PP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  6 

PUSH  PP/  TRANS  #18  FROM  6:NP/N:10(6)  TO  1 3 :NP/N: 16 ( 15 ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (13)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 . NP/N : 1 6 ( 1 5 ) 

{There  are  no  new  arcs  to  try  from  this 
configuration. } 


"THE"  TRYING  CAT  ART  ARC  FROM  STATE  NP/  TO  CONFIG  11 

{This  is  the  arc  which  caused  "the"  to  be 
noticed  to  the  left  of  the  word  "year".  Since 
the  relevant  transition  has  already  been  made, 
no  further  processing  is  necessary. } 


PREDICTIONS: 

NOTICING  (5  FINAL  2 6 100  0),  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ N ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ART  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  10 
PROPOSING  (QUANi  ART)  ENDING  AT  6 


CREATING  THEORY  3: 

0 6 TRIP  10  OF  12  THE  14  YEAR  16 

WITH  SYN  SCORE  15 


-150- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


4 MONITORS  SET 
0 WORDS 
4 CATEGORIES 
0 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

0  PROPOSALS  MADE 
0 WORDS 

0 CATEGORIES 
il  NOTICES  MADE 

1 WORDS 

0 CONSTITS (THIS  THEORY) 

3 CONSTITSCOTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
2 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 

2 FOR  THIS  THEORY 

0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{This  event  took  6.4  seconds.^ 


{Now  tbe  best  event  is  that  which  adds  the  word 
"final". } 


SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THEORY#3 
WITH  NEW  WORD  (2  FINAL  6) 

TO  GET  NEW  THEORY//4 : 

0 2 FINAL  6 TRIP  10  OF  12  THE  14  YEAR  16 


"FINAL"  TRYING  (CAT  ADJ— ) FROM  STATE  NP/QUANT  TO  CONFIG  3 
CAT  ADJ  TRANS  #19  FRCM  18 :NP/QUANT: 2(4 ) 

TO  3:NP/QUANT:6(8) 

ENDING  AT  2: 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ ADI  ] 

JLMP  TRANS  #20  FROM  19  :NP/ART: 2( 1 ) TO  1 8 : NP/QUANT : 2 ( 4 ) 
ENDING  AT  2: 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

NOTICING  "THE" 

JUMP  TRANS  #21  FROM  20:NP/:2(1)  TO  1 9 : NP/ART : 2 ( 1 ) 


PREDICTIONS: 

NOTICING  (6  THE  0 2 100  0),  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  2,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  2,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ART  ] ENDir'G  AT  2,  SCORE  10 
PROPOSING  (QUANT  ADJ  ART)  STARTING  AT  6 
PROPOSING  (QUANT  ART)  ENDING  AT  2 


-151- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


i 


l 


I 


1 

i 


\ 

I 

i 

r 


CREATING  THEORY  4: 

0 2 FINAL  6 TRIP  10  OF  12  THE  14  YEAR  16 

WITH  SYN  SCORE  15 


3 MONITORS  SET 
0 WORDS 
3 CATEGORIES 
0 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

2 PROPOSALS  MADE 

0 WORDS 

2 CATEGORIES 
1 NOTICES  MADE 

1 WORDS 

0 CONSTITSdHIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
0 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 

2 FOR  THIS  THEORY 

0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{This  took  4.25  seconds.} 


(Now  the  best  event  is  that  which  adds  the  word 
"the"  to  the  beginning  of  the  theory  just 
created.  This  completes  the  utterance,  and 
SPARSER  finds  a successful  parse  ol’  the  entire 
sentence . } 


SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THEORY#4 
WITH  NEW  WORD  (0  THE  2) 

TO  GET  NEW  THEORY//5: 

0 THE  2 FINAL  6 TRIP  10  OF  12  THE  14  YEAR  16 


"THE"  TRYING  dAT  ART  — ) FROM  STATE  NP/  TO  CONFIG  19 
CAT  ART  TRANS  //22  FROM  21:NP/;0(5)  TO  19  :NP/ART:2(  10 ) 
EXECUTING  PATH  (22  20  19  2 5 6) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  22,  CONFIG  21 

MADE  //3  FROM  0 TO  10: 

NP  ART  THE 
ADJ  FINAL 
N TRIP 
NU  SG 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 15  + 0 = 15 


3 


i. 


Li 

iJ 


1 


-152- 


Report  No.  311b 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


IJ 

u 


I ■ 

1 . 


i 


NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSKCD  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #P3  FROM  22 : PP/PREP : 0 ( 1 ) TO 
23:PP/NP: 10(10) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (22  20  19  2 5 18  12) 
BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  18,  CONFIG  6 

«««« 

MADE  #4  FROM  0 TO  16: 

NP  ART  THE 
ADJ  FINAL 
N TRIP 
NU  SG 

PP  PRFP  OF 
NP  ART  THE 
N YEAR 
NU  SG 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 30  + 0 = 30 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  22 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #2H  FROM  22 : PP/PREP : 0 ( 1 ) TO 
16:PP/NP:16(18) 


CREATING  THEORY  5: 

0 THE  2 FINAL  6 TRIP  10  OF  12  THE  14  YEAR  16 
WITH  SYN  SCORE  35 


This  example  has  shown  the  way  SPARSER  notices  words 
in  the  word  lattice  and  helps  to  guide  the  construction  of 
a theory  which  spand  the  entire  utterance.  In  this  case, 
the  control  strategy  used  was  completely  syntax  oriented, 
that  is,  no  semantic  events  were  constructed  or  processed. 
Of  course,  word  lattices  generally  will  hot  contain  all 
and  only  the  correct  words  of  the  utterance.  The  next 
example  demonstrates  how  SPARSER  can  help  to  select  the 
best  set  of  words  from  a more  complex  word  lattice. 


I 


5 

I 


A 


-153- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


1' 


3 


$ 


6.i4  EXAMPLE  3 

This  example  is  more  realistic  than  the  previous 
two  — it  shows  the  operation  of  SPARSER  in  the  context  of 
an  utterance  which  has  been  automatically  segmented  and 
labeled,  with  the  lexical  retrieval  and  match  component  in 
operation.  This  example  also  uses  the  SPEECHGRAMMAR  of 
Apendix  II. 

The  utterance  "What  is  the  registration  fee?"  was 
spoken  by  an  adult  male  speaker  in  a quite  room  and  was 
recorded  on  tape.  The  utterance  was  then  dThe  utterance 
was  automatically  digitized  and  passed  through  the 
segmentation  and  labeling  routines  of  the  BBN  speech 
understanding  system.  The  initial  scan  of  the  utterance, 
using  the  lexical  retrieval  compnent,  produced  a word 
lattice  of  fifteen  entries,  including  several  for 
inflectional  endings.  (In  this  version  of  the  system, 
they  were  not  combined  with  the  root  form  into  a single 
word  match,  and  hence  could  match  even  without  a root 
word.)  The  format  for  a word  match  is: 

(NUMBER  WORD  LEFT-END  RIGHT-END  LEXICAL-SCORE). 


U 

\] 

0 

1 


-15H- 


( 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


! 


4 

• «i 


mm 


I 

m 


(2  WHAT  0 3 191) 

(3  ONE  0 3 189) 

(11  WHEN  0 3 102) 

(9  THE  4 6) 

( 1 REGISTRATION  6 19  237) 
(10  REGISTRATION  7 19  103) 
(5  HAS  9 12  121) 

(8  THIS  9 12  115) 

(15  THE  9 11  90) 

(6  -EST  10  13  118) 

(12  -EST  10  14  101 ) 

(13  IS  10  12  97) 

( 14  -ES  10  12  97) 

(7  TRIP  12  17  116) 

(4  FEE  19  23  155) 


The  two  best  matches,  for  "what"  and  "registration", 
appear  to  be  good  candidates  for  a theory,  so  we  begin  by 
building  and  processing  that  theory. 


SPARSER  PROCESSING  THEORY  1: 

0 WHAT  3 6 REGISTRATION  19  23 


STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

STARTING  AT  LEFT  END  OF  SENTENCE 

{Knowing  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  gc  through 
the  usual  startup  procedure  for  islands  when 
beginning  an  island  at  position  0,  SPARSER 
starts  with  a configuration  for  state  S/  at 
position  0.) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (1)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1:S/;0(1)  WITH  WORD  WHAT 
TRYING  JUMP  S/Q  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  /n  FROM  1:S/:0(1)  TO  2: S/Q: 0(6) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (2)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  2:S/Q:0(6)  WITH  WORD  WHAT 


I 


I 

■ 


r 

I 


i 

I 

4 

i 

i 

1 

> 

i 

i 


-155- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


trying  push  np/  arc 

MONITORING  [ NP/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  3:NP/:0(11) 

TRYING  CAT  QWORD  ARC 

CAT  QWORD  TRANS  //2  FROM  2:S/Q:0(6)  TO  4:S/NP:3(11) 


have 

are 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (3  ) FOR  EXTENSION 

{This  time  two  active  configurations 
same  maximal  score,  so  they 
processed . } 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  j:NP/:0(ll)  WITH  WORD  WHAT 
TRYING  CAT  QDET  ARC 

CAT  QDET  TRANS  #3  FROM  3;NP/:0(11)  TO  5 : NP/ORD : 3 ( 1 6 ) 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  ^:S/NP:3(n) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ MODAL  j 
MONITORING  [ V 1 
TRYING  FOP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  FROM  i| : S/NP  : 3 ( 1 1 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  ( 1 2 1| ) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  1 , CONFIG 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  WITH  WHAT  FROM 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  WHAT  FROM 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  i<:S/NP 
TEST  FAILED 

(This  test  failed  because  the 
allow  "what”  to  be  a complete 


the 

both 


1 

1 :S/ 
2:S/Q 


TO  2;S/Q 
TO  i|;S/NP 


erammar  does 
sentence . } 


not 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (5)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  5 : NP/ORD ; 3 ( 1 6 ) 

STARTING  AT  3; 

MONITORING  [ QUANT/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  6 ; QUANT/ ; 3 ( 1 6 ) 

(Here  all  the  words  which  can  start 
quantifiers,  like  "a  hundred”  or  ’’point  five” 
are  proposed.  The  grammar  does  not  preclude  a 
quantifier  following  a question-determiner, 

e.g.  ’’What  three  men  traveled  to  Soain’”  1 
MONITORING  [ INTEGER  ] ^pain . 

MONITORING  [ ZERO  ] 

PROPOSING  ’’ZERO” 

MONITORING  [ NO  ] 

PROPOSING  ”NO” 

MONITORING  [ POINT  ] 

PROPOSING  ’’POINT” 

MONITORING  [ A ] 

PROPOSING  ”A” 


-156- 


I 

I 


1 


r 

« • 

\ ’ 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


TRYING  JUMP  NP/OUANT  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #5  FROM  5 :NP/ORD : 3 ( 1 6 ) TO  7 : NP/OUANT : 3 ( 2 1 ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (7)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  7 : NP/OUANT : 3 ( 2 1 ) 

TRYING  JUMP  NP/DET  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #6  FROM  7 : NP/OUANT : 3 ( 2 1 ) TO  8 : NP/DET : 3 ( 26  ) 


SELECTED  CON/IGS  (8)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  8 : NP/DET : 3 ( 26 ) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ NPR/  NPR/  ] 

{There  are  two  ''USH  NPR/  arcs  from  this  state 
so  two  monitrrs  an;  created,  but  only  one 
configuration  is  set  ud.} 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  9:NPR/:3(26) 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

MONITORING  [ ADV  ] 

TRYING  JUMP  NP/HEAD  ARC 

JUMP  TRAMS  n FROM  8 : NP/DET : 3 (26 ) TO  10 :NP/HEAD : 3 ( 29  ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (10)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 0 : NP/HEAD : 3 ( 29  ) 

(This  is  an  example  of  the  fallibility  of  using 
only  context  free  tests  on  partial  paths.  The 
parser  thinks  it  has  successfully  reached  state 
NP/HEAD,  while  in  fact  this  cannot  be  the  case 
because  no  head  noun  has  been  discovered  for 
the  noun  phrase.  Thus  it  is  incorrect  to 
predict  relative  clauses  at  this  point.  This 
issue  will  be  discussed  in  more  detail  in 
Chapter  Seven . } 


STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ R/  PP/  R/NIL  ] 
SETTING  UP  CONFIG  11:R/:3(29) 
MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHOSE" 

MONITORING  [ WHO  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHO" 

MONITORING  [ WHICH  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHICH" 

MONITORING  [ THAT  ] 

PROPOSING  "THAT" 


I 


i 


-157- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


MONITORING  [ WHOM  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHOM" 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  12:PP/:3(29) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  13 : R/NIL : 3 (29  ) 

MONITORING  [ THERE  ] 

PROPOSING  "THERE" 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #8  FROM  10 :NP/HEAD : 3 (29  ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (35678) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  3,  CONFIG  3 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  WHQ  FROM  3:NP/  TO  5:NP/ORD 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  5:NP/ORD  TO  7:NP/QUANT 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  7:NP/QUANT  TO  8:NP/DET 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  8:NP/DET  TO  10:NP/HEAD 
TEST  FAILED 

{A  question-determiner  alone  cannot  be  a 
complete  noun  phrase;  although  this  is 
permitted  by  considering  "what"  as  a OWORD  as 
in  transition  #2.} 


STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

"REGISTRATION"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/DET  TO  NP/DET 
CAT  N TRANS  //9  FROM  1 4 : NP/DET : 6 ( 1 ) TO  1 5 : NP/DET:  1 9 ( ^ ) 

{This  arc  is  using  "registration"  as’  a noun 
modifier  for  some  future  head  noun.} 

ENDING  AT  6: 

NPR/  ] 

ADJ  j 

n ] 

V ] 

FROM  16:NP/QUANT:6(  1 ) TO  1 ; NP/DET : 6 ( 1 ) 


[ 


MONITORING 
MONITORING 
MONITORING 
MONITORING 
JUMP  TRANS  #10 
ENDING  AT  6: 
MONITORING  [ 

JUMP  TRANS  #11 
ENDING  AT  6: 
MONITORING 
MONITORING 
MONITORING 
PROPOSING  "ONLY" 


QUANT/  ] 

FROM  17:NP/ORD:6(  1 ) 


TO  16:NP/QUANT:6( 1 ) 


ORD 

QDET 

ONLY 


] 


JUMP  TRANS  #12  FROM  1 8 : NP/ART : 6 ( 1 ) TO  1 7 : NP/ORD • 6 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  6:  i > 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

NOTICING  "THE" 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ POSS  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHOSE" 


-158- 


1 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


1. 


1 


JUMP  TRANS  #13  FROM  19 : NP/ONLY : 6 ( 1 ) TO  1 8 : NP/ART : 6 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  6: 

MONITORING  [ ONLY  ] 

PROPOSING  "ONLY" 

JUMP  TRANS  FROM  20:NP/:6(1)  TO  1 9 : NP/ONLY : 6 ( 1 ) 


"REGISTRATION"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/DET  TO  NP/HEAD 
CAT  N TRANS  #15  FROM  1 ^ : NP/DET : 6 ( 1 ) TO  2 1 : NP/HEAD : 1 9 ( 6 ) 
{This  arois  using  "registration"  as  the  head 
noun  of  a noun  fihrase.) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (21)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  2 1 : NP/HEAD : 1 9 ( 6 ) 

STARTING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ R/  PP/  R/NIL  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  22:R/:19(6) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHO  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHICH  ] 

MONITORING  [ THAT  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHOM  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  23:PP/:19(6) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  24 : R/NI L : 1 9 ( 6 ) 

MONITORING  [ THERE  ] 

NOTICING  "FEE" 

(This  notice  is  in  response  to  the  look-ahead 
test  on  the  push  arc  to  state  R/NIL,  Since 
"fee"  can  start  a reduced  relative  clause,  it 
is  noticed,  but  there  is  not  a specific  monitor 
set  up  because  the  arc  within  the  relative 
clause  network  which  will  actually  process  the 
word  "fee"  is  not  known.} 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #16  FROM  2 1 :NP/HEAD : 1 9 ( 6 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (14  13  12  11  10  15  16) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  14,  CONFIG  20 
TEST  FAILED 

(The  path  failed  because  there  is  no  determiner 
for  "registration."} 


PREDICTIONS: 

NOTICING  (4  FEE  19  23  155  0),  SCORE  -5 
NOTICING  (9  THE  4 6 103  0),  SCORE  0 
PROPOSING  (ONLY  WHOSE)  ENDING  AT  6 

PROPOSING  (ZERO  NO  POINT  A WHOSE  WHO  WHICH  THAT  WHOM 
THERE)  STARTING  AT  3 1 


-159- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

PROPOSING  ( 


[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

r 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

[ 

V 


PREP  ] STARTING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 
WHOSE  J STARTING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 
WHO  ] STARTING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 
WHICH  ] STARTING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 
THAT  ] STARTING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 
WHOM  ] STARTING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 
THERE  ] STARTING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 
ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 
N ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 

V ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 

ORD  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 
QDET  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 

ONl.Y  _1  C.NDING  AT  o,  SCORE  5 

ART  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 
QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 
POSS  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  0 
WHOSE  ] ENDING  AT  6,  SCORE  5 
MODAL  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

V ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
INTEGER  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
ZERO  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 

NO  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
POINT  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
A ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
NPR  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
N ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
ADJ  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

V ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
ADV  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
PREP  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
WHOSE  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 


WHO  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
WHICH  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
THAT  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
WHOM  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
THERE  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
N ADJ)  FROM  3 TO  6 

{Proposals  were  made  to  fill  the  Kao 
there  were  monitors  from  both  sides  of  a gap 
small  enough  to  contain  one  word.} 


because 


FINISHED  THEORY  1 WITH  SYN  SCORE  0 

47  MONITORS  SET 
18  WORDS 
18  CATEGORIES 
11  CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 


a 

! 


i 


-160- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


13  PROPOSALS  MADE 
10  WORDS 
3 CATEGORIES 
2 NOTICES  MADE 
2 WORDS 

0 COKSTITS(THIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
0 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORj.ES 
0 FOR  THIS  THEORY 
0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{It  took  11.9  seconds  to  process  this  theory.} 


{Processing  the  proposals  just  made  results, 
notably,  in  the  detection  of  the  word  "other" 
between  "what"  and  "registration",  but  the  word 
match  score  is  very  low.  Word  matches  for  "is" 
and  "are"  from  position  3 (next  to  "what")  to 
position  ^ are  also  found,  but  since  they  do 
not  fill  the  gap,  the  event  scores  are  low. 
The  best  event  is  that  for  the  word  "fee". 
Processing  it  is  fairly  uninteresting,  since  it 
completes  no  constituent,  so  we  will  omit  the 
trace  of  that  event.  After  it  has  been 
processed,  however,  the  best  event  is  that  for 
the  word  "the"  and  the  theory  just  created.} 


SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THEORY/^2 
WITH  NEW  WORD  (4  THE  6) 

TO  GET  NEW  THE0RY//3: 

WHAT  3 4 THE  6 REGISTRATION  19  FEE  23 


"THE"  TRYING  (CAT  ART  — ) FROM  STATE  N.'^/ONLY  TO  CONFIG  18 
CAT  ART  TRANS  //26  FROM  32 : NP/ONLY : 4 ( 3 ) TO  1 8 : NP/ART : 6 ( 6 ) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ ONLY  ] 

PROPOSING  "ONLY" 

JUMP  TRANS  #27  FROM  33:NP/:^(1)  TO  32:NP/ONLY:4(3) 
EXECUTING  PATH  (27  26  12  11  10  9 22  25) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  22,  CONFIG  15 


-161- 


Report  No.  ;!116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


MADE  /M  FROM  4 TO  23: 

NP  DET  ART  IHE 

ADJ  NP  N REGI3TRATI0N 
NU  SO 

N FEE 

FEATS  NU  SG 

{The  format  of  this  noun  phrase  is  slightly 
different  from  that  in  the  previous  examples 
because  the  structure  building  action  for  noun 
phrases  in  SPEECHGRAMMAR  is  different  from  that 
in  MINIGRAMMAR> 

There  are  many  places  in  the  SPEECHGRAMMAR 
which  push  for  noun  phrases,  and  since  there 
were  no  monitors  in  the  WFST  which  can  use  this 
constituent,  all  of  them  must  be  tried, 
resulting  in  a number  of  predictions  and 
notices . } 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 15  + 0 r 15 


HP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #28  FROM  3^ : FOR/FOR ; 4 ( 1 ) TO  35 : TO/ : 23 ( 10 ) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ FOR  ] 

PROPOSING  "FOR" 


NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #29  FROM  36 : PP/PREP : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
37:PP/NP:23( 10) 

ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 


NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #30  FROM  38 : R/NIL ; 4 ( 1 ) TO  39 : S/NP : 23 ( 9 ) 
NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #31  FROM  40:R/WH:4(1)  TO  3 ) :S/NP:23(9) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ R/WHOSE  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHICH  THAT  WHO  WHOM  WHICH  WHOM  ] 
PROPOSING  "WHICH" 

PROPOSING  "THAT" 

PROPOSING  "WHO" 

PROPOSING  "WHOM" 

PROPOSING  "WHICH" 

PROPOSING  "WHOM" 

(There  are  two  arcs  entering  state  R/WH  which 
use  the  words  "which"  and  "whom".  There  is  a 
check  made  to  see  that  duplicate  proposals  ai'e 
not  actually  communicated  to  the  control 


-162- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


component,  although  they  appear 
duplicated  in  the  trace.} 


to  be 


NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #32  FROM  ^1 1 :S/DCL : ( 1 ) TO  39  : S/NP : 23 ( 9 ) 
JUMP  TRANS  #33  FROM  il2:S/:il(1)  TO  :S/DCL:4(  1 ) 

ENDING  AT  : 

MONITORING  [ PP/  ] 


NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #3^  FROM  ^13  :S/NO-SUBJ : 1 ) TO 

i1i1:VP/V:23(9) 

JUMP  TRANS  #35  FROM  ^15  ;S/AUX : 1 ) TO  ^13:S/NO-SUBJ:^(  1 ) 

ENDING  AT  ^4  : 

MONITORING  [ MODAL  ] 

MONITORING  [ NEG  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

NOTICING  "IS" 

NOTICING  "ARE" 


NF7  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #36  FROM  H6 :S/Q: ( 1 ) TO  39:S/NP:23(9) 
ENDING  AT  ^4 : 

MONITORING  [ QADV  ] 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #37  FROM  ^17  : VP/HEAD  : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
il8:VP/NP:23(9) 

ENDING  AT  : 

MONITORING  [ PARTICLE  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #38  FROM  ^9 : VP/V: ^4 ( 1 ) TO  ^17 : VP/HEAD : 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  ; 

MONITORING  [ NP/  NP/  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

NOTICING  "IS" 

NOTICING  "ARE" 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

NOTICING  "13" 

NOTICING  "ARE" 

MONITORING  [ ADV  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

{The  words  "is"  and  "are"  failed  the  context 
free  test  on  the  arc  causing  this  monitor, 
hence  they  are  not  noticed  } 

JUMP  TRANS  #39  FROM  ^5:S/AUX;40)  TO  ^9:VP/V:^(1) 

JU.'IP  TRANS  #40  FROM  43  :S/NO-SUBJ  ; 4 ( 1 ) TO  49:VP/V:4(1) 
JUMP  TRANS  #41  FROM  43 : S/NO-SUBJ : 4 ( 1 ) TO  49:VP/V:4(1) 


¥ 


U 


-163- 


! 

: 


5 

i 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


JUMP  TRANS  #42  FROM  50 : S/THERE : 4 ( 1 ) TO  49:VP,V:4(1) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ THERE  ] 

PROPOSING  "THERE" 


NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #43  FROM  5 1 : VP/NP : 4 ( 1 ) TO  52 : VP/VP : 23 ( 9 ) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ NP/  ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #44  FROM  47 : VP/HEAD : 4 (1 ) TO  5 1 : VP/NP  : 4 ( 1 ) 


NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #45  FROM  49:VP/V:4(1)  TO  44 : VP/V : 23 ( 9 ) 

{The  creation  of  transition  #27  completed  3 
paths.  The  first  two  have  been  executed, 
resulting  respectively  in  failure  and  the 
completion  of  a constituent  with  all  the 
processing  that  entails.  Now  the  third  path  is 
still  pending  and  is  about  to  be  executed.} 
EXECUTING  PATH  (27  26  12  11  10  15  16) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  15,  CONFIG  l4 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  REGISTRATION  FROM  14:NP/DET  TO 
21  :NP/HEAD 

DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  21 :NP/HEAD 

MADE  #2  FROM  4 TO  19: 

NP  DET  ART  THE 
N REGISTRATION 
FEATS  MU  SG 

(This  constituent  can  now  satisfy  the  monitors 
set  by  the  discovery  of  the  larger  one, 
resulting  in  the  creation  of  many  new 
transitions  but  no  new  predictions.} 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 10  + 0 = 10 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  34 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #46  FROM  34 : /OR/FOR : 4 ( 1 ) TO  53:TO/:19(8) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  36 
PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #47  FROM  36 ; PP/PREP : 4 { 1 ) TO  54 : PP/NP : 1 9 ( 8 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  38 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #48  FIOM  38 : R/NIL : 4 ( 1 } TO  55 : S/NP : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  40 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #49  FROM  40:R/WH:4(1)  TO  55 : S/NP  : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  41 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #50  FROM  41:S/DCL:4(1)  TO  55 : S/NP : 1 9 ( 7 ) 


-1o4- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Berar.ek  and  Newman  Inc. 


NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  43 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #51  FROM  43 : S/NO-SUBJ : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
56:VP/V: 19(7) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  46 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #52  FROM  46:S/Q:4(1)  TO  55 : S/NP : 1 9 ( 8 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  47 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #53  FROM  47 : VP/HEAD ; 4 ( 1 ) TO 
57:VP/NP: 19(8) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  51 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #54  FROM  5 1 : VP/NP : 4 ( 1 ) TO  58 : VP/VP : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  49 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #55  FROM  49:VP/V:4(1)  TO  56 : VP/V : 1 9 ( 8 ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (55  54  39  37)  FOR  EXTENSION 

{Because  these  are  the  maximally  scoring 

configu '’ations  from  the  large  pool  of 

possibi Lities . } 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  55 : S/NP : 1 9 ( 8 ) WITH  WORD  FEE 
TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #56  FROM  55:S/NP: 19(8) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (48  56) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  48,  CONFIG  38 
TEST  FAILED 

EXECUTING  PATH  (33  50  56) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  33,  CONFIG  42 

«»«« 

MADE  #3  FROM  4 TO  19: 

S NPU 

NP  DET  ART  THE 

ADJ  NP  N REGISTRATION 
NU  SG 

N FEE 

FEATS  NU  SG 
WITH  FEATURES  (NPU) 

(Here  is  an  example  of  a constituent  which  has 
features  attached  to  it.  The  feature  NPU  can 
be  tested  by  the  semantic  component  to 
determine  that  the  constituent  is  a noun  phrase 
utterance.  If  necessary,  it  could  also  be 
tested  on  a PUSH  S/  arc  i:.  the  grammar,  since 
there  are  some  times,  '"‘.g.  during  the 
construction  cf  a sentential  complement,  when 
an  embedded  sentence  must  contain  a verb.} 


-165- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inn. 


SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 10  + 0 = 10 

{No  arcs  in  this  grammar  push  for  noun  phrase 
utterances,  so  this  constituent  is  not  used 
further . } 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  54 : PP/NP : 1 9 ( 8 ) WITH  WORD  FEE 
TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #57  FROM  54 : PP/NP : 1 9 ( 8 ) 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  39 : S VNP : 23 ( 9 ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #58  FROM  39 : S/NP : 23 ( 9 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (30  58) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  30,  CONFIG  38 
TF'?T  FATI  FH 

EXECUTING  PATH  (33  32  58) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  32,  CONFIG  41 

MADE  #4  FROM  4 TO  23: 

S NPU 

NP  ADJ  NP  N REGISTRATION 
NU  SG 

DET  ART  THE 
N FEE 

FEATS  NU  SG 
WITH  FEATURES  (NPU) 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 15  + 0 = 15 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  37 : PP/NP : 23 ( 10  ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #59  FROM  37 : PP/NP : 23 ( 1 0 ) 


PREDICTIONS: 

NOTICING  (19  IS  3 4 -79  0),  SCORE  10 
NOTICING  (20  ARE  3 4 -128  0),  SCORE  10 

PROPOSING  (ONLY  FOR  WHICH  THAT  WHO  WHOM  THERE)  ENDING  AT  4 


MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 

MONITORING 


[ ONLY  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  15 
[ FOR  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  15 
[ PREP  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 
[ WHICH  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  15 
[ THAT  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  15 
[ WHO  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  15 
[ WHOM  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  15 
[ MODAL  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 
[ NEG  ] ENDING  AT  SCORE  10 
[ 7 ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 

[ vOADV  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 
[ PARTICLE  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE 
L V ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 
[ V ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 


10 


-166- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


MONITORING  [ V ] "JNDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ ADV  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 
MONIT'^RING  [ V ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  10 
MONITORING  [ THERE  ] ENDING  AT  4,  SCORE  15 
MONITORING  [ MODAL  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ V ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ INTEGER  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ ZERO  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ NO  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ POINT  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ A ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ NPR  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ N ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ V ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ ADV  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ PREP  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 
MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ WHO  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ WHICH  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ THAT  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ WHOM  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
MONITORING  [ THERE  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 
PROPOSING  (MODAL)  FROM  3 TO  4 
PROPOSING  (MODAL  PREP)  STARTING  AT  3 
PROPOSING  (PREP  MODAL  NEG  QADV ) ENDING  AT  4 

CREATING  THEORY  3: 

0 WHAT  3 4 THE  6 REGISTRATION  19  FEE  23 

WITH  SYN  SCORE  15 


42  MONITORS  SET 
17  WORDS 
20  CATEGORIES 
5 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

11  PROPOSALS  MADE 
7 WORDS 
4 CATEGORIES 
2 NOTICES  MADE 
2 WORDS 


0 CONSTITS(THIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS (OTHER  THEORIES) 
0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
4 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 
4 FOR  THIS  THEORY 
0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


{This  event  took  3^.5  seconds,  largely  because 
of  the  extensive  bottom  up  processing 
necessitated  by  the  discovery  of  the  noun 
phrases  which  were  not  monitored  for.} 


^ (Processing  the  proposals  from  this  theory 
p results  in  the  best  event  being  the  one  for 
I "is"  in  the  last  gap.  The  word  "are"  also 
1 fills  the  gap,  but  the  lower  lexical  score 
f prevents  the  event  for  it  from  surfacing.  If 
^ it  were  syntactically  processed,  htwever,  no 
j new  theory  would  be  created  since  the  completed 

string  would  be  ungrammatical.) 


SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THE0RY//3 
WITH  NEW  WORD  (3  IS  ) 

TO  GET  NEW  THEORYZ/lJ: 

0 WHAT  3 IS  11  THE  6 REGISTRATION  19  FEE  23 

"IS"  TRYING  (CAT  V --)  FROM  CONFIG  4 

CAT  V TRANS  »60  FROM  4:S/NP:3(H)  TO  45  : S/AUX  : 4 ( 1 6 ) 

{This  transition  does  not  immediately  complete 
any  paths,  so  the  best  scoring  configurations 
of  the  theory  are  tried.} 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (31)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  'll  : NP/DET : 23 ( 36  ) 

TRYING  JUMP  NP/HEAO  ARC 
JUMP  TRANS  //61  FROM  3 I : NP/DET ; 23  ( 36  ) TO 
30:NP/HEAD: 23(39) 


1] 
n 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (52  48  44)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  52 : VP/VP : 23 ( Q ) 

TRYING  JUMP  S/VP  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  /r‘62  FROM  52 : VP/VP ; 23  ( 9 ) TO  59  : S/VP  : 23  ( 12 ) 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  48 : VP/NP ; 23 ( 9 ) 

TRYING  JUMP  VP/VP  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #63  FROM  48 : VP /NP : 23 ( 9 ) TO  52 : VP/VP : 23 ( 1 1 ) 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  44 : VP/V ; 23 ( 9 ) 

TRYING  JUMP  VP/HEAD  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #64  FROM  44 : VP/V : 23 ( 9 ) TO  60 : VP/HEAD : 23 ( 1 3 ) 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (60)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  60 : VP/HEAD : 23 ( 1 3 ) 

TRYING  JUMP  VP/NP  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #65  FROM  60 : VP/HEAl  :23( 1 3 ) TO  48 : VP/NP : 23( 1 6 ) 


-168- 


[ 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Report  No . 311^ 


SELECT2D  CONFICS  (59)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  59 :S/VP ;23( 12) 

TRYING  JUMP  S/S  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #66  FROM  59:S/VP:23( 12)  TO  6 1 : S/S: 23 ( 1 4 ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (6l)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  6 1 : S/S : 23 ( 1 4 ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #67  FROM  6l :S/S: 23( 14 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  ( 1 2 60  35  34  64  65  63  62  66  67) 
BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  34,  CONFIG  43 

MADE  #5  FROM  0 TO  23: 

S Q 

SUBJ  NP  DET  ART  THE 

ADJ  NP  N REGISTRATION 
NU  SG 

N FEE 

FEATS  NU  SG 
AUX  TNS  PRESENT 
VOICE  ACTIVE 
VP  V BE 

OBJ  NP  N WHAT 

FEATS  NU  SG/PL 

«««« 

{This  is  the  complete  parse  of  the  utterance, 
but  SPARSER  continues  the  operations  it  has 
pending  before  returning  to  Control.) 

NO  SEMANTICS  FOR  HEAD 

(This  is  a comment  from  the  .semantic  component 
indicating  that  it  cannot  currently  interpret 
the  construction.) 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 25  + 0 = 25 


S/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  S/  TRANS  #68  FROM  62 : COMPL/NTYPE ; 0 ( 1 ) TO 
63:COMPL/S;23( 15) 


S/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  S/  TRANS  #69  FROM  64 :S/THEN: 0 ( 1 ) TO 
65:S/IFTHEN:23(15) 


S/  WAS 
PUSH 

JUMP 

JUMP 

JUMP 

JUMP 

JUMP 

JUMP 


NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

S/  TRANS  #70  FROM  66 : VP/HEAD : 0 ( 1 ) TO 
52:VP/VP:23(  13) 

TRANS  #71  FROM  67:VP/V:0(1)  TO  66 : VP/HEAD : 0 ( 1 ) 
TRANS  #72  FROM  68 : S/AUX ; 0 ( 1 ) TO  67:VP/V:0(1) 

TRANS  #73  from  69:S/N0-SUBJ:0( 1 ) TO  67:VP/V:0(1) 
TRANS  #74  FROM  68 :S/AUX:0( 1 ) TO  69 : S/NO-SUBJ ; 0 ( 1 ) 
TRANS  #75  FROM  69 : S/NO-SUBJ ; 0 ( 1 ) TO  67:VP/V:0(1) 
TRANS  #76  FROM  70;S/THERE:0( 1 ) TO  67:VP/V:0(1' 


-169- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


{One  of  the  pending  operations  is  to  check  the 
other  arcs  which  caused  monitors  for  the  verb 
"is". } 

"IS"  TRYING  (CAT  V — ) FROM  STATE  S/NP  TO  CONFIG  1l5 


"IS"  TRYING  (CAT  V — ) FROM  STATE  FOR/TO  TO  CONFIG  49 
CAT  V TRANS  #77  FROM  7 1 : FOR/TO : 3 (5 ) TO  49 : VP/V : 4 ( 20 ) 

"IS"  TRYING  (CAT  V — ) FROM  STATP  VP/V  TO  CONFIG  49 
CAT  V TRANS  #78  FROM  72: VP/V: 3(5)  TO  49 : VP/V : 4 ( 20  ) 

JUMP  TRANS  #79  FROM  73:S/AUX: 3( 1 ) TO  7C:VP/V:3(5) 

JUMP  TRANS  #80  FROM  74 : S/NO-SUBJ : 3 ( 1 ) TO  72:VP/V:3(5) 
JUMP  TRANS  #81  FROM  73 :S/AUX: 3( 1 ) TO  74 : S/NO-SUBJ : 3( 1 ) 
JUMP  TRANS  #82  FROM  74 : S/NO-SUBJ : 3 ( 1 ) TO  72:VP/V:3(5) 
JUMP  TRANS  #83  FROM  75 : S/THERE : 3 ( 1 ) TO  72:VP/V:3(5) 


CREATING  THEORY  4: 

0 WHAT  3 IS  4 THE  6 REGISTRATION  19  FEE  23 
WITH  SYN  SCORE  15 


2 MONITORS  SET 
0 WORDS 
0 CATEGORIES 
2 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

0 PROPOSALS  MADE 
0 WORDS 
0 CATEGORIES 
0 NOTICES  MADE 
0 WORDS 

0 CONSTITS (THIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 

1 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 
5 FOR  THIS  THEORY 

1 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{This  processing  took  34.45  seconds.} 


This  example  was  run  with  a very  simple,  mechanical 
control  structure.  After  the  processing  of  the  initial 
theory,  the  proposals  which  had  been  made  by  SPARSR  were 
processed  by  the  lexical  retrieval  component  and  the 
results  added  to  the  word  lattice  — a process  which  can 


-170- 


I 


I 

I 

I 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


set  off  monitors  and  result  in  the  creation  of  event 
notices.  The  events  are  scored  by  a combination  of  the 
monitor  score  assigned  by  SPARSER  and  the  lexical  score 
assigned  by  the  word  match  component.  In  this  sentence, 
syntax  and  lexical  score  alone  were  sufficient  to  make  the 
best  scoring  event  at  each  step  be  one  which  resulted  in  a 
correct  extension  of  the  theory. 


I 

• * 

i' 

• • 

j ‘ 


6.5  EXAMPLE  4 

We  now  show  how  the  same  utterance  used  in  the 
previous  example  c&n  be  recognized  when  different  theories 
are  created  and  when  events  and  thecries  are  processed  in 
a different  order  from  that  in  Example  3.  Suppose  that 
after  the  initial  scan  of  the  utterance  (resulting  in  the 
word  lattice  shown  at  the  beginning  of  Section  6.4)  the 
semantic  component  created  two  theories,  one  for  the  words 
"what"  and  "fee"  and  the  other  for  the  words  "what"  and 
"registration".  Let  us  see  what  happens  in  SPARSER  when 
we  begin  by  processing  these  two  theories  in  sequence. 


SPARSER  PROCESSING  THEORY  1; 

0 WHAT  3 19  FEE  23 

{The  processing  of  this  theory  is  very  similar 
to  that  of  the  first  theory  in  the  previous 
example,  and  will  not  be  commented  upon  here. 


1 

i 

f 


'i 


'I 

J 

I 

( 

f 


'i 


-171- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


The  purpose  in  showing  it  is  to  provide  a map, 
part  of  which  the  next  call  to  SPARSER  will 
trace . } 

STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

STARTING  AT  LEFT  END  OF  SENTENCE 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (1)  FOR  EXTENSION 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1:S/:0(1)  WITH  WORD  WHAT 
TRYING  PUSH  PP/  ARC 
TRYING  JUMP  S/Q  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #1  FROM  1:S/:0(1)  TO  2:S/Q:0(6) 

TRYING  WRD  IF  ARC 
TRYING  JUMP  S/IMP  ARC 
TRYING  JUMP  S/DCL  ARC 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (2)  FOR  EXTENSION 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  2:S/Q:0(6)  WITH  WORD  WHAT 
TRYING  PUSH  NP/  ARC 

MONITORING  [ NP/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  3:NP/:0(11) 

TRYING  WRD  HOW  ARC 
TRYING  CAT  QWORD  ARC 

CAT  QWORD  TRANS  //2  FROM  2:S/Q:0(6)  TO  4:S/NP:3(11) 

TRYING  CAT  QADV  ARC 
TRYING  JUMP  S/NP  ARC 

SELECTED  CJNFIGS  (34)  FOR  EXTENSION 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  3:NP/:0(11)  WITH  WORD  WHAT 
TRYING  WRD  ONLY  ARC 
TRYING  CAT  QDET  ARC 

CAT  QDET  TRANS  #3  FROM  3:NP/:D(11)  TO  5 : NP/ORD : 3 (1 6 ) 
TRYING  PUSH  DATE/  ARC 
TRYING  TST  ARC 
TRYING  JUMP  NP/ONLY  ARC 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  4:S/NP:3(11) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ MODAL  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  //4  FROM  4:S/NP:3(11) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (124) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  1,  CONFIG  1 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  WITH  WHAT  FROM  1:S/  TO  2:S/Q 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  WHAT  FROM  2:S/Q  TO  4:S/NP 


-172- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  In 


DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  4:S/NP 
TEST  FAILED 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (5)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  5 : NP/ORD : 3 ( 1 6 ) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ QUANT/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  6 : QUANT/ : 3 ( 1 6 ) 

MONITORING  [ INTEGER  ] 

TRYING  JUMP  NP/QUANT  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #5  FROM  5 : NP/ORD : 3 ( 1 6 ) TO  7 : NP/QUANT : 3 ( 2 1 ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (7)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  7 :NP/QUANT: 3(21 ) 

TRYING  JJMP  NP/DET  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #6  FROM  7 :NP/QUANT; 3(21 ) TO  8 :NP/DET : 3 ( 26 ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (8)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  8 :NP/DET : 3 (26 ) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ NPR/  NPR/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  9:NPR/;3(26) 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  9:NPR/:3(26) 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

MONITORING  [ ADV  ] 

TRYING  JUMP  NP/HEAD  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #7  FROM  8 :NP/DET ; 3 (26 ) TO  10 :NP/HEAD : 3 ( 29  ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (10)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1 0 : NP/HEAD ; 3 ( 29 ) 

STARTING  AT  3 : 

MONITORING  [ R/  PP/  R/NIL  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  11:R/:3(29) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHOSE” 

MONITORING  [ WHO  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHO" 

MONITORING  [ WHICH  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHICH" 

MONITORING  [ THAT  ] 

PROPOSING  "THAT" 

MONITORING  [ WHOM  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHOM" 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  12:PP/:3(29) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  1 3 : R/NIL : 3 ( 29 ) 


-173- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


MONITORING  [ THERE  ] 

PROPOSING  "THERE" 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #8  FROM  10 :NP/HEAD: 3 (29  ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (35678) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  3,  CONFIG  3 
DOING  CAT  ARC  WITH  WHO  FROM  3:NP/  TO  5:NP/0RD 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  5:NP/0RD  TO  7:NP/QUANT 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  7:NP/QUANT  TO  8:NP/DET 
DOING  JUMP  ARC  FROM  8:NP/DET  TO  10:NP/HEAD 
TEST  FAILED 


STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

"FEE"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/DET  TO  NP/DET 

CAT  N TRANS  #9  FROM  1^1 : NP/DET:  1 9 ( 1 ) TO  1 5 : NP/DET : 23  ( 4) 
ENDING  AT  19: 


MONITORING  [ NPR/  ] 
MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 
MONITORING  [ N ] 

NOTICING  "REGISTRATION" 
NOTICING  "REGISTRATION" 
{There  are  two 
"registration"  in 
notices  are  created 


instances  of  the  word 
the  word  lattice,  hence  two 


MONITORING  [ V ] 

JUMP  TRANS  FROM  1 6 : NP/QUANT : 1 9 ( 1 ) TO  14  : NP/DET : 1 9 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ QUANT/  ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #11  FROM  1 7 : NP/ORD : 1 9 ( 1 ) TO  16:NP/QUANT: 19( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ ORD  ] 

MONITORING  [ QDET  ] 

MONITORING  [ ONLY  j 
PROPOSING  "ONLY" 

JUMP  TRANS  #12  FROM  1 8 : NP/ART : 1 9 ( 1 ) TO  17:NP/0RD: 19 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

JONITCRING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITfRING  [ POSS  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] 

PROPOSING  "WHOSE" 

JUMP  TRANS  #13  FROM  1 9 : NP/ONLY : 1 9 ( 1 ) TO  18 :NP/ART- 19 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ ONLY  ] 

PROPOSING  "ONLY" 

JUMP  TRANS  #14  FROM  20:NP/:19(1)  TO  19 :NP/ONLY : 19 ( 1 ) 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


"FEE"  TRYING  CAT  N ARC  FROM  NP/DET  TO  NP/HEAD 

CAT  N TRANS  #15  FROM  IM :NP/DET: 19 ( 1 ) TO  2 1 : NP/HEAD : 23 ( 6 ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (21)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  2 1 : NP /HEAD : 23 ( 6 ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #16  FROM  2 1 : NP/HEAD : 23 ( 6 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (l^l  13  12  11  10  15  16) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  CONFIG  20 

TEST  FAILED 


PREDICTIONS: 

NOTICING  (1  REGISTRATION  6 19  277  0),  SCORE  -5 
NOTICING  (10  REGISTRATION  7 19  103  0),  SCORE  -5 
PROPOSING  (ONLY  WHOSE)  ENDING  AT  19 

PROPOSING  (WHOSE  WHO  WHICH  THAT  WHOM  THERE)  STARTING  AT  3 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ N ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ V 1 ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ ORD  ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ QDET  ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ ONLY  j ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ POSS  ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] ENDING  AT  19,  SCORE  5 

MONITORING  [ MODAL  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ V ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ INTEGER  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ N ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ V ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ ADV  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  0 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 

MONITORING  [ WHO  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 

MONITORING  [ WHICH  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 

MONITORING  [ THAT  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 

MONITORING  [ WHOM  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 

MONITORING  [ THERE  ] STARTING  AT  3,  SCORE  5 

FINISHED  THEORY  1 WITH  SYN  SCORE  0 

33  MONITORS  SET 
8 WORDS 
17  CATEGORIES 
8 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 


-175- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


6 PROPOSALS  MADE 
6 WORDS 
0 CATEGORIES 
2 NOTICES  MADE 
3 WORDS 

0 CONSTITS(THIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITSCOTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
0 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 
0 FOR  THIS  THEORY 
0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{T’his  took  12.5  seconds.) 


{Now  we  will  process  the  second  theory.) 

SPARSER  PROCESSING  THEORY  2: 

0 WHAT  3 6 REGISTRATION  19  23 

STARTING  AN  ISLAND 

STARTING  AT  LEFT  END  OF  SENTENCE 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (1)  FOR  EXTENSION 

{Upon  picking  up  this  configuration  to  extend 
it,  SPARSER  finds  the  transitions  which  were 
created  during  the  processing  of  che  word 
"what"  by  the  previous  theory.  It  "traces" 
them  all,  that  is,  it  does  not  recreate  them 
but  simply  puts  the  transition  numbers  on  a 
list  which  will  form  part  of  the  syntactic 
information  associated  with  the  current  theory. 
The  tracing  process  also  involves  the  cr  of 
monitors  Und  notices,  where  applicable)  for 
constituents  along  the  path.  These  monitors 
and^  notices  must  be  remade,  since  the  previous 
monitors  will  activate  only  the  previous 
theory . 

Due  to  the  recursive  nature  of  the  tracing 
process,  the  transitions  are  not  necessarily 
followed  in  the  same  order  that  they  were 
originally  created,  nor  are  the  monitor."  ntcde 
in  exactly  the  same  order. 

Notice  that  the  many  arcs  which  were  tried  but 
which  did  not  result  in  the  creation  of 
transitions  in  the  previous  theory  are  not 
retried  here . ) 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  1:S/;0n)  WITH  WORD  WHAT 

TRACING  JUMP  S/Q  TRANS  1 FROM  1:S/:0(1)  TO  2:S/Q:0(6) 
MONITORING  [ NP/  ] 

TRACING  CAT  QWORD  TRANS  2 USING  "WHAT"  FROM  2:S/Q-0(6) 

TO  4:S/NP:3(11) 


-176- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ MODAL  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

TRACING  POP  TRANS  H FROM  : S/NP  : 3 ( 1 1 ) 

TRACING  CAT  QDET  TRANS  3 USING  "WHO"  FROM  3:NP/:0(11) 

TO  5:NP/0RD:3(16) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ QUANT/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  6 : QUANT/ : 3 ( 1 6 ) 

{This  does  not  mean  that  configuration  6 was 
just  created.  Since  it  already  existed  in  the 
map,  having  been  created  during  the  processing 
of  the  previous  theory,  the  configuration 
number  is  merely  put  on  the  list  of 
configurations  in  the  current  theory. } 
MONITORING  [ INTEGER  ] 

TRACING  JUMP  NP/QUANT  TRANS  5 FROM  5 : NP/ORD : 3 ( 1 6 ) TO 
7:NP/QUANT:3(21 ) 

TRACING  JUMP  NP/DET  TRANS  6 FROM  7 : NP /QUANT : 3 ( 2 1 ) TO 
8:NP/DET: 3(26) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ NPR/  NPR/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  9:NPR/:3(26) 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  9:NPR/:3(26) 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

MONITORING  [ ADV  ] 

TRACING  JUMP  NP/HEAD  TRANS  7 FROM  8 : NP/DET: 3 ( 25 ) TO 
10:NP/HEAD:3(29) 

STARTING  AT  3: 

MONITORING  [ R/  ??/  R/NIL  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  ll:R/:3(29) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHOSE  ] 

NOTICING  "WHOSE” 

NOTICING  "WHO" 

MONITORING  [ WHO  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHICH  ] 

MONITORING  [ THAT  j 
MONITORING  [ WHOM  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  1P;PP/;3(29) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  1 3 : R/NIL ; 3 ( 29  ) 

MONITORING  [ THERE  ] 

NOTICING  "WHOSE" 

NOTICING  "WHO" 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


i 

I 


1 


I 


! 


I 

\ 


{No  proposals  v/ere  raade  here  because  proposals 
are  not  theory  dependent;  that  is,  the  word 
proposals  wnich  were  made  during  the  processing 
of  the  previous  theory  resulted  in  some  words 
being  placed  in  the  word  lattice  which  were 
noticed  here.  Remaking  the  proposals  would  not 
lead  to  the  d^’scovery  of  any  new  information.} 
TRACING  POP  TRANS  8 FROM  10 : NP/HEAD : 3 ( 29  ) 

(The  processing  cf  the  island  for 
"registration”  is  identical  to  that  in  the  "last 
example,  so  the  remainder  of  the  trace  will  be 
omitted.  The  total  processing  took  12.2 
seconds . } 


(Let  us  now  process  the  event  which  adds  the 
word  "the"  to  the  theory  just  processed.  This 
will  result  in  the  creation  of  a constituent 
event . } 

SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THE0RY#2 
WITH  NEW  WORD  THE  6) 

TO  GET  NEW  THE0RY#3: 

0 WHAT  3 4 THE  6 REGISTRATION  19  23 

"THE"  TRYING  (CAT  ART  — ) FROM  STATE  NP/OMLY  TO  CONFIG  25 
CAT  ART  TiANS  #25  FROM  32 ;NP/0NLY : 4 ( 3 ) TO  25 : NP/ART : 6 ( 6 ) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ ONLY  J 
PROPOSING  "ONLY" 

JUMP  TRANS  y^26  FROM  33:NP/:4(1)  TO  32  : NP/ONLY : 4 ( 3 ) 
EXECUTING  PATH  (26  25  20  19  18  17  15  16) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  26,  CONFIG  33 

MADE  in  FROM  4 TO  23: 

NP  DET  ART  THE 

ADJ  NP  N REGISTRATION 
NU  SG 

N FEE 

FEATS  NU  SG 

NOTIFYING  T.iEORY  3 ABOUT  CONSTITUENT  in 
I^This  constituent  cannot  be  used  immediately  by 
ti.is  theory  because  it  contains  a word  ("fee") 
which  is  not  in  the  theory.  Therefore  a notice 
is  sent  to  Control  which  may  be  turned  into  an 
event  at  some  later  time.  Nothing  further  is 
done  with  this  constituent  at  this  time,  i.e., 
no  transitions  using  it  are  created.  It  is, 
however,  placed  in  the  WEST  for  later  use.} 


I 1 
l_i 


I 


iJ 

iJ 

il 

0 


□ 


-178- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranel:  and  Newman  Inc. 


EXECUTING  RATH  (26  25  20  19  IS  23  24) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  23,  CONFIG  22 

{The  creation  of  transition  #26  completes 
another  path . } 

MADE  #2  FROM  4 TO  19: 

NP  DET  ART  THE 
N REGISTRATION 
FEATS  NU  SG 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 10  + 0 = 10 

{This  constituent  is  completely  consistent  with 
the  current  theory,  i-hat  is,  it  is  composed 
only  of  word  matches  already  in  the  theory,  and 
there  are  no  monitors  in  the  WFST  for  it,  sc  it 
is  processed  bottom  up  as  we  have  seen  before.) 
NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #27  FROM  34 : FOR/FOR : 4 ( 1 ) TO  35:TO/:19(7) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ FOR  ] 

PROPOSING  "FOR" 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #28  FROM  36 : PP/PREP : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
37:PP/NP: 19(7) 

ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  ( PREP  ] 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #29  FROM  38 : R/NIL : 4 ( 1 ) TO  39 :S/NP : 1 9 ( 6 ) 
NP/  WAS  lIEVEh  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #30  FROM  40:R/WH:4(1)  TO  39:S/NP; 19(6) 
ENDING  AT  4; 

MONITORING  [ R/WHOSE  ] 

MONITORING  [ WHICH  THAT  WHO  WHOM  WHICH  WHOM  ^ 
NOTICING  "WHO” 

PROPOSING  "WHOM" 

PROPOSING  "WHICH" 

PROPOSING  "WHOM" 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #31  FROM  4 1 :S/DCL : 4 ( 1 ) TO  39 ; 3/NP : 1 9 ( 6 ) 
JUMP  TRANS  #32  FROM  42;S/:4(1)  TO  41 :S/DCL:4( 1 ) 

ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ PP/  ] 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  F R 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #33  F 10M  43 :S/NO-SUBJ : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
44 :VP/V:  19(6) 


-179- 


•Tepcrt  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


JUMP  TRANS  #3^  FROM  ^5 : S/AUX : 4 ( 1 ) TO  43 : S/NO-SUBJ • 4 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  4:  oudo .mv  i ) 

MONITORING  [ MODAL  ] 

MONITORING  [ NEG  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

NOTICING  "IS" 

NOTICING  "ARE" 

NOTICING  "PAY" 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #35  FROM  46:S/Q;4(1)  TO  39 :S/NP : 1 9 (7 ) 
ENDING  AT  4:  ’ 

MONITORING  [ QADV  ] 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #36  FROM  4? : VP/HEAD : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
48:VP/NP: 19(7) 

ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ PARTICLE  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

NOTICING  "PAY" 

JUMP  TRANS  #37  FROM  49:Vr/V:4(1)  TO  47 : VP/HEAD • 4 ( 1 ) 
ENDING  AT  4:  ^ ^ 

MONITORING  [ NP/  NP/  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

NOTICING  "IS" 

NOTICING  "ARE" 

NOTICING  "PAY" 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

NOTICING  "IS" 

NOTICING  "ARE" 

NOTICING  "PAY" 

MONITORING  [ ADV  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #38  FROM  45 :S/AUX;4f 1 ) TO  49;VP/V:4(1' 

JUMP  TRANS  #39  FROM  43 :S/NO-SUBJ ; 4 ( 1 ) TO  49:VP/V;4(1) 
JUMP  TRANS  #40  FROM  43 ;S/NO-SUBJ ; 4 ( 1 ) TO  49:VP/V-4(1) 
JUMP  TRANS  #4l  FROM  50  : S/THERF : 4 ( 1 ) TO  49-VP/V4M) 
ENDING  AT  4: 

MONITORING  [ THERE  ] 

PROPOSING  "THERE" 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #42  FROM  5 1 : VP/NP ; 4 ( 1 ) TO  52  : VP/VP • 1 9 ( 6 1 
ENDING  AT  4:  v / j . vr/vr. 

MONITORING  [ NP/  ] 

JUMP  TRANS  #43  FROM  47 : VP/HEAD : 4 ( 1 ) TO  5 1 ; VP/ NP : 4 ( 1 ) 

NP/  WAS  NEVER  PUSHED  FOR 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #44  FROM  49:VP/V:4(1)  TO  44 ; VP/V ; 19 (7 ) 


-180- 


i; 

r 


t 1 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


SELECTED  CONFIGS  (35  37  39  4^1  48)  FOR  EXTENSION 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  35:TO/:19(7) 

STARTING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ NEG  ] 

MONITORING  [ TO  ] 

PROPOSING  "TO" 

ALL  ARCS  TRIED  AT  THIS  CONFIG 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  37 : PP/NP  : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #45  FROM  37 : PP/NP : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  39 : S/NP : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

STARTING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ MODAL  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #46  FROM  39 : S/NP : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (32  J1  46) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  32,  CONFIG  42 

«««« 

MADE  #3  FROM  4 TO  VJ  ; 

S NPU 

NP  DET  ART  THE 
N REGISTRATION 
FEATS  NU  SG 
WITH  FEATURES  (NPU) 

SYN  WEIGHT  + SEM  WT  = 10  + 0 = 10 

PICKING  UP  CONFIG  44 : VP/V ; 1 9 ( 7 ) 

STARTING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ NP/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  20:NP/:19(7) 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

NOTICING  "FEE" 

MONITORING  [ QDET  ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

MONITORING  [ INTEGER  ] 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ PRO  ] 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

MONITORING  [ POSS  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

MONITORING  [ ADV  ] 

MONITORING  [ TEST(NOT  (CAT  V))  ] 

NOTICING  "FEE" 

ALL  ARCS  TRIED  AT  THIS  CONFIG 


-181- 


PICKING  UP  CONFIG  : VP/NP  : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

STARTING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ COMPL/  TO/  COMPL/  NP/  j 
SETTING  UP  CONFIG  53 : COMPL/ : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

MONITORING  [ FOR  ] 

MONITORING  [ THAT  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  35:TO/:19(7) 

MONITORING  [ TO  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  53 : COMPL/ : 1 9 ( 7 ) 

MONITORING  [ FOR  ] 

MONITORING  [ THAT  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  20:NP/:19(7) 

MONITORING  [ N ] 

NOTICING  "FEE" 

MONITORING  [ QDET  ] 

MONITORING  [ ADJ  ] 

MONITORING  [ INTEGER  ] 

MONITORING  [ ART  ] 

MONITORING  [ QUANT  ] 

MONITORING  [ PRO  ] 

MONITORING  [ NPR  ] 

MONITORING  [ POSS  ] 

MONITORING  [ V ] 

MONITORING  [ PARTICLE  ] 

TRYING  JUMP  VP/VP  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #1I7  FROM  : VP/NP  : 1 9 ( 7 ) TO  52  : VP/VP : 1 9 ( 9 ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (52)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  52 : VP/VP : 1 9 ( 9 ) 

STARTING  AT  19: 

MONITORING  [ PP/  ] 

SETTING  UP  CONFIG  30:PP/:19(9) 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

MONITORING  [ PREP  ] 

TRYING  JUMP  S/VP  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #118  FROM  52 : VP/VP : 1 9 ( 9 ) TO  5^  : S/VP  : 1 9 ( 1 2 ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (5^1)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  5^1 : S/VP  : 1 9 (1 2 ) 

TRYING  JUMP  S/S  ARC 

JUMP  TRANS  #H9  FROM  5^1 : S/VP  : 1 9 (1 2 } TO  55  : S/S : 1 9 ( 1 ^ ) 

SELECTED  CONF.tgS  (55)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  55 : S/S r 1 9 ( 1 ^ ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #50  FROM  55 : S/S : 1 9 ( 1 ^ ) 
pred: CTIONS: 

NOTICING  (14  FEE  19  23  155  0),  SCORE  5 
NOTICING  (19  WHO  3 ^4  - 180  0),  SCORE  10 
NOTICING  (21  IS  3 14  -39  0 ),  SCORE  10 
NOTICING  (23  ARE  3 -128  0),  SCORE  '0 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


NOTICING  (25  PAY  3 ^ -1^6  0),  SCORE  5 
PROPOSING  (TO)  STARTING  AT  19 

PROPOSING  (ONLY  FOR  WHOM  WHICH  THERE)  ENDING  AT  ^1 
PROPOSING  (V  MODAL)  FROM  3 TO  4 
PROPOSING  (MODAL  PREP)  STARTING  AT  3 
PROPOSING  (PFEP  MODAL  NEG  QADV)  ENDING  AT  H 

{The  ler'gthy  summary  of  monitors  set  by  this 
event  is  omitted.} 

CREATING  THEORY  3: 

0  WHAT  3 THE  6 REGISTRATION  19  23 

WITH  SYN  SCORE  15 

66  MONITORS  SET 
21  WORDS 
36  CATEGORIES 
8 CONSTITS 
1 TESTS 

9 PROPOSALS  MADE 
5 WORDS 

CATEGORIES 
6 NOTICES  MADE 
5 WORDS 

1 CONSTITS(THIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 
3 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORIES 

2 FOR  THIS  THEORY 

0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

{This  took  30.8  seconds.) 


{Now  we  will  process  the  constituent  event  for 
the  theory  just  created.  Because  of  the 
constituent  for  "the  registration"  there  are 
now  monitors  in  the  WFST  for  a noun  phrase 
beginning  at  position  4,  so  the  appropriate 
transitions  are  made.) 

SYNTAX  PROCESSING  EVENT  FOR  THEORY/M  WITH  CONSTITUENT  #1 
TO  GET  NEW  THE0RY#i| 

0 WHnx’  3 ^ the  6 REGISTRATION  19  FEE  23 

{Processing  begins  exactly  where  it  left  off 
when  the  constituent  was  made  — the 
constituent  is  semantically  evaluated  with 
respect  to  this  theory  so  that  the  constituent 
weight  may  be  altered.  In  this  case,  however, 


-183- 


n 


Report  No. 


SYN  WEIGHT 


3116 


Semantics 
increment 
+ SEM  WT 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newmi-n  Inc. 


has  been  turned  off,  so  there  is  no 
in  the  score . } 

15  + 0 = 15 


NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  3^ 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #51  FROM  3^ : FOR/FOR : 4 ( 1 ) TO  56 : TO/ : 23 ( 1 1 ) 
{The  monitors  set  by  these  paths  are  copied 
from  the  previous  theory,  so  there  is  no 
indication  here  of  a new  monitor  being 
created.} 


NP/  Was  pushed  FCR  at  CONFIG  36 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #52  FROM  36 : PP/PREP : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
57:PP/NP:23( 1 1 ) 

[ NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  38 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #53  FROM  38 : R/NIL : 4 ( 1 ) TO  58 : S/NP : 23 ( 1 0 ) 


NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #54  FROM  40:R/WH:4(1)  TO  58 : S/NP : 23 ( 1 0 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  41 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #55  FROM  4 1 :S/DCL : 4 ( 1 ) TO  58 : S/NP : 23 ( 1 0 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  43 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #56  FROM  43 :S/NO-SUBJ : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
59: VP/V:23( 10) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  46 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #57  FROM  46:S/Q:4(l)  TO  58 : S/NP : 23 ( 1 0 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  47 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #58  FROM  47 : VP/HEAD : 4 ( 1 ) TO 
60: VP/NP:23( 10) 


NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  51 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #59  FROM  5 1 ; VP/NP : 4 ( 1 ) TO  6l : VP/VP : 23 ( 1 0 ) 

NP/  WAS  PUSHED  FOR  AT  CONFIG  49 

PUSH  NP/  TRANS  #60  FROM  49:VP/V:4(1)  TO  59 : VP/V : 23 ( 1 0 ) 

SELECTED  CONFIGS  (58  57)  FOR  EXTENSION 
PICKING  UP  CONFIG  58 :S/NP ;23( 10  ) 

TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #6l  FROM  58 : S/NP ; 23 ( 1 0 ) 

EXECUTING  PATH  (32  55  6l) 

BEGINNING  AT  TRANS  55,  CONFIG  4l 
DOING  PUSH  ARC  WITH  #1  FROM  4l:S/DCL  TO  58:S/NP 
DOING  POP  ARC  FROM  58:S/NP 


i 

[ 

! 


i 


!'S 


-184- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 


} 


1 


1 


MADE  im  FROM  k TO  23: 

S NPU 

NP  DET  ART  THE 

ADJ  NP  N REGISTRATION 
NU  SG 

N FEE 

FEATS  NU  SG 
WITH  FEATURES  (NPU) 

SYN  ..EIGHT  + WT  - 15  0 = 15 


3 


PICKING  UP  CONFIG  57 : PP/NP : 23 ( 1 1 ; 
TRYING  POP  ARC 

POP  TRANS  #62  FROM  57 : PP/NP : 23 ( 1 1 ) 


PREDICTIONS: 

NOTICING  (19  WHO  3 ^ -180  0),  SCORE  10 
NOTICING  (21  IS  3 4 -39  0),  SCORE  10 
NOTICING  (23  ARE  3 4 -128  0),  SCORE  10 
NOTICING  (25  PAY  3 ^ -1^6  0),  SCORE  5 
PROPOSING  (V  MODAL)  FROM  3 TO  4 
PROPOSING  (MODAL  PREP)  STARTING  AT  3 
PROPOSING  (PREP  MODAL  NEG  QADV)  ENDING  AT  4 

{Again,  the  monitor  list  is  omitted  for 
considerations  o."  space.} 

CREATING  THEORY  4: 

0 WHAT  3 4 THE  6 REGISTRATION  19  FEE  23 

WITH  SYN  SCOPE  15 

33  MONITORS  SET 
13  WORDS 
20  CATEGORIES 
0 CONSTITS 
0 TESTS 

4 PROPOSALS  MADE 
0 WORDS 
4 CATEGORIES 
4 NOTICES  MADE 
4 WORDS 

0 CONSTITSdHIS  THEORY) 

0 CONSTITS(OTHER  THEORIES) 

0 CONSTITS  FOUND 

1 CONSTITS  MADE 

0 FOR  OTHER  THEORTFS 
12  FOR  THIS  THEORY 
0 COMPLETE  PARSINGS  FOUND 

(This  event  took  only  9.7  seconds,  } 


-185- 


^ ** 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


The  processing  of  the  final  event,  that  which  adds 
the  word  "is"  to  the  theory  just  created,  will  not  be 
shown , 


6.6  SUMMARY 


These  examples  have  shown  that  SPARSER  is  a useful 
tool  in  the  automatic  recognition  of  speech.  The  timing 
measurements  indicate  that  considerable  processing  is  done 
when  the  parser  is  forced  to  work  in  bottom  up  mode, 
especially  with  a large  grammar.  Of  course  there  is  some 
implementaion  overhead  involved  in  doing  the  timings 
themselves.  If  the  parseing  algorithm  were  to  be 
carefully  recoded  in  assembly  language  a speed  up  of  at 
least  a factor  of  20  (and  perhaps  much  more)  could  be 
achieved.  Another  way  to  cut  down  the  time-consuming 
processing  might  be  to  attempt  to  obtain  more  semantic 
guidance.  For  example,  if  the  semantic  hypothesis 
associated  with  a theory  indicates  that  a particular  noun 
is  likely  to  be  used  in  a noun  phrase  modifier  (e.g. 
"tomorrow"),  then  SPARSER  should  be  able  to  take  advantage 
of  this  information  by  scoring  the  PUSH  NP/  transition 
from  a configuration  for  state  FP/  (i.e.  to  get  something 
like  "by  tomorrow")  higher  than  those  PUSH  NP/  transitions 


-186- 


Report  No . 3116 


Belt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


f 


for  othc'*  syntactic  slots.  In  fact,  the  others  may  not 
need  to  be  constructed  rt  all.  The  grammar  could  also  be 
further  tuncu  to  eliminate  some  spurious  predictions  and 
reduce  the  time  spent  following  erroneous  paths. 

The  following  chapter  discusses  these  and  other 
extensions  to  SPARSER. 


-187- 


1 


j 


1 


i 


Chapter  7 

Conclusions  and  Further  Research 

7,1  STRENGTHS  AND  WEAKNESSES  OF  SPARSER 

One  of  the  weak  points  of  the  current  system  is  the 
fact  that  some  context  information  is  not  used  until  a 
path  is  complete,  resulting  in  the  creation  of  false  paths 
and  predictions  which  should  not  have  been  made.  This  is 
partly  mitigated  by  the  fact  that  this  avoids  a too  great 
dependence  on  left  context  ano  allows  the  creation  of 
partial  paths  which  may  be  followed  if  an  earlier  word  is 
changed . 

It  is  important,  however,  to  minimize  the  number  of 
predictions  which  are  made  and  to  make  the  predictions  as 
accurate  as  possible.  In  this  regard,  it  is  unfortunate 
that  the  current  system  makes  predictions  on  the  left  of 
an  island  solely  on  the  basis  of  the  first  word  in  the 
island  and  makes  predictions  on  the  right  end  from 
configurations  which,  if  context  sensitive  tests  had  been 
done  along  the  path,  would  never  have  been  created. 


I 


-188- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


One  way  to  help  tighten  the  predictions  would  be  to 
take  each  context  free  path  through  an  island  and  walk  it 
in  a special  mode  after  the  island  has  been  processed  but 
before  predictions  are  communicated  to  the  control 
component.  This  mode  would  set  and  check  registers, 
assuming  that  any  tests  which  require  unknown  left  context 
are  true.  Only  if  the  path  did  not  fail  under  this  mode 
of  operation  would  the  predictions  at  either  end  of  it  be 
made.  If  a really  efficient  way  of  handling  unknown  left 
context  and  of  storing  this  information  were  developed,  it 
could  be  used  in  place  of  the  context  free  pass  in  the 
first  place,  thus  eliminating  all  inconsistent  paths. 

The  problem  with  storing  all  possible  contexts  is 
that  they  must  be  recomputed  each  time  a new  step  is  added 
to  the  path.  This  is  relatively  easy  if  the  next  step  is 
taken  to  the  right  of  an  existing  path,  since  ATN's  are 
more  suited  to  left  to  right  processing,  but  it  becomes 
extremely  complex  when  a transition  is  added  to  tne  left 
end  of  a path  (or  set  of  paths)  or  when  a transition  joins 
two  sets  of  paths  together.  To  be  absolutely  sure  that  no 
contexts  have  been  missed,  all  the  paths  would  have  to  be 
walked  and  their  contexts  reprocessed  and  copied  in  whole 
or  in  part  (since  the  new  step  may  be  wrong,  the  old 
context  must  be  preserved.)  Of  course  this  is  not  the  only 
approach  which  could  be  used  — a merging  technique  like 


-189- 


p 


■ 

b 


u 

i 


h 


I 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

that  of  Earley's  algorithm  (see  Section  2.2.1)  might  be 
feasible,  if  the  structure  of  the  grammar  were  also 
changed  to  make  it  less  left  to  right  orienteid. 

Another  way  to  tighten  up  predictions  on  the  left  of 
an  island  might  be  to  process  the  island  in  an  "analysis 
by  synthesis"  mode,  assuming  that  a word  (or  words)  which 
satisfies  the  left  end  prediction  has  been  found  and 
setting  registers  using  this  assumption.  The  predictions 
would  not  be  made  if  a path  blocks  as  a consec^uence  of 
this  assumption.  The  problem  here  is  that  when  a path 
blocks  it  is  difficult  to  tell  what  really  caused  the 
problem.  The  test  which  ultimately  failed  could  depend  on 
a register  whose  contents  was  set  as  a consequence  of  a 
test  on  a previous  register  which  could  have  itself  been 
set  as  a consequence  of  the  original  assumption.  Since 
the  tests  and  actions  ..  the  arcs  of  the  grammar  may  be 
arbitrary  functions,  all  such  functions  would  require 
modification  in  order  to  be  able  to  follow  the 
consequences  of  a particular  action;  this  is  not  a burden 
which  should  be  placed  on  the  writer  of  the  grammar. 

Another  weakness  of  SPARSER  is  that  there  is  no 
opportunity  to  share  information  among  islands  except  that 
in  the  special  case  where  they  are  separated  by  a one-word 
gap  the  islands  may  co-operate  to  predict  that  word. 
Establishing  a global  data  area  associated  with  each 


4 


i 1 


I ! 


( 


h 


-190- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


*1' 


I 


I 


1 


i 


island  where  information  concerning  the  nature  of  the  best 

path  through  the  island  (e.g.  that  the  main  verb  of  the 

sentence  has  been  tentatively  found,  that  part  of  an 
auxiliary  structure  has  been  found,  etc.)  would  allow 
compatible  paths  in  subsequent  islands  to  be  followed  in 
preference  to  incompatible  ones,  especially  if  context 
sensitive  information  were  available  from  registers. 

One  great  strength  of  the  system  is  its  ability  to 
store  and  merge  information  in  such  a way  that  it  does  not 
have  to  be  redone  when  the  context  is  changed.  For 
example,  once  an  arc  has  been  tried  with  a particular  word 

match,  a transition  will  be  creatc^d  if  the  arc  may  be 

taken  and  the  arc  will  be  removed  from  further 
consideration  if  it  may  not  be  taken.  Then,  if  the 
configuration  should  ever  be  reached  with  the  same  word 
match  again  (perhaps  in  a later  theory)  not  only  will  any 
relevant  transitions  'be  recognized  without  having  to  go 
through  the  work  of  re-creating  them  , but  also  n^  arcs 
iiaii  previously  failed  will  be  retried . 

Another  feature  of  SPARSER  is  the  fact  that  it  was 
designed  and  implemented  with  many  unsolved  problems  and 
unavailable  data  in  mind,  and  therefore  many  "holes"  have 
been  left  on  which  to  "hook"  further  developments.  For 
example,  although  prosodic  verification  of  constituents  is 
not  yet  available,  the  scoring  mechanism  for  constituents 


I 

I I 


-191- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


is  structured  in  such  a way  that  it  would  be  easy  to 
include  the  results  of  verification  by  prosodies  (or  any 
other  component).  'Ihe  original  implementation  of  SPARSER 
used  a depth  first  search  but  was  implemented  in  such  a 
way  that  the  change  to  modified  breadth  first  was  quite 
simple.  This  foresight  has  paid  off  in  a flexible  system 
which  has  shown  that  it  can  be  readily  experimented  with 
in  order  to  explore  many  still  unsolved  problems 

concerning  the  nature  and  use  of  syntactic  information  in 
understanding . 

7.2  PROSODICS 

A tremendous  amount  of  information  in  speech  is 
conveyed  by  prosodic  features:  stress,  intonation, 

duration,  loudness,  pauses,  pitch.  For  example,  if  John 
mumbles  to  Bill,  "The  mailman  left  something  for  you," 
Bill  may  reply  either  "What?"  with  much  energy  and  a 
sharply  rising  intonation  or  "What?"  with  a flat  or 
intonation.  In  the  first  case  John  is  very  likely 
to  shout  "I  said.  The  mailman  left  something  for  you^", 
interpreting  "What?"  to  mean  "What  did  you  say?"  whereas 
in  the  second  case  he  is  likely  to  say  oomething  like  "A 
package  from  your  mother,"  interpreting  "What?"  to  mean 
"What  is  it?" 


-192- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


The  case  where  virtually  all  the  disambiguation 
information  is  carried  by  prosodic  features  is  fairly  rare 
in  English  (though  not  in  languages  such  as  Chinese).  It 
is  more  common  for  important  information  in  speech  to  be 
encoded  redundantly,  by  a combination  of  syntactic, 
semantic,  pragmatic,  prosodic,  and  phonological  cues.  To 
ignore  prosodies,  however,  is  to  ignore  a source  of 
information  which  has  been  shown  repeatedly  to  be  an 
extremely  important  factor  in  human  understanding  [22,  30, 
^8,  49]. 


Consider  the  following  examples  of  sentences  and 
sentence  fragments  which  illustrate  some  of  the  ways 
prosodies  are  used: 

1.  I stepped  on  the  man  with  black  shoes.  (Who  was 

wearing  the  shoes?) 

2a.  The  new  gnu  knew  news. 

2b.  The  gnu  knew  new  gnus. 

3.  Ira  going  to  move  on  Thursday.  (stress  on  ”move” 

implies  moving  to  a new  house;  stress  on  ”on” 
implies  going  to  visit  a new  place.) 

4a.  Can  you  swim  to  Daddy? 

4b.  Can  you  swim  too.  Daddy? 

In  the  process  of  computing,  the  average  values  will 
be  used. 

In  the  process  of  computing  the  average,  values  will 


5a 


5b 


-193- 


Repc 

)rt 

No.  3116 

Bolt 

Beranek 

and  Newman 

be 

used  . 

5c. 

The  process  of 

computing 

the 

average 

values 

will 

be 

used  . 

5d. 

In 

the  process. 

computing 

the 

average 

values 

will 

be 

used  . 

6a . 

• 

. . two-fi f ty 

for  , , , 

6b . 

. 

two-fifty 

-four  . , , 

Frosodic  verification  could  help  a lot  in  rejecting 
semantically  correct,  syntactically  consistent  phrases 
which  are  nonetheless  wrong.  If  the  constituent  "speech 
understanding"  were  identified  and  relied  upon,  it  might 
be  very  difficult  to  produce  a correct  analysis  of  the 
utterance:  "Because  of  peculiarities  in  his  speech, 
understanding  Joe  is  not  easy." 


Besides  indicating  syntactic  boundaries  and/or 
providing  intonation  contours  for  certain  constituents, 
prosodic  features  can  be  used  to  mark  emphasis,  introduce 
new  topics,  convey  information  about  the  speaker's 
internal  mental  and  emotional  state  (e.g.  whether  he  is 
teasing  or  serious),  and  probably  more.  It  is 
particularly  interesting  to  note  that  some  well  known 
phenomena  such  as  "pronouns  are  almost  never  stressed"  and 
"in  discourse  when  a new  topic  word  is  mentioned  it  is 
almost  always  stressed"  have  very  natural  explainations  in 
light  of  what  we  know  about  acoustic  processing.  Stressed 


I 


-19^- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


i; 


words  are  generally  easier  to  identify  because  there  is 
less  acoustic  ambiguity,  but  unstressed  words  may  differ 
greatly  from  their  ideal  pronunciation  and  hence  are 
harder  to  reliably  identify.  Pronouns  refer  to 
antecedents  which  are  presumably  known  to  the  listener,  so 
he  can  anticipate  them  or  at  least  verify  thorn  easily, 
henco  they  need  not  have  good  acoustic  characteristics.  A 
new  topic  may  not  have  been  anticipated,  so  the  listener 
will  have  to  depend  heavily  on  identifying  the  word  from 
acoustic  information  alone  and  the  speaker  can  provide 
this  extra  reliable  information  by  stressing  the  word. 

Unfortunately,  not  a great  deal  is  known  about  either 
the  acoustic  correlates  of  prosodic  features  or  the  ways 
in  which  they  are  used  (see  [H7,  48,  38]).  Many  of  the 
rules  which  have  been  developed  thus  far  (such  as  Jon 
Allen  s work  with  fundamental  frequency  patterns  in 
auxiliaries  [2])  are  speaker  dependent  and  are  sufficient 


for  conveying  information  but  are  not 

necessary  (as 

shown 

in  an  auxiliary  example 

by 

Yeager 

and  O'Malley 

GO 

This  makes 

them  difficult  to 

use 

in 

the  analysis 

mode . 

Although 

a good  start 

has 

been 

made  in  exploring 

prosodies , 

much  more  work 

remains 

to  be  done 

before 

prosodic 

information  can 

be 

reliably  used  by 

speech 

understanding  systems. 

-195- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Considerable  work  has  been  done  by  Wayne  Lea  [44-46] 
to  develop  an  algorithm  to  detect  certain  types  of 
syntactic  boundaries  based  on  fluctuations  in  the 
fundamental  frequency  contour.  Experimentation  with  his 
algorithm  by  Bates  and  Wolf  [8]  has  shown  that  while  many 
boundaries  are  delected,  two  facts  stand  out  which  make 
the  process  difficult  to  use  in  speech  analysis.  First, 
the  boundaries  which  are  "detected"  are  not  "located", 
that  is,  the  point  in  the  utterance  where  the  Lea-boundary 
is  found  may  be  anywhere  from  the  first  stressed  vowel 
following  the  actual  boundary  to  the  first  stressed  vowel 
before  it.  In  addition,  a rather  high  percentage  (23?)  of 
the  detections  are  spurious.  Some  types  of  boundaries  are 
reliably  detected  by  this  algorithm,  however.  It  found  23 
out  of  24  prepositional  phrase  boundaries  in  a 16  sentence 
test.  Perhaps  by  reinterpreting  the  results  of  the 
experiment  or  by  varying  the  thresholds  used  in  the 
detection  algorithm  it  may  be  possible  to  reduce  the 
percentage  of  false  drops  and  to  make  the  remaining 
detections  more  reliable  so  that  the  information  can  be 
useful  in  a speech  understanding  system.  Continued 

investigation  of  these  possibilities  is  currently  under 
way  at  BBN . 


-196- 


i; 

i; 


Report  No.  3‘i  i6  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

SPARSER  could  use  prosodic  information  in  several 
ways.  Verifica'  'vjn  of  constituents  would  be  a great  help, 
but  local  prosodic  information  could  be  used  even  earlier 
in  the  parsing  process.  For  example,  if  major  constituent 
boundaries  could  be  accurately  determined,  then  instead  of 
both  POPing  a constituent  and  continuing  it  in  parallel, 
as  is  done  now,  one  alternative  could  be  chosen  instead  of 
the  other  on  the  basis  of  prosodic  information.  If,  as  is 
more  likely,  some  major  boundaries  could  be  reliably 
detected,  then  it  would  be  easy  to  revise  SPARSER  to  begin 
processing  at  such  places  even  within  an  island  at  states 
which  can  begin  constituents.  This  would  again  reduce  the 
number  of  partial  paths  created  when  parsing  an  island. 

7.3  EXTENSIONS  AND  FURTHER  RESEARCH 
7.3.1  Unfrrammatical  input 

One  of  the  obvious  extensions  to  a basic  speech 
understanding  system  is  to  relax  the  restrictions  on  the 
input  to  the  system.  Syntactically,  this  can  mean 
removing  the  requirement  that  the  initial  utterance  be 
grammatical.  Since  people  frequently  speak 
ungrammatically  in  informal  discourse,  this  is  a natural 
step  to  want  to  take. 


-197- 


.jxr 


1 

Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc, 

In  order  to  extend  SPARSER  to  handle  such  input, 
several  approaches  are  possible.  Certain  types  of  errors 
may  be  called  errors  of  style  (and  may  not  be  called 
errors  at  all  by  some  people)  such  as  the  use  of  "ain't" 
and  the  occurrence  of  a preposition  at  the  end  of  a 
sentence.  These  regularities  may  simply  be  declared 
grammatical  by  modifying  the  grammar  to  accept  them.  Many 
speech  errors  have  been  shown  to  follow  regular  patterns 
(see  Fromkin  [27])  and  hence  may  be  amenable  to  this 
approach . 

Other  common  errors  violate  specific  tests  which 
appear  on  the  arcs  of  the  grammar,  for  example,  to 
prohibit  double  negatives  and  to  check  for  number 
agreement  between  subject  and  verb  or  between  determiner 
and  noun  (e.g.  *"There  is  some  very  severe  restrictions 
on  this  rule.").  In  this  case,  rather  than  removing  the 
tests  fi'om  the  grammar  it  would  be  more  suitable  to  modify 
chem  so  that  if  they  failed  the  arc  could  still  be  taken, 
though  with  a much  reduced  weight  or  with  an  indication  in 
some  register  that  an  error  has  occurred.  One  way  to 
implement  this  would  be  to  have  all  tests  return  a number 
as  their  value  indicating  how  well  they  succeeded  on  some 
scale  from  "perfectly"  to  "not  at  all". 


-198- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Deranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I 


1 


I 


Not  all  arc  tests  are  of  this  relaxable  nature, 
however,  since  certain  types  of  errors  are  so  rare,  if 
they  occur  at  all,  that  they  may  be  judged  unacceptable. 
Examples  of  such  tests  are  the  case  cheexs  for  pronouns 
(e.g.  *"1  gave  it  to  he")  and  the  requirement  that  a verb 
modifying  a noun  must  be  in  either  the  present  or  past 
participle  form  (e.g.  "the  singing  brook"  vs.  «"the  sing 
brook" ) . 

These  methods  would  not  allow  all  types  of 
grammatical  errors  to  be  handled  (in  particular  it  ignores 
the  problem  of  constituent  ordering  er»^or3  such  as  "Throw 
Mama  from  the  train  a kiss"),  but  would  handle  many  of  the 
most  common  syntactic  errors. 

7.3.2  experiment 

Keeping  in  mind  the  caveat  of  Section  1.3,  that 
SPARSER  is  not  intended  to  be  a model  of  human  syntactic 
analysis,  it  is  nonetheless  reasonable  to  ask  whether 
there  are  any  similarities  which  may  be  seen.  The 
following  experiment  is  suggested  with  the  hypothesis  that 
it  will  indicate  that  people  do  considerable  processing  at 
the  end  of  syntactic  constituents  in  a way  similar  to  some 
register  setting  and  testing  actions  and  semantic  (..r 
other)  verification. 


-199- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


The  experiment  is  this:  a subject  is  seated  in  front 
of  a switch  which  he  is  asked  to  press  whenever  he  is  sure 
that  he  is  hearing  an  anomalous  sentence.  He  is  then 
presented  with  a sequence  of  recorded  utterances,  some  of 
which  are  incorrect,  e.g. 

*The  cat  and  dog  which  lives  next  door  are  friendly. 

*I  saw  a red  big  barn  on  the  farm. 

I hypothesize  that  the  subject  will  indicate  the  presence 
of  an  error  at  a point  shortly  after  the  end  of  the 
constituent  in  which  the  error  occurred  more  often  than 
shortly  after  the  earliest  possible  place  where  the  error 
could  be  detected. 


7.4  CONCLUSION 

In  conclusion,  it  is  obvious  that  there  is  much  work 
yet  to  be  done  in  the  problem  of  speech  understanding,  but 
it  is  loped  that  the  system  presented  here  has  not  only 
advanced  our  current  understanding  of  the  role  of 
syntactic  knowledge  in  comprehension  but  will  continue  to 
be  useful  for  further  exploration  of  the  field. 


;i 


i 


I 


¥ i 


APPENDIX  I 


MINIGRAMMAR 


This  appendix  contains  a listing  (slightly  edited  for 
clarity)  of  the  grammar  called  MINIGRAMMAR  which  was 
discussed  in  Chapter  Three  (illustrated  in  Figure  3.3)  and 
which  was  used  in  some  of  the  examples  in  Chapter  Six. 


(NP/ 

(CAT  ART  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  ART  (BUILDO  ((ART  »)))) 
(TO  NP/ART)) 

(JUMP  NP/ART  (T  T) 

4)) 


(NP/ADJ 

(CAT  N (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  N ») 

(SETR  NU  (GETF  NUMBER)) 

(TO  NP/N) ) 

(CAT  N (T  T) 

2 

(ADDL  ADJS  (BUILDQ  (ADJ  (NP  (N  *) 

(NU  ))) 
(GETF  NUMBER) ) ) 

(TO  NP/ADJ) ) ) 


(NP/ART 

(CAT  QUANT  (T  T) 

4 

(SETR  QUANT  (BUILDQ  ((QUANT  »)))) 
(TO  NP/QUANT)) 

(JUMP  NP/QUANT  (T  T) 

5)) 


-201- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(NP/QUANT 

(CAT  ADJ  (T  T) 

4 

(ADDR  ADJS  (BUILDQ  (ADJ) 

(»)) 

FEATURES)) 

(TO  NP/QUANT)) 

(JUMP  NP/ADJ  (T  T) 

M) 

(NP/N 

(PUSH  PP/  ((PPSTART) 

T T) 

(ADDL  NMODS  ») 

(TO  NP/N)) 

(POP  (BUILDQ  (@  (NP) 

+ + + ((N  +)) 

((NU  +)) 

+ ) 

ART  QUANT  ADJS  N NU  NMODS) 
(T  (DETAGREE)) 

5)) 

(PP/ 

(CAT  PREP  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  PREP  ») 

(TO  PP/PREP))) 

(PP/PREP 

(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART) 

T T) 

5 

(SETR  NP  ») 

(TO  PP/NP))) 

(PP/NP 

(POP  (BUILDQ  (PP  (PREP  +) 

+ ) 

PREP  NP) 

(T  T) 

5)) 


APPENDIX  II 


SPEECHGRAMMAR 


This  appendix  contains  a complete  listing  of  the 
SPEECHGRAMMAR  discussed  in  Chapter  Four  and  used  in  the 
examples  in  Chapter  Six.  Due  to  considerations  of  space, 
complete  listings  of  the  functions  which  are  called  on  the 
arcs  of  the  grammar  (for  example,  tests  and  some  structure 
building  operations)  were  not  included,  but  the  names  of 
the  functions  should  be  sufficiently  indicative  of  the 
purpose  to  be  comprehensible.  Forms  beginning  with- a * 
are  comments. 


(FILECREATED  "22-JUL-75  13:35:40” 
<BATES>SPEECHGRAMMAR. ;2  37501  ) 

(LISPXPRINT  (QUOTE  SPEECHGRAMMARCOMS ) 

T T) 

(RPAQQ  SPEECHGRAMMARCOMS 
((G:  SPEECHGRAMMAR) 

(V:  (DIGITS  TEENS  TENS  CLASSES  /MONTH/ 
/WEEKDAY/))  )) 

(LISPXPRINT  (QUOTE  (G:  SPEECHGRAMMAR))  T) 

(RPAQQ  SPEECHGRAMMAR  ($/  $/$  $ -'AND  $/CENTS  $/D0LLARS 
$/NUM  COMPL/  COMPL/NTYPE  COMPL/S  DATE/  DATE/DATE 
DATE/DAY  DATE/MO  DATE/NUM  DATE/OF  FOR/FOR  FOR/TO 
NP/  NP/ART  NP/D  NP/DET  NP/HEAD  NP/NP  NP/ONLY  NP/0.3D 
NP/QUANT  NP/R  NPR/  NPR/CITY  NPR/FIRST  NPR/NPR  NUM/ 
NUM/1  NUM/NUM  NUM/STR  NUMBER/  NUMBER/1  NUMBER/IA 
NUMBER/A  NUMBER/H  NUMBER/H2  NUMBER/K  NUMBER/NUMBER 
NUMBER/OH  NUMBER/0H2  NUMBER/OHD  NUMBER/P  NUMBER/PO 


-203- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Bera.Tek  ani  Newman  Inc. 


number/ta  number/th  ORD/  ORD/NUM 

ORD/ORD  PP/  PP/NP  PP/PREP  OUANT/  QUANT/QUANT  OUANT/tINTT 

S/IF  S/IFTHC.N  S/IMP  S/NO-SURJ  S/NP  S/0  S/S  S/THFM 
S/THERE  S/VP  TO/  VP/HEAD  VP/NP  VP/V  VP/VP)) 

(DEFINEG 


($/ 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ( (NUMBERSTART ) 

T 

(NOR  (GETF  DIGITS) 

(GETF  AMBIG) 

(GETF  OH))) 

3 

(SETR  NUM  (NUMBOF  »)) 

(TO  $/NUM)) 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ((NUMBERSTART) 

T 

(OR  (FLOATP  (NUMBOF  »)) 

^ (GETF  AMBIG))) 

(COND  ((GETF  AMBIG) 

(SETR  NUM  (FOUOTIENT  (NUMBOF  ») 

, 100))) 

(T  (SETR  NUM  (NUMBOF  »)))) 

(TO  $/$))) 

( $/$ 

(POP  (BUILDQ  (N  ) 

(PACK  (CONS  (QUOTE  "$") 

...  (UNPACK  (GETR  NUM))))) 

( -l  i J 

5) ' 


($/AND 

(PUSH  NUM/  (T  T (ILESSP  (NUMBOF  ») 

c:  100)) 

0 

(SETR  NUM  (IPLUS  (GETR  NUM) 

(FOUOTIENT  (NUMBOF  ») 

(TO  $/CENTS)))  100))) 

( $/CENTS 

(WRD  CENT  ((EQ  (GETF  NUMBER) 

(QUOTE  PL)) 

T) 

5 

(TO  $/$))) 

($/DOLLARS 


-2014- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(JUMP  $/$  (T  T) 
2) 

(WRD  AND  (T  T) 

3 

(TO  $/ANDj)) 


($/NUM 

(WRD  DOLLAR  ((EQ  (GETF  NUMBER) 

(QUOTE  PL)) 

T) 

5 

(TO  $/D0LLARS))) 


(COMPL/ 

(WRD  FOR  (T  T) 

3 

(SETRQ  TYPE  FORCOMP) 

(TO  FOR/FOR)) 

(WRD  THAT  (T  T) 

3 

(SETRQ  THAT  T) 

(TO  COMPL/NTYPE) ) ) 

(COMPL/NTYPE 

(PUSH  S/  ((SSTART) 

T 

(NEQ  (STYPE) 

(QUOTE  NPU))) 

5 

(COND 

((AND  (NULLR  THAT) 

(EQ  (QUOTE  THAT) 

(NP.DET  (S.NP  (UNHASH  »))))) 

(ABORT))) 

(SETR  S (CONS  (QUOTE  S) 

(CONS  (QUOTE  THATCOMP) 

(CDDR  (UNHASH  »))))) 

(TO  COMPL/S))) 

(COMPL/S 

(POP  (GETR  S) 

(T  T) 

5)) 


(DATE/ 

(WRD  /WEEKDAY/  (T  T) 
5 

(SETR  DAY  ») 

(TO  DATE/DAY)) 


-205- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(WRD  /WEEKDAY/  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  DAY  «) 

(TO  DATE/DATE)) 

(PUSH  NUM/  ((NUMSTART) 

T 

(ILESSP  (NUMBOF  *) 

32)) 

2 

(SETR  NUM  «) 

(TO  DATE/DAY)) 

(JUMP  DATE/DAY  (T  T) 

M) 

(DATE /DATE 

(POP  (BUILDQ  (§  (DATEI 

) 

(COND  ((GETR  DAY) 

(BUILDQ  ((DAY  +)) 

DAY))) 

(COND  ((GETR  NUM) 

(BUILDQ  ((NUM  +)) 

NUM) ) ) 

(COND  ((GETR  MONTH) 

(BUILDQ  (vMONTH  +)) 

MONTH) ) ) 

(COND  ((GETR  YEAR) 

(BUILDQ  ^(YEAR  +)) 

YEAR)))) 

(T  (OR  (GETR  DAY) 

(GETR  MONTH) 

(GETR  YEAR))) 

5 

(*  SHOULD  TEST  NUMBER  OF  DAYS  IN  MONTH  TO  AVOID 
FEB  30  OR  SEPT  3D)) 


(CATE/DAY 

(WRD  /MONTH/  (T  (NULLR  MONTH)) 

5 

(SETR  MONTH  *) 

(TO  DATE/MO)) 

(WRD  THE  (T  (NULLR  NUM)) 

3 

(SETRQ  THE  T) 

(TO  DATE/MO)) 

(JUMP  DATE/MO  (T  (NOR  (GETR  DAY) 

(GETR  NUM))) 
3)) 


-206- 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Report  No.  3116 


(DATE/MO 

(PUSH  ORD/  ((ORDSTART) 

(NULLR  NUM) 

(AND  (NUMBER?  (NUMBOF  »)) 
(ILESSP  (NUMBOF  ») 

32))) 

2 

(SETR  NUM  «) 

(TO  DATE/NUM)) 

(JUMP  DATE/NUM  (T  (OR  (AND  (GETR  MONTH) 

(NULLR  DAY)) 
(AND  (NULLR  MONTH) 
(NULLR  DAY) 
(NULLR  NUM) 
(NULLR  THE) ) ) ) 
iO 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ( ( NUMBERSTART ) 

(NULLR  NUM) 

(ILESSP  (NUMBOF  *) 

32)) 

2 

(SETR  NUM  «) 

(TO  DATE/NUM) ) ) 

(DATE/NUM 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ((NUMBERSTART) 

T 

(YEAR?  (UNHASH  *))) 

H 

(SETR  YEAR  *) 

(TO  DATE/DATE)) 

LLR  THE))  (JUMP  DATE/DATE  (T 

4) 

(WRD  OF  (T  (AND  (NULLR  MONTH) 

(GETR  THE))) 

5 

(SETR  THE) 

(TO  DATE/OF))) 


(DATE/OF 

(WRD  /MONTH/  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  MONTH  *) 
(TO  DATE/NUM) ) ) 


-207- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


L 


r 

1 


E 


(FOR/FOR 

(PUSH  NP/  ( (NPSTART) 

T 

(NOT  (ROLE  SUBJ))) 

5 

(»  MIX  IS  TIME  FOR  ME  TO  LEAVE") 
(SETR  SUBJ  *) 

(TO  TO/))) 


(FOR /TO 

(CAT  V ((CHECKF  V UNTENSED) 
T) 

5 

(SE'iR  V *) 

(SETRQ  VOICE  ACTIVE) 

(TO  VP/V))) 


(NP/ 

(WRD  ONLY  (T  T) 

5 

(.*  "ONLY  A FOOL  WOULD  X"  , "ONLY  THREE  FLIGHTS" 
"ONLY  THE  FLIGHTS  WHICH  X") 

(ADDL  PREMODS  (BUILDQ  (PREDET  *))) 

(TO  NP/ONLY)) 

(CAT  QDET  (T  T) 

5 

(*  "WHOSE  CAR  IS  THAT?"  "WHICH  FIVE  TRIPS" 
"HOWMANY  (TRIPS)  WERE  THERE") 

(SETR  ART  ») 

(ADDL  LIFTLIST  (QUOTE  QDET)) 

(SETR  QDET  T) 

(TO  NP/ORD)) 

(PUSH  DATE/  ((DATESTART) 

T T) 

1 

(SETR  DATE  *} 

(TO  NP/NP) ) 

(TST  DATEMOD  ((DATEMOD) 

T) 

(SETR  PREMODS  (BUILDQ  ((ADJ  *)))) 

(SETRQ  NPNUAGREE  T) 

(TO  NP/D)) 

(JUMP  NP/ONLY  ((NOR  (CAT  QDET) 

(WRD  ONLY)) 

T) 

M) 


i 

\ 


-208- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


r 


I 

I 


i 

\ 

t- 

I 

» 

f 


! 

i 

i 

! 

1 


! 


(NP/ART 

(PUSH  $/  ( ($START) 

T T) 

1 

(SETR  DET  (DETBUILD)) 

(SETR  HEAD  ») 

(SETRQ  NU  PL) 

(TO  NP/HEAD)) 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ( ( NUMBERSTART  ) 

T T) 

1 

(SETR  HEAD  (BUILDQ  (NUMBER  »))) 

(SETRQ  NU  PL) 

(SETR  DET  (DETBUILD)) 

(SETR  LIFTLIST  FEATURES) 

(TO  NP/HEAD)) 

(WRD  ONLY  (T  (ART  THE)) 

5 

(»  "THE  ONLY  ONE”) 

(ADDL  PREMODS  (BUILDQ  (POSTDET  »))) 

(TO  NP/ORD)) 

(CAT  ORD  (T  (GETR  ART)) 

5 

(»  "THE  FIRST  SAMPLE”  , "THE  NEXT  OF  THE  ROCKS”) 
(SETR  POSTART  (BUILDQ  ((ORD  *)))) 

(TO  NP/ORD)) 

(JUMP  NP/ORD  (T  T) 

4)) 


(NP/D 

(WRD  /MONTH/  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  HEAD  (BUILDQ  (DATE  (MONTH  »)))) 
(SETRQ  NU  SG) 

(TO  NP/NP)) 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ((NUMBERSTART) 

T 

(YEAR?  (UNHASH  »))) 

3 

(SETR  HEAD  (BUILDQ  (DATE  (YEAR  »)))) 
(SETRQ  NU  SG) 

(TO  NP/NP) ) ) 


(NP/DET 

(CAT  N (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  HEAD  (BUILDQ  (N  »))) 
(SETR  NU  (GETF  NUMBER)) 

(TO  NP/HEAD)) 


. .u  .. 


-209- 


1 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


i 


L 


R- 


I 


(PUSH  NPR/  ( (NPRSTART) 

T T) 

3 

(SETR  HEAD  ») 

(SETRQ  NU  SG) 

(TO  NP/HEAD)) 

(CAT  ADJ  (T  T) 

4 

(COND  ((NULLR  ADADJ) 

(»  ADADJ  ARE  LIKE  ADVERBS  ONLY  THEY 
MODIFY  ADJECTIVES  RATHER  THAN  VERBS. 
WE  HAVE  NONE  IN  THE  CURRENT 
VOCABULARY.  WHEN  WE  DO,  IT  WILL  BE 
NECESSARY  TO  PUT  A 
(CAT  ADADJ  (T  T) 

(SETR  ADADJ  ») 

(TO  NP/DET)) 

IN  NP/QUANT) 

(ADDL  PREMODS  (BUILDQ  (§  (ADJ) 

(«)) 

FEATURES) ) ) 

((ADJAGREE  (GETR  ADADJ) 

*) 

(ADDL  PREMODS 

(BUILDQ  (ADJP  (ADV  +) 

(ADJ  *)) 

ADADJ)) 

(SETR  ADADJ)) 

(T  (»  DO  SOMETHING  LIKE  LOWERING  WEIGHT 
ON  PATH))) 

(TO  NP/DET)) 

(CAT  N (T  (NULLR  ADADJ)) 

3 

(ADDL  PREMODS 

(BUILDQ  (ADJ  (NP  (N  ») 

(NU  ))) 

(GETF  NUMBER))) 

(TO  NP/DET)) 

(PUSH  NPR/  ( (NPRSTART) 

T T) 

2 

(ADDL  PREMODS  (BUILDQ  (ADJ  (NP  ») 

(NU  SG)))) 

(TO  NP/DET)) 


I 

i 


-210- 


4 


i 


r 


I 


I 


i 


[ 


f 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


(CAT  V ((OR  (CETF  PRESPART) 

(GETF  PASTPART)) 

T) 

3 

(*  "A  SINGING  BIRD”  , ”AN  ELEVATED  PLATFORM”) 
(ADDL  NMODS  (BUILDQ  (ADJ  (PARTICIPLE 


^TO  NP/DET)) 


( TNS  ) ) ) 

(COND  ((GETF  PRESPART) 
(QUOTE  PRES)) 

(T  (QUOTE  PAST))))) 


(CAT  ADV  (T  T) 

2 

(»  SOME  ADVS  CANNOT  APPEAR  HERE,  E.G.  THERE. 
THEY  SHOULD  BE  SCREENED  OUT) 

(*  THE  VERY  OLD  CAR,  THE  UNUSUALLY  INEXPENSIVE 
TRIP) 

(SETR  ADV  *) 

(TO  NP/ADV)) 

(JUMP  NP/HEAD  (T  (AND  (NULLR  PREMODS) 

(ELLIP?  (GETR  DET)))) 

(*  "I  NEED  SEVEN”  , "ALL  ARE  GONE”) 

(SETRQ  HEAD  (PRO  ONE)) 

(SETR  NU  (GETDETNUM  (GEfR  DET))))) 


(NP/HEAD 

(PUSH  R/  ( (RELSTART) 

(OR  (DET. ART  (GETR  DET)) 
(WRD  PL  NU) 

(GETF  N MASS) 
(RELAGREE) ) 

T) 

3 

(«  .ixHE  TRIP  WHICH  JOHN  TOOK”  , 
"GIRLS  TO  WHOM  I WROTE”  , 
"MILK  WHICH  IS  SOUR”) 

(ADDL  NMODS  ») 

(TO  NP/R)) 

(PUSH  PP/  ((PPSTART) 

T T) 

3 

(*  "THE  BOOKS  ON  THE  SHELF”) 
(ADDL  NMODS  ») 

(TO  NP/HEAD)) 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(PUSH  R/NIL  ((RRELSTART) 

(AND  (NULLR  PPFLAG) 
(NULLR  QDET) 
(RELAGREE) ) 

T) 

3 

(»  "THE  TRIP  JOHN  TOOK") 
(ADDL  NMODS  ») 

(TO  NP/R)) 

(POP  (NPBUILD) 

(T  (NPNUCHEK)) 

5)) 


I 


(NP/NP 

(POP  (NPBUILD) 
(T  T) 


(NP/ONLY 

(JUMP  NP/ART  ((NOR  (CAT  (ART  PRO  NEG  QUANT  POSS)) 

(WRD  (WHOSE  WHO  HOW  WHAT  WHETHER 
IF  WHICH))) 


4) 

(CAT  ART 


T) 

(T  T) 


3 

(SETR  ART  (BUILDQ  ((ART  »)))) 

(TO  NP/ART)) 

(CAT  QUANT  (T  T) 

3 

(*  "ALL  THE  MONEY"  "ENOUGH  MONEY" 
"HUWMUCH  MONEY") 

(SETR  QUANT  (BUILDQ  ((QUANT  *)))) 
(TO  NP/ART)) 

(CAT  POSS  (T  T) 

3 

(«  "HIS  TRAVEL  PLANS") 

(ADDL  NMODS  *) 

(TO  NP/ART)) 

(CAT  PRO  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  HEAD  (BUILDQ  (PRO  »))) 

(SETR  NU  (GETF  NUMBER)  ) 

(SETR  DET  (DETBUILD)) 

(COND  ((GETF  ROLE) 

(SETR  ROLE  (GETF  ROLE)))) 
(TO  NP/NP) ) ) 


-212- 


[ 


(NP/ORD 

(PUSH  QUANT/  ( (QUANTSTART) 

T T) 

2 

(»  AN  ORDINAL  INDICATOR  HAS  BEEN  ANALYZED 
(OR  IT  WAS  OMITTED) 

AND  AN  OPTIONAL  QUANTIFIER  MAY  FOLLOW 
"THE  (FIRST)  FIVE  MEN") 

(SETR  POSTART  (BUILDQ  ((§  (POSTART) 


(»))) 

POSTART)) 

(TO  NP/QUANT)  ) 

(JUMP  NP/QUANT  (T  T) 

5)) 


(NP/QUANT 

(JUMP  NP/DET  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  DET  (DETBUILD) ) )) 

(NP/R 

(JUMP  NP/NP  (T  T) 


(NPR/ 

(CAT  FIRSTNAME  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  NAME  T) 

(SETR  FIRST  *) 

(TO  NPR/FIRST)) 

(CAT  CITY  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  LOCATION  T) 

(SETR  CITY  *) 

(TO  NPR/CITY)) 

(JUMP  NPR/CITY  (T  T) 

2 

(SETR  LOCATION  T)) 

(CAT  NPR  (T  T) 

2 

(SETR  NPR  *) 

(TO  NPR/NPR))  ) 

(NPR/CITY 

(POP  (BUILDQ  (NPR  (LOCATION  (CITY  +))) 
CITY) 

(T  (GETR  CITY) 

3)) 


-213- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(CAT  STATE  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  STATE  ») 

(TO  NPR/NPR)) 

(CAT  COUNTRY  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  COUNTRY  ») 

(TO  NPR/NPR))) 

(NPR/FIRST 

(CAT  LASTNAME  . T) 

H 

(SETR  LAST  ») 

(TO  NPR/NPR)) 

(JUMP  NPR/NPR  (T  T) 

2)) 

(NPR/NPR 

(POP  (NPRBUILD) 

(T  T) 

5)) 

(NUM/ 

(CAT  INTEGER  ((OR  (MEMB  (NUMBOF  *) 

DIGITS) 

(MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 
TEENS)) 

T) 

(SETR  NUM  (NUMBOF  *)) 

(TO  IJUM/NUM)) 

(CAT  INTEGER  ((MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 

TENS) 

T) 

(SETR  NUM  (NUMBOF  »)) 

(TO  NUM/1 ) ) ) 

(NUM/1 

(CAT  INTEGER  ((MEMB  (NUMBOF  *) 

DIGITS) 

T) 

(SETR  NUM  (IPLUS  (NUMBOF  ») 

(GETR  NUM))) 

(TO  NUM/NUM)) 

(JUMP  NUM/NUM  (T  T) 

3)) 


I 


Report  No.  3116  Boll  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(NU^  ,'NUM 

(POP  (GETR  i’UK) 
(T  T) 


(NUM/STR 

I,  ?0P  (PACK  (GETR  NUMSTR  ) ) 

(T  T) 

3 

(SELECTQ  (LENGTH  (GETR  NUMSTR)) 

(4  (SETRQ  LIFTLIST  (TRIPNO  DIGITS))) 

((5  6) 

(SETRQ  LIFTLIST  (JOBNO  DIGITS))) 
(ABORT))) 

(CAT  INTEGER  ((OR  (MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 

DIGITS) 

(EQ  (NUMBOF  ») 

0)) 

T) 

4 

(»  STRINGS  OF  DIGITS  LIKE  "ONE  OH  FIVE  ONE  OH") 
(ADDR  NUMSTR  (NUMBOF  »)) 

(TO  NUM/STR))) 

(NUMBER/ 

(PUSH  NUM/  ((NUMSTART) 

T T) 

4 

(SETR  TOTAL  (NUMBOF  »)) 

(TO  NUMBER/1 )) 

(PUSH  NUM/STR  ( ( NUMSTRSTART ) 

T T) 

3 

(SETR  TOTAL  (NUMBOF  »)) 

(SETR  LIFTLIST  FEATURES) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER)) 

(WRD  (ZERO  NO)  (T  T) 

5 

(SETRQ  TOTAL  0) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER)) 

(WRD  A (T  T) 

3 

(TO  NUMBER/A)) 

(WRD  POINT  (T  T) 

5 

(TO  NUMBER/PO))) 


-215- 


Report  No,  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(NUMBER/1 

(PUSF  NUM/  ((NUMSTART) 

T 

(NOT  (MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 

DIGITS)) ) 

3 

(»  LOOKING  FOR  250,  1292,  FOR  EXAMPLE) 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (ITIMES  100  (GETR  TOTAL)) 

(NUMBOF  »))) 

(TO  NUMBER/OHD)) 


(WRD  OH  (T  T) 

3 

(»  LOOKING  FOR  109,  1207,  FOR  EXAMPLE) 
(TO  NUMBER/OH)) 

(WRD  HUNDRED  (T  (NOR  (EQ  (GETR  NUM) 

10) 

(MEMB  (GETR  NUM) 

TENS) ) ) 

5 

(SETR  T0':AL  (ITIMES  100  (GETR  TOTAL))) 
(TO  NUMBER /H)) 

(WRD  THOUSAND  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  1000  (GETR  TOTAL))) 
(TO  NUMBER/T)) 

(WRD  K (T  T) 


(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  1000 
(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER)) 

(WRD  POINT  (T  T) 


(GETR  TOTAL))) 


(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  1000  (GETR  TOTAL))) 
(TO  NUMBER/P)) 

(WRD  AND  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  1000  (GETR  TOTAL))) 
(TO  NUMBER/1  A) ) 

(JUMP  NUMBER/NUMBER  vT  T) 

2)) 


(NUMBER/1A 

(WRD  (A  ONE)  (T  T) 

2 

(SETRQ  A1  A1) 

(TO  NUMBER/1A)) 

(WRD  QUARTER  (T  (GETR  A1)) 

2 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 
, 250)) 

(TO  NUMBER/K)) 

(WRD  HALF  (T  (GETR  A1)) 


-216- 


I 


!J 


1 • 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

500)) 

(TO  NUMBER/K) ) ) 


(NUMBER/A 

(WRD  HUNDRED  (T  T) 

2 

(SETRQ  TOTAL  100) 
(TO  NUMBER/H)) 

(WRD  THOUSAND  (T  T) 

2 

(SETRQ  TOTAL  1000) 
(TO  NUMBER/T))) 


(NUMBER/H 

(PUSH  NUM/  ((NUMSTART) 

T T) 

3 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(NUMBOF  »))) 

(SETR  AND  NIL) 

(TO  NUMBER/H2)) 

(JUMP  NUMBER/NUMBER  (T  (NULLR  AND)) 

2) 

(WRD  AND  (T  (NULLR  AND)) 

3 

(SETRQ  AND  AND) 

(TO  NUMBER/H)) 

(WRD  THOUSAND  (T  (NULLR  AND)) 

4 

(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  1000  (GETR  TOTAL))) 
(TO  NUMBER/T)) 

(WRD  K (T  T) 

4 

(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  (GETR  TOTAL) 

1000)) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER))) 


(NUMBER/H2 

(WRD  K (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  (GETR  TOTAL) 

1000)) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER)) 

(WRD  THOUSAND  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  1000  (GETR  TOTAL))) 
(TO  NUMBER/T)) 


-217- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


IJ 


(JUMP  NUMBER/NUMBER  (T  T) 

2)) 

(NUMBER/K 

(WRD  (K  THOUSAND)  (T  T) 

5 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER))) 

(NUMBER/NUMBER 

(POP  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(T  T) 

5 

(COND  ((GETR  DIGITS) 

(ADDL  LIFTLIST  (QUOTE  DIGITS)))))) 

(NUMBER/OH 

(CAT  INTEGER  ((MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 

DIGITS) 

T) 

5 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (ITIMES  100  (GETR  TOTAL)) 

(NUMBOF  ») ) ) 

(SETR  DIGITS  T) 

(ADDL  LIFTLIST  (QUOTE  01!)) 

(TO  NUMBER/OHD) ) ) 

(NUMBER/0H2 

(CAT  INTEGER  ((MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 

DIGITS) 

T) 

5 

(SETR  TOTAL  (FPLUS  (GETR  TOTZ-L) 

(FQUOTIENT  (NUMBOF  ») 
100))) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER))) 

(NUMBER/OHD 

(PUSH  NUM/  ( (NUMSTART) 

T 

(NOT  (MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 

DIGITS))) 

3 

(»  LOOKING  FOR  1207.79,  FOR  EXAMPLE) 

(SETR  TOTAL  (FPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(FQUOTIENT  (NUMBOF  ») 
100))) 

(SETR  DIGITS  NIL) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER)) 


i 

I / 


-218- 


h 

I ' 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(WRD  OH  (T  T) 

3 

(»  LOOKING  FOR  1207.09,  FOR  EXAMPLE) 

(TO  NUMBER/0H2)) 

(JUMP  NUMBER/NUMBER  (T  T) 

2 

(ADDR  LIFTLIST  (QUOTE  AMBIG)))) 

(NUMBER/P 

(PUSH  NUM/  ((NUMSTART) 

T T) 

5 

(COND  ((MEMB  (NUMBOF  *) 

DIGITS) 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(ITIMES  100 

(NUMBOF 

•))))) 

(T  (ABORT))) 

(TO  NUMBER/K))) 

(NUMBER/PO 

(PUSH  NUM/  ((NUMSTAFT) 

T T) 

5 

(COND  ((MEMB  (NUMBOF  ») 

DIGITS) 

(SETR  TOTAL  (ITIMES  (NUMBOF  ») 

100))) 

(T  (ABORT))) 

(TO  NUMBER/K))) 

(NUMBER/T 

(PUSH  NUM/  ((NUMSTART) 

T T) 

2 

(COND  ((IGREATERP  (NUMBOF  ») 

9) 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(NUMBOF  »)))) 

(T  (ABORT))) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER)) 

(PUSH  NUM/  C’.’UMSTART) 

T T) 

2 

(COND  ((ILESSP  (NUMBOF  ») 

10) 

(SETR  NUM  (NUMBOF  »))) 

(T  (ABORT))) 

(TO  NUMBER/TH)) 


] 


5 


i 


-219- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  I 


(WRD  AND  (T  T) 

3 

(TO  NUMBER/TA))) 

(NUMBER/T2 

(PUSH  NUM/  ( (NUMSTART) 

T T) 

3 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(NUMBOF  »))) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER)) 

(WRD  AND  (T  (NULLR  AND)) 

3 

(SETRQ  AND  AND) 

(TO  NUMBER/T2)) 

(JUMP  NUMBER/NUMBER  (T  (NULLR  AND)) 

2)) 

(NUMBER/TA 

(PUSH  NUM/  ( (NUMSTART) 

T T) 

5 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(NUMBOF  »))) 

(TO  NUMBER/NUMBER))) 

(NUMBER/TH 

(WRD  HUNDRED  (T  T) 

3 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

(ITIMES  100  NUM))) 

(TO  NUMBER/T2)) 

(JUMP  NUMBER/NUMBER  (T  T) 

2 

(SETR  TOTAL  (IPLUS  (GETR  TOTAL) 

NUM) ) ) ) 


(ORD/ 

(CAT  ORD  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  ORD  «) 

(TO  ORD/ORD)) 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ( ( NUMBERSTART ) 

T 

(AND  (IGREATERP  » 19) 

(EQ  0 (IREMAINDER  » 10)  ) ) ) 
5 

{*  "THIRT/  FIFTH") 

(SETR  ORD  «) 

(TO  ORD/NUM) ) ) 


-220- 


I 


I ! ' 
► 

! i 


1 . 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(ORD/NUM 

(CAT  ORD  ((ILESSP  » 10) 

T) 

5 

(SETR  ORD  (IPLUS  * (GETR  ORD))) 
(TO  ORD/ORD))) 

(ORD/ORD 

(POP  (GETR  ORD) 

(T  T) 

5)) 


(PP/ 

(CAT  PREP  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  PREP  ») 

(TO  PP/PREP))) 

(PP/NP 

(POP  (BUILDQ  (PP  (PREP  +) 

+ ) 

PREP  NP) 

(T  T) 

5)) 

(PP/PREF 

(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART) 

T 

(NOT  (ROLE  SUBJ))) 

5 

(SETR  NP  ») 

(COND  (FEATURES  (ADDL  LIFILIST  FEATURES))) 
(TO  PP/NP))) 


(QUANT/ 

(PUSH  NUMBER/  ( ( NUMBERSTART ) 
T T) 

5 

(SETR  NUMB  (NUMBOF  »)) 
(TO  QUANT/QUANT))) 


(QUANT/QUANT 

(TST  UNIT-TST  ((AND  (NEQ  (GETF  NUMBER) 

(QUOTE  PL)) 
(MARKER  UNIT  »)) 

T) 

4 

(«  "A  SEVEN  DAY  TRIP”) 

(SETR  UNIT  «) 

(TO  QUANT/UNIT)) 


-221- 


i 

I 


I 


; I 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(JUMP  QUANT/UNIT  (T  T) 

3)) 


(QUANT/UNIT 
(POP  (COND 

((GETR  ADV) 

(6UILDQ  (COMP  (ADV 

(§  (NP  (INTEGER  +)) 

)) 

ADV  NUMB  (COMD 
((GETR  UNIT) 

(BUILDQ  ((UNIT  +)) 

UNIT)) 

(T  NIL)))) 

(T  (BUILDQ  (§1  (INTEGER  +) 

) 

NUMB 

(COND  ((GETR  UNIT) 

(BUILDQ  ((UNIT  +)) 

riMTrr  \ \ \ ' \ \ 


(R/ 

(PUSH  R/WHOSE  ((RELSTART  WHOSE) 

T T) 

4 

(*  "THE  MAN  WHOSE  HOUSE  BURNED") 

(SETRQ  TYPE  RED 
(SETR  WH  *) 

(TO  R/WH)) 

(WRD  (WHICH  THAT  WHO)  (T  T) 

4 

(SETRQ  TYPE  REL) 

(SETRQ  WH  »*RELNP»») 

(TO  R/WH)) 

(WRD  WHOM  (T  T) 

4 

(*  »»RELNP*»  IS  NOT  THE  SUBJ  - WILL  BE  PICKED 
UP  LATER) 

(SETRQ  TYPE  REL) 

(SETRQ  HOLDWH  »*RELNP»») 

(TO  R/WH) ) 

(CAT  PREP  (T  T) 

4 

(*  "THE  PERSON  TO  WHOM  I WROTE") 

(SETR  PREP  ») 

(SETRQ  TYPE  REL) 

(SETRQ  WH  *»RELNP»») 

(TO  R/PREP))) 


I 


I 


n 

ii 


3 


I 

■ 

i 


r 

? 


I 


t! 


\ 


i 

j 


-222- 


Report  No.  31  16 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


I! 

n 

ij 

1.1 


i 


i 

i . 


(R/NIL 

(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART) 

(AND  (NULLR  VMODS) 

(NULLR  NEC)) 

T) 

3 

(»  ’’THE  BOOK  MANY  PEOPLE  READ") 

(SETRQ  HOLDWH  »»RELNP«») 

(SETRQ  TYPE  REL) 

(SETR  SUBJ  ») 

(TO  S/NP)) 

(CAT  V ((AND 

(NOT  (AND  (WRD  BE  (GETROOT  » V)) 

(NOT  (EQ  » (QUOTE  BEING))))) 
(OR  (AND  (GETF  PASTPART) 

(VPASSIVE  *)) 

(GETF  PRESPART))) 

T) 

4 

(*  "THE  CHILD  GOING  TO  BED"  , 

"A  CLOTH  SOAKED  WITH  WATER") 

(COND  ((AND  (GETF  PASTPART) 

(VPASSIVE  »)) 

(SETRQ  SUBJ  »».<ELNP»») 

(SETRQ  TNS  PAST) 

(SETRQ  VOICE  PASSIVE) 

(SETR  AGFLAG  T) ) 

((GETF  PRESPART) 

(SETRQ  SUL;  *»RELNP»») 

(SETRQ  TNS  PRESENT) 

(SETRQ  VOICE  ACTIVE) 

(SETRQ  ASPECT  PROGRESSIVE))) 

(SETR  V ») 

(SETRQ  WH  »*RELNP*«) 

(SETRQ  TYPE  REL) 

(TO  VP/V))) 


(R/PREP 

(WRD  (WHICH  WHOM)  (T  T) 

3 

(ADDL  VMODS  (BUILDQ  ( PP  (PREP  +) 

»»RELNP»») 

PREP)) 

(SETR  WH  NIL) 

(TO  R/WH))) 


-223- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(R/WH 

(PUSH 


NP/ 


3 

(COND 


T 


NPSTART) 

T) 


((GETR  WH) 

(SETR  HOLDWH  (GETR  WH)))) 
(SETR  SUBJ  *) 

(TO  S/NP)) 

(JUMP  S/NP  (T  (AND  (GETR 

(NULLR 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GETR  WH)))) 


WH) 

PREP) ) ) 


(R/WHOSE 

(WRD  WHOSE  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  ART  *) 

(ADDL  LIFTLIST  (QUOTE  QDET)) 

(SETR  QDET  T) 

(ADDL  PREMODS  (BUILDQ  (POSS  **RP’LNP**  1 1 1 
(TO  NP/ART))) 


(3/ 


(PUSH  PP/ 


2 

(» 


( (PPSTART) 
T T) 


"TO  WHICH  PLACE  DID  YOU  GO" 


"TO  A MAN  THEY  SAY  'CUTTY  SARK'") 

(*  IF  THERE  IS  A QWORD  OR  QDET  IN  THE 
THE  PP  IT  BECOMES  THE  DS  SUBJECT  IN 
(SETR  HOLDPP  «) 

(COND  ((GETF  QDET) 

(SETRQ  TYPE  Q))) 

(TO  S/)) 

(JUMP  S/Q  ( (QSTART) 

T) 

5 

(SETRQ  TYPE  Q)) 

(WRD  IF  (T  T) 

5 

(TO  S/IF)) 

(JUMP  S/IMP  ((CHECKF  V UNTENSED) 

(NULLR  TYPE)) 

(JUMP  S^'DCL 


OBJECT  OF 
S/QP1 ) 


(COND 


((NOR  (QSTART) 

(CAT  PREP)) 
T) 


((NULLR  TYPE) 

(SETRQ  TYPE  DCL))))) 


-224- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(S/AUX 

(CAT  NEC  (T  (NULLR  NEC)) 

5 

(»  "JOHN  DIDN'T  GO  TO  WASHINGTON") 

(SETRQ  NEG  NEG) 

(COND  ((WRD  DO  MODAL) 

(SETR  MODAL  NIL) 

(*  UNDOING  DO-SUPPORT))) 

(TO  S/AUX)) 

(JUMP  VP/V  (T  (OR  (GETR  THERE) 

(AND  (GETR  SUBJ) 

(PNCHECK  (GETR  SUBJ) 

(GETR  PNCODE))))) 

(*  IF  WE  HAVE  SUBJ,  GO  TO  VP/V  IF  IT  AGREES 
WITH  VERB)) 

(JUMP  S/NO-SUBJ  (T  (NOR  (GETR  SUBJ) 

(GETR  THERE))) 

(*  "DID  JOHN  GO  TO  WASHINGTON") 

(*  BECAUSE  OF  SUBJ-VERB  INVERSION,  WE  HAVEN'T 
IDENTIFIED  SUBJECT,  SO  GO  TO  S/NO-SUBJ  TO 
FIND  ONE))) 

(S/DCL 

(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART) 

T 

(NOT  (ROLE  OBJ))) 

3 

(»  SUBJECT  NP  BEGINS  DECL  SENTENCE) 

(SETR  SUBJ  ») 

(TO  S/NP)) 

(WRD  THERE  (T  T) 

14 

(»  "THERE  WAS  A BOOK  ON  THE  TABLE") 

(SETR  THERE  T) 

(»  THERE-INSERTION  HAS  OCCURRED;  WE  MUST  LATER 
FIND  'BE'  OR  'EXIST') 

(TO  S/NP))) 

(S/HOW 

(CAT  ADJ  (T  T) 

14 

(»  "HOW  BIG") 

(SETR  HOLDADJ  ») 

(TO  S/NP))) 


( 


-225- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman 


(S/IF 

(PUSH  S/  ( (SSTART) 

T 

(EQ  (STYPE) 

(QUOTE  DCL))) 

5 

(SETR  SI  (CONS  (QUOTE  S) 

(CONS  (QUOTE  IF) 

(CDDR  (UNHASH  »))))) 

(TO  S/THEN) ) ) 

(S/IFTHEN 

(POP  (GETR  S2) 

(T  T) 

5)) 

(S/IMP 

(CAT  V ( (GSTF  UNTENSED) 

T) 

5 

(»  "GIVE  ME  . . . ") 

(*  SET  UP  REGS  FOR  IMPERATIVE;  GO  TO  VP/HEAD  TO 
PICK  UP  POST-VERB  CONSTITUENTS ) 

(SETRQ  TYPE  IMP) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (BUILDQ  (NP  (DET) 

(PRO  YOU) 

, , (FEATS  (NU  SG))))) 

(SETR  V ») 

(SETR  HEAD  ») 

(SETRQ  TNS  PRESENT) 

(SETRQ  VOICE  ACTIVE) 

(TO  VP/HEAD))) 

(S/NO-SUBJ 

(PUSH  NP/  ( (NPSTART) 

(PNCHECK  * (GETR  PNCODE)) 

(NOT  (ROLE  OBJ))) 

3 

(*  IF  SUCCESSFUL  AND  NP  AGREES  WITH  VERB,  IT  IS 
SUBJ  AND  OUR  INDECISION  ABOUT  WHQ  IS 
RESOLVED 

(IT  IS  NOT  SUBJ  SO  IT  IS  HELD  TO  BE  PICKED 
UP  AS  OBJECT  OR  PREP  OBJECT) 

; UNDO  DO-SUPPORT  FOR  S-V  INVERSION) 

(SETR  SUBJ  ») 

(COND  ( (OR  (GETR  WH ) 

(GETR  WHQ)) 

(SETR  HOLDWH  (GETR  WHQ)))) 

(COND  ( (WRD  DO  MODAL) 

(SETR  MODAL  NIL))) 

(TO  VP/V)) 


i I 

1 j 


-226- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(WRD  THERE  (T  (OR  (NULLR  WHQ) 

(PNCHECK  (GETR  WHQ) 

(GETR  PNCODE)))) 

4 

(»  WE  GET  TO  THIS  STATE  IF  THERE  WAS  NO 
IDENTIFIABLE  SUBJ  BEFORE  FIRST  VERB.  SUBJ 
MIGHT  BE  HERE  IN  STRING  IF  SUBJ-VERB 
INVERSION  HAPPENED,  OR  IT  MIGHT  BE  IN  WHQ 
REG) 

(»  ANYTHING  IN  WHQ  MUST  AGREE  WITH  VERB  AND 
BECOME  SUBJECT  'HOW  MANY  MEN  WERE  THERE...'; 
IF  WHQ  IS  EMPTY  'WERE  THERE  MANY  MEN...' 
MOVE  ON  TO  S/THERE) 

(COND  ( (GETR  WHQ) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GETR  WHQ)) 

(SETR  WHQ  NIL)) 

((GETR  WH) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GETR  WH ) ) 

(SETR  WH  NIL))) 

(SETR  THERE  T) 

(TO  S/THERE)) 

(JUMP  VP/V  (T  (AND  (GETR  WH) 

(NOT  (WRD  HAVE  V)) 

(PNCHECK  (GETR  WH ) 

(GETR  PNCODE)))) 

(»  'THERE'  AND  NP  DIDN'T  WORK,  BUT  WH  AGREES 
WITH  VERB  SO  MAKE  IT  THE  SUBJECT) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GETR  WH)) 

(SETR  WH  NIL)) 

(JUMP  VP/V  (T  (AND  (GETR  WHQ) 

(PNCHECK  (GETR  WHQ) 

(GETR  PNCODE)))) 

3 

(»  DITTO  FOR  WHQ) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GETR  WHQ)) 

(SETR  WHQ  NIL) ) ) 


i 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


(S/NP 

(POP  (COND  ((WRD  Q TYPE) 

(BUILDO  (S  NPQ  +) 

WHO)) 

(T  (BUILDO  (S  NPU  +) 

SUBJ) ) ) 

(T  (AND  (NPUPOP  (GETR  SUBJ)) 

(NOT  (WRD  REL  TYPE)) 

(NOT  (GETR  VMODS)))) 

3 

(ADDL  LIFTLIST  ( OUOTE  NPU)) 

(*  "WHICH  ONE") 

(*  WE  GET  TO  THIS  STATE  AFTER  FIRST  ATTEMPT  AT 
FINDING  AN  NP , EITHER  AS  DCL  SUBJECT  OR  AS  A 
OUESTION  WORD  (WHO))) 

(CAT  MODAL  (T  T) 


(*  "JOHN  MAY  LEAVE"  "WHICH  CANDY  CAN  I EAT" 
"WILL  JOHN  LEAVE") 

(SETRO  VOICE  ACTIVE) 

(SETR  MODAL  ») 

(SETR  PNCODE  (GETF  PNCODE)) 

(SETR  TNS  (GETF  TNS)) 

(TO  S/AUX)  ) 

(CAT  V ((GETF  TNS) 

T) 

5 

(*  THIS  IS  THE  ARC  USUALLi  TAICEN  FROM  THIS 
STATE.  THE  VERB  IS  EITHER  THE  FIRST  WORD  IN 
A OUESTION  (IF  WE  JUMPED  HERE  FROM  S/0) 

OR  IT  FOLLOWS  A SUBJ  NP  OR  'THERE'.  IF  WE 
ARE  IN  A Wri  OUESTION  AND  THE  VERB  IS  NOT  AN 
AUX  ( 'WHO  HIT  JOHN  ') 

THEN  THE  WHO  IS  THE  SUBJ.  IN  ANY  CASE,  SAVE 
TENSE  AND  PERSON-NUMBER  CODE) 

(SETRO  VOICE  ACTIVE) 

(SETR  V ») 

(COND  ((AND  (GETR  WHO) 

(NOT  (WRD  (HAVE  BE) ) ) ) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GETR  WHO') 

(SETR  WHO  NIL))) 

(COND  ((AND  (GETR  WH) 

(NOR  (MODAL) 

(WRD  (HAVE  BE  DO ) ) ) ) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GETR  WH)))) 

(SETR  PNCODE  (GETF  PNCODE)) 

(SETR  TNS  (GETF  TNS)) 

(TO  S/AUX) ) ) 


(COND 


(COND 


(SETR 


-228- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


(S/Q 

(PUSH  NP/  ( (NPSTAHT) 

T 

(OR  (Eg  (PRONP) 

(QUOTE  ONE)) 

(NOT  (PRONP)))) 

4 

(«  NORMALLY  WILL  BE  REACHED  ONLY  WITH  QWORD  OR 
QDET  FROM  S/) 

(«  ALLOWS  "WHICH  ONE(S)"  BUT  NOT  "WHICH  HE") 
(COND  ((ROLE  OBJ) 

(SETR  HOLDNP  (COPY  »)) 

(»  HOLDWH?)) 

(T  (SETR  WHQ  (COPY  »)))) 

(TO  S/NP)) 

(WRD  HOW  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  HOW  «) 

(TO  S/HOW)  ) 

(CAT  QWORD  (T  T) 

5 

(SETR  TEMP  (BUILDQ  (NP  (N  ) 

(FEATS  (NU  ))) 

(COPY  •) 

(GETF  NUMBER))) 

(COND  ((ROLE  SUBJ/OBJ) 

(SETR  WHQ  (GETR  TEMP))) 

( (ROLE  OBJ) 

(SETR  OBJ  (GETR  TEMP))) 

(T  (SETR  HOLDWH  (GETR  TEMP)))) 

(COND  ( (GETF  ANAPHORIC) 

(SETRQ  ANAPHORFLG  T))) 

(TO  S/NP)) 

(CAT  QADV  (T  (NULLR  QADV)) 

5 

(SETR  QADV  ») 

(TO  S/Q)) 

(JUMP  S/NP  ((OR  (CAT  MODAL) 

(AND  (CAT  V) 

(MEMB  (GETROOT  » V) 

(QUOTE  (BE  HAVE  DO  WILL 
SHALL  CAN 
MUST  MAY))))) 
T) 

iO) 


-229- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(S/S 

(POP  (GETR  POPVAL) 

(T  (AND  (NULLR  HOLDWH) 

(NULLR  HOLDPP) 

(NULLR  HOLDADJ))) 

5)) 

(S/THEN 

(PUSH  S/  ((SSTART) 

T 

(FMEMB  (STYPE) 

(QUOTE  (Q  DCL)))) 
5 

(»  "IF  WE  DO  X CAN  WE  DO  Y" 
"IF  WE  DO  X WE  CAN  DO  Y") 

(»  CHEK  TYPE) 

(SETR  S2  (BUILDQ  (S  + ») 

SI)) 

(TO  S/IFTHEN)) 

(WRD  THEN  (T  (NULLR  THEN)) 

5 

(»  "IF  X THE''  Y") 

(SETR  THEN  T) 

(TO  S/THEN))) 


U 

I 


1 


(S/THERE 

(JUMP  VP/V  (T  T) 
5)) 


(S/VP 

(JUMP  S/S  (T  T) 

2 

(COND  ((GETR  HOLDPP) 

(»  "BY  TOMORROW  JOHN  WILL  GO") 

(»  PICKING  UP  VIRTUAL  PP) 

(ADDL  VMODS  (GETR  HOLDPP)) 

(SETR  HOLDPP  NIL))) 

(COND  ((AND  (RFEAT  COPULA  V) 

(GETR  HOLDADJ)) 

(»  PICKING  UP  ADJ  FOUND  AT  S/HOW) 
(SETR  V (BUILDQ  (ADJ  +) 

HOLDADJ) ) 

(SETR  HOLDADJ  NIL))) 

(SETR  POPVAL  (SBUILD)))) 


-230- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


n 


(TO/ 

(WRD  TO  (T  T) 

1 • (»  "I  WANT  TO  GO") 

(COND  ((NULLR  SUBJ) 

(SETRQ  SUBJ  »»TOCOMP»») ) ) 

(COND  ((NULLR  TYPE) 

(SETRQ  TYPE  TOCOMP))) 
j (TO  FOR/TO)) 

^ ■ (CAT  NEG  (T  (NULLR  NEG)) 

2 

j (»  "I  TOLD  HIM  NOT  TO  EAT  THE  CAKE") 

1 • (SETR  NEG  ») 

(TO  TO/) ) ) 

i (VP/HEAD 

(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART) 

(OR  (VTRANS  V) 

I (AND  (NULLR  THERE) 

‘ • (RFEAT  COPULA  V))) 

(NOT  (ROLE  SUBJ))) 

I ^ 

; . (»  HERE  WE  PICK  UP  THE  REGULAR  OBJECT  OF 

TRANSITIVE  VERBS.  NOTE  THAT  FOR  A 
WHQ-QUESTION  WITH  'BE'  AS  THE  MAIN  VERB 
j (WHO  IS  THE  LEADER) 

* ‘ THE  SUBJECT  (THE  LEADER) 

WAS  PICKED  AT  STATE  S/NO-SUBJ  AT  WHICH  POINT 
, THE  WHQ  WAS  HELD.  THUS  WE  DON'T  LOOK  FOR  THE 

••  OBJECT  ON  THIS  ARC,  BUT  RATHER  ON  THE 

SUBSEQUENT  VIR  ARC) 

(»  WE  ALSO  GET  PREDICATE  NOMINATIVES  OF 
. . COPULAS,  AS  IN  'THE  TRIP  COST  $400',  'THE 

CONFERENCE  LASTED  9 DAYS') 

(SETR  OBJ  *) 

(TO  VP/NP)) 

’*  (PUSH  COMPL/  ( (COMPLSTART) 

(RFEAT  THATCOI’P  V) 

(COMPTYPE  (QUOTE  THATCOMP))) 

2 

(»  "I  WISHED  THAT  IT  WOULD  HAPPEN") 

(SETR  OBJ  (BUILDO  (NP  »))) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 


-231- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  Jind  Newman  Inc. 


(PUSH  COMPL/  ((COMPLSTART) 

(RFEAT  FORCOMP  V) 

(COMPTYPE  (QUOTE  FORCOMP))) 

2 

(*  "I  WAITED  FOR  JOHN  TO  COME”) 

(SETR  OBJ  (BUILDQ  (NP  »))) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 

(PUSH  TO/  ((TOCOMPSTART) 

(RFEAT  TOCOMP  V) 

T) 

3 

(*  "I  WANTED  TO  GO”  ”I  WANTED  JOHN  TO  GO” 

"IT  IS  NECESSARY  TO  GO-'^ 

(»  MUST  DECIDE  WHAT  TO  REPLACE  DUMMY  NODE  WITH) 
(SETR 
OBJ 

(BUILDQ 
(NP  ) 

(CHANGENODE 

« 

(QUOTE  »»TOCOMP»») 

(COND 

((IT?  (GETR  SUBJ)) 

(QUOTE  (NP  (DET) 

(PRO  SOMEONE) 

(FEATS  (NU  SG))))) 

((AND  (RFEAT  OBJLOW  V) 

(GETR  OBJ)) 

(GETR  OBJ)) 

(T  (GETR  SUBJ)))))) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 

(PUSH  3/  ((SSTART) 

(SCOMP  V) 

(NEQ  (STYPE) 

(QUOTE  NPU))) 

2 

(»  LOOK  FOR  A COMPLEMENT  WITH  THAT  DELETED  - 
’HE  KNEW  I WOULD  GO') 

(COND  ((EQ  (QUOTE  THAT) 

(NP.DET  (S.NP  (UNHASH  »)))) 

(ABORT))) 

(SETR  OBJ 

(BUILDQ 
(NP  ) 

(CONS  (QUOTE  S) 

(CONS  (QUOTE  THATCOMP) 

(CDDR  (UNHASH  *)))))) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 


-232- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Bei anek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(CAT^PARTICLE  (T  ( PARTICLEAGREE  (GETR  V))) 

(*  "I  PICKED  UP  THE  BABY") 

(SETR  V (VERB-PARTICLE  (GETR  V) 

»)) 

(SETR  HEAD  (GETR  V)) 

(TO  VP/HEAD)) 

(JUMP  VP/NP  (T  T) 

3 

(COND 

((AND  (OR  (WRD  PE  V) 

(WRD  HAVE  V) 

(VTRANS  V)) 

(GETR  HCLDWH)) 

(»  PICKING  UP  OBJECT  WHICH  WAS  HELD) 

(SETR  OBJ  (GETR  HOLDWH)) 

(SETR  HOLDWH  NIL)) 

((OR  (AND  (RFEAT  COPULA  V) 

(GETR  HOW)) 

(AND  (RFEAT  INTRANS  V) 

(OR  (NOT  (WRD  BE  V)) 

(GETR  THERE) 

(GETR  QADV))) 

(AND  (VTRANS  V) 

(OR  (GETR  OBJ) 

(EQ  (GETR  VOICE) 

(QUOTE  PASSIVE))))) 

(*  IF  MAIN  VERB  IS  INTRANSITIVE,  THERE  IS  NO 
PREDICATE  COMPLEMENT  DIRECTLY  TIED  TO  THE 
VERB,  SO  SKIP  TO  VP/NP)) 

(T  (ABORT))))) 


(VP/NP 

(PUSH  COMPL/  ( (COMPLSTART) 

(OR 

(AND  (OR  (COMPTYPE  (QUOTE  FORCOMP)) 
(COMPTYPE  (QUOTE  THATCOMP)) 

(IT?  (GETR  SUBJ))) 

(AND  (COMPTYPE  (QUOTE  THATCOMP)) 
(GETR  AGFLAG))) 

T) 

2 

(COND  ((GETR  AGFLAG) 

(SETRQ  AGFLAG  NIL))) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (BUILDQ  (NP  »))) 

(»  SEE  COMMENT  IN  ANNGRAM) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 


-233- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(PUSH  TO/  ( (TOCOMPSTART) 

(RFEAT  TOCOMP  V) 

T) 

3 

(»’  "I  PERSUADED  MAY  TO  GO”  , 

’’I  PROMISED  MARY  TO  GO”) 

(»  SEE  COMMENT  IN  ANNGRAM) 

(SETR  CHNGE 
(COND 

((IT?  (GETR  SUBJ)) 

(QUOTE  (NP  (DET) 

(PRO  SOMEONE) 

(FEATS  (NU  SG))))) 

((AND  (GETR  OBJ) 

(RFEAT  OBJLOW  V)) 

(GETR  OBJ)) 

(T  (GETR  SUBJ)))) 

(SETR  TOCOMP  (BUILDQ  (NP  ) 

(CHANGENODE  * 

(QUOTE 
»»TOCOMP»») 
(GETR  CHNGE)))) 

(COND  ((RFEAT  COPULA  V) 

(COND  ((IT?  (GETR  SUBJ)) 

(»  "IT  COST  $J400  TO  GO”) 

(SETR  SUBJ  (GE'^R  TOCOMP))) 

(T  (»  "THE  TRIP  COST  $400  TO  TAKE”) 
(ABORT)) ) ) 

(T  (SETR  OBJ  (GETR  TOCOMP)))) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 

(PUSH  COMPL/  ( (COMPLSTART) 

(AND  (OR  (COMPTYPE  (QUOTE  FORCOMP)) 

(COMPTYPE  (QUOTE  THATCOMP))) 
(RFEAT  (INDOBJ  V))) 

T) 

2 

(»  ”I  TOLD  MARY  THAT  . . . ”) 

(ADDL  VMODS  (BUILDQ  (PP  (PREP  TO) 

+ ) 

OBJ)) 

(SETR  OBJ  (BUILDQ  (NP  *))) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 


-234- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART) 

(AND  (RFEAT  INDOBJ  V) 

(GETR  OBJ) 

(INDOBJ?  (GETR  OBJ))) 

(NOT  (ROLE  SUBJ))) 

3 

(»  A NP  CAN  OCCUR  IN  THIS  POSITION  IF  THE  VERB 
CAN  TAKE  AN  INDIRECT  OBJECT.  WHAT  WE  THOUGHT 
WAS  THE  OBJECT  WAS  REALLY  THE  INDIRECT 
OBJECT,  AND  THE  NP  HERE  IS  TO  BE  THE  DIRECT 
OBJECT 

(I  GAVE  JOHN  THE  INFO  -->  I GAVE  THE  INFO  TO 
JOHN) ) 

(»  INDOBJ?  TEST  CHECKS  THAT  OBJECT  IS  HUMAN) 
(ADDL  VMODS  (BUILDQ  ( P?  (PREP  ) 

+ ) 

(COND  ((EQ  (RFEAT  INDOBJ  V) 
(QUOTE  FOR)) 
(QUOTE  FOR)) 

(T  (QUOTE  TO))) 

OBJ)) 

(SETR  OBJ  ») 

(TO  VP/VP) ) 

(JUMP  VP/VP  (T  T) 

2) 

(CAT  PARTICLE  (T  ( PARTICLEAGREE  (GETR  V))) 

3 

(»  A PARTICLE  CAN  OCCUR  AFTER  THE  OBJECT: 

"LOOK  THE  INFORMATION  UP") 

(SETR  V (VERB-PARTICLE  (GETR  V) 

•)) 

(SETR  HEAD  (GETR  V)) 

(TO  VP/VP) ) ) 


I 


(VP/V 

(PUSH  NP/  ((NPSTART) 

(AND  (GETR  THERE) 

(NULLR  SUBJ) 

(WRD  (BE  EXIST) 

V)) 

(NOT  (PRONP))) 

4 

(»  PUSHING  FOR  SUBJ  OF  THERE-INSERTED  SENTENCE) 
(COND  ((NOT  (PNCHECK  » (GETR  PNCODE))) 

(ABORT)  ) ) 

(SETR  SUBJ  ») 

(TO  VP/V) ) 


-235- 


r 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(CAT  V (T  T) 

5 

(*  THE  FIRST  VERB  CAN  BE  FOLLOWED  BY  OTHER 
VERBS  TO  FILL  OUT  THE 
PERFECT-PRCGRESSIVE-PASSIVE  AUXILIARY 
STRUCTURE.  ADVERBS  At'D  THE  SUBJECT  OF  A 
THERE-INSERTED  SENTENCE  CAN  BE  INTERSPERSED 
BETWEEN  THE  VERBS — WF  LOOP  FOR  THEM  HERE) 

(*  VERBS  AFTER  THE  MAIN  '^ERB  MUST  BE 

PARTICIPLES  OR  UNTENSED  FORMS.  IF  A PAST 
PARTICIPLE,  THE  PREVIOUS  VERB  IN  THE 
SEQUENCE  MUST  BE  EITHER  'HAVE'  ( 
ASPECT=PERFECT) 

OR  'BE'  (SENTENCE  IS  PISSIVE,  IF  POSSIBLE) 

A PRESENT  PARTICIPLE  MUST  BE  PRECEDED  BY 
'BE'  (ASPECT=PROGRESSIVE) 

OTHERWISE,  THE  CURRENT  WORD  MUST  BE  AN 
UNTENSED  VERB  AND  THE  REGISTER  V MUST  BE 
EMPTY  (BECAUSE  THE  FIRST  VERB  WAS  A MODAL) 

IF  ANY  OF  THESE  CONDITIONS  IS  SATISFIED,  WE 
REPLACE  THE  VERB  BY  THE  ROOT  FORM  OF  THE 
CURRENT  WORD . ) 

(COND  ((GETF  PASTPART) 

(COND  ((AND  (WRD  BE  V) 

(VPASSIVE  »)) 

(SETRQ  VOICE  PASSIVE)) 

( (AND  (NULLR  ASPECT) 

(WRD  HAVE  V)) 

(SETRQ  ASPECT  (PERFECT))) 

(T  (ABORT)))) 

((GETF  PRESPART) 

(COND  ((WRD  BE  V) 

(ADDR  ASPECT  (QUOTE  PROGRESSIVE))) 
((WRD  POSS-ING  TYPE)) 

(T  (ABORT)))) 

((OR  (NOT  (GETF  UNTENSED)) 

(GETR  V)) 

(ABORT) ) ) 

(SETR  V ») 

(TO  VP/V)) 


4 i 


-236- 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


n 

L! 

!i 


|i.i 

i i ; 


in 

in 


(JUMP  VP/HEAD  ((NOT  (CAT  V)) 

(GETR  SUBJ)) 

4 

(*  IF  WE  HAVE  THE  SUBJECT,  WE  CAN  ASSUME  THAT 
WE  ALSO  HAVE  THE  MAIN  VERB 

(USUALLY,  THIS  WILL  BE  TRUE  BECAUSE  WE  WOULD 
HAVE  LOOPED  THROUGH  THE  FIRST  ARC 
AS  LONG  AS  POSSIBLE) 

AND  JUMP  TO  VP/HEAD  TO  LOOK  FOR  POST-VERB 
CONSTITUENTS.  IF  THE  V REGISTER  IS  EMPTY 
(THE  FIRST  AND  ONLY  VERB  WAS  A MODAL) 

WE  ABORT  UNLESS  THE  MODAL  WAS  'DO '—WE  ALLOW 
'DO'  TO  BECOME  THE  MAIN  VERB) 

(COND  ((NULLR  V) 

(COND  ((WRD  DO  MODAL) 

(SETRQ  V DO) 

(SETR  MODAL  NIL)) 

(T  (ABORT))))) 

(SETR  HEAD  (GETR  V))) 

(CAT  ADV  (T  T) 

5 

(ADDL  VMODS  (BUILDQ  (ADV  »))) 

(TO  VP/V)1) 

(VP/VP 

(PUSH  PP/  ((PPSTART) 

T T) 

3 

(ADDL  VMODS  *) 

(TO  VP/VP)) 

(JUMP  S/VP  (T  T) 

3) 

(CAT  PREP  (T  (GETR  WHQ)) 

4 

(•  "WHO  DID  YOU  GIVE  IT  TO  ON  FRIDAY") 

(ADDL  vMODS  (BUILDQ  (PP  (PREP  ») 

+ ) 

WHQ)) 

(SETR  WHQ  NIL) 

(TO  VP/VP))) 


Report  No.  3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


(LISPXPRINT  (QUOTE  (V:  (DIGITS  TEENS  TENS  CLASSES 
/MONTH/  /WEEKDAY/)))  T) 

(DEFINEV 


(DIGITS  (123^56789)) 

(TEENS  (10  11  12  13  1^  15  16  17  18  19)) 

(TENS  (20  30  ^10  50  60  70  80  90)) 

(CLASSES  (/MONTH/  /WEEKDAY/)) 

(/MONTH/  (JANUARY  FEBRUARY  MARCH  APRIL  MAY  JUNE  JULY 

AUGUST  SEPTEMBER  OCTOBER  NOVEMBER 
DECEMBER) ) 


( 

) 


/WEEKDAY/  (MONDAY  TUESDAY  WEDNESDAY  THURSDAY  FRIDAY 

SATURDAY  SUNDAY)) 


(DECLARE:  DONTCOPY 
(FILEMAP  (NIL))) 
STOP 


-238- 


I 

4 1 


J 


APPENDIX  III 


Vocabulary  and  Syntax  Classes 

This  appendix  lists  the  351  words  which  were  in  the 
dictionary  of  the  BBN  speech  understanding  system  when  the 
examples  in  Chapter  Six  were  run.  (A  569  word  dictionary 
is  now  available,  and  a dictionary  of  more  than  1000  '.'ords 
is  being  prepared.)  After  the  listing  of  the  words  in  the 
dictionary,  they  are  broken  into  syntactic  classes,  with 
the  number  of  words  in  each  class  indicated  beside  the 
class  name.  Finally,  the  syntactic  features  are  given 
together  with  a list  of  the  words  which  carry  each 
feature.  Features  may  be  of  the  form  FEATURE,  (FEATURE), 
or  (FEATURE  VALUE)  . 


This  is  not  a listing  of  the  dictionary  as  it  appears 
to  the  system,  but  rather  a derived  cross  reference  which 
indicates  the  various  parts  of  speech  and  syntactic 
features  for  each  word. 


-239- 


appendix  III 


THE  VOCABULARY 


afford”/!???^  acoustical  acoustics  additional 

AHHFRST  airplane  ALL  ALREADY  ALSO  AH 

ANYwSIr^  “RirARE%R?rARRA5iE"srASK“Locj:nON 

PE^“BLAUSE'"’Jf™  *““CST  available  BATES 

n^iLniT  been  before  beginning  being  RTG  RTrr 

BONNIE  BOSTON  BOTH  BREAKDOWN  BUDGET  bSs  RY 

CANCEL  CAR  CARNEGIE  CENT  CHANGE  CITY 
COLARUSSO  COMPUTATIONAL  CONFERENCE  CONTINUE  COSELL 
COST  COSTING  COSTS  COUNTRY  CRAIG  CURRENT  DATE  DAVE 

DIVISION  DO  DOES  DOL^Ir 
DURING  EACH  EIGHT  EIGHTEEN  EIGHTEENTH 
EIGHTH  EIGHTY  EITHER  ELEVEN  ELEVENTH  END  ENGLAND 
ENOUGH  ESTIMATE-N  ESTIMATE-V  EVERY  EVERYONE  EXPECT 
EXPENSE  EXPENSIVE  FALL  FARE  FEBRUARY  FEE  FIFTEEN 
FIFTEENTH  FIFTH  FIFTY  FIGURE  FINAL  FiLt 

GETS  '"GETTrSJVTSE^,®^"'^^^''  '"““'’’■EENTH  FOURTH  GET 
GETS  GETTING  GIVE  GIVEN  GIVES  GIVING  GO  GOES  rriTMr 

GONE  GOT  GOTTEN  GROUP  HAD  HALF  HALVES  SLs  2J5e 

HER  HIM  HIS  HOW  HOWHANY  HOWMUCH  HUNDRED  I 

IJCAI  IN  INTERNATIONAL  IS  IT  JANUARY  JFRRY 

NINE  NINETEEN  NINETEENTH  NINETY^lS  No'^^NOT^  NOTE 
NOVEMBER  NOW  OCTOBER  OF  ON  ONE  ONLY  OR  OTH^  R 
OVERHEAD  PAJARRO0DUNES  PARTICIPANT  PAUL  PAY 

PER  person  PHONOLOGY  PITOBURGH 
PLACE  PLEASE  PLUS  PRINT  PROJECT-N  PROJECT-V  PURPDBF 
9UARTER  RFGISTRATION  REMAIN  ReT  REVIS^  r?ch 

SESS'''’sESDfN?”?jMn,®''"’'''®“"®“''  SCHEDULE  SECOND 
SEND  SENDING  oENDS  SENT  SEPTEMBER  SEVEN  SEVENTPR-m 

SEVENTEENTH  SEVENTH  SEVENTY  SHE  SINCE  S^^E 

SIXTEEN  SIXTEENTH  SIXTH  SIXTY  SO  SOCIEtJ 

SOMEONE  SPEECH  SPEND  SPENDING  SPENDS  3PLWT  SPRING 

START  STATUS  STOCKHOLM  SUMMER  SUPPOSE 

SUPPOSED  SUPPOSITION  SUR  SWEDEN  TAKE  TAKEN  TAPES 

that  the  ?hLr  ™em 

™?r?ieS“?hIRt\“^HIs"  rJS;^lN^?"THREl^?ISfS 

TOO  TOOK  TOTAL  TRAVEL  TRtp  TWELFTH  TWELVE  ?uS?rpS 
TWENTY  TWO  UNANTICIPATED  UNBUDGETEd”  oJm™^NMKEN 

WASHINGTON  wI  wLr  SEN? 

WERE  WHAT  WHEN  WHERE  WHICH  WHO  WHOM  WHOSE  uti t 
WINTER  WISCONSIN  WITH  WITHIN  WORKSHOP  YEAR  YES  YOU) 


-240- 


APPENDIX  III 


VHE  VOCABULARY 


The  syntactic  categories: 


(ADJ  23  (ACOUSTICAL  ADDITIONAL  AVAILABLE  BIG  COMPUTATIONAL 
CURRENT  EACH  ENOUGH  EXPENSIVE  FINAL  FISCAL 
INTERNATIONAL  LATE  LEFT  LONG  MANY  MISCELLANEOUS 
OTHER  UNANTICIPATED  UNBUDGETED  UNSPENT  UNTAKEN 
VARIOUS)) 

(ADV  18  (ALREADY  ALSO  ANYWHERE  EITHER  ENOUGH  HOW  LATE  LONG 
MORE  MOST  MUCH  NOW  ONLY  PLEASE  SO  THERE  TOO  YES)) 

(ART  8 (A  AN  NO  THAT  THE  THESE  THIS  THOSE)) 

(CONJ  8 (AND  BECAUSE  BOTH  IF  OR  PLUS  SINCE  SO)) 

(INTEGER  27  (EIGHT  EIGHTEEN  EIGHTY  ELEVEN  FIFTEEN  FIFTY 
FIVE  FORTY  FOUR  FOURTEEN  NINE  NINETEEN  NINETY  ONE 
SEVEN  SEVENTEEN  SEVENTY  SIX  SIXTEEN  SIXTY  TEN 
THIRTEEN  THIRTY  THREE  TWELVE  TWENTY  TWO)) 

(MODAL  5 (CAN  DID  DO  DOES  WILL)) 

(N  70  (ACOUSTICS  AIR  AIRPLANE  AMOUNT  ASSOCIATION 

ASSUMPTION  BEGINNING  BREAKDOWN  BUDGET  BUS  CAR  CENT 
CHANGE  CITY  CONFERENCE  COST  COUNTRY  DATE  DAY 
DIVISION  END  ESTIMATE-N  EXPENSE  FALL  FARE  FEE 
FIGURE  GROUP  HALF  HALVES  LINGUISTICS  LIST  MEETING 
MEMBER  MONEY  MONTH  MUCH  NEED  NOTE  OVERHEAD 
PARTICIPANT  PEOPLE  PERSON  PHONOLOGY  PLACE  PROJECT-N 
PURPOSE  QUARTER  REGISTRATION  REST  ROUNDgTRIP 

SCHEDULE  SITE  SOCIETY  SOME  SPEECH  SPRING  STATUS 
SUMMER  SUPPOSITION  THANKgYOU  TIME  TOTAL  TRAVEL  TRIP 
VISIT  WEEK  WINTER  WORKSHOP  YEAR)) 

(NEG  1 (NOT)) 

(NPR  53  (ACL  AI  AMHERST  APRIL  ARPA  ASA  AUGUST  BATES  BILL 
BONNIE  BOSTON  CALIFORNIA  CARNEGIE  COLARUSSO  COSELL 
CRAIG  DECEMBER  DENNIS  ENGLAND  FEBRUARY  IFIP  IJCAI 
JANUARY  JERRY  JOHN  JULY  JUNE  L.A.  LINDA  LONDON 
LOS^ANGELES  LYN  LYNN  MAKHOUL  MARCH  MASSACHUSETTS 
MAY  NEW0YORK  NOVEMBER  OCTOBER  PA JARRO0DUNES 
PENNSYLVANIA  PITTSBURGH  RICH  RICHARD  SANTA0BARBARA 
SEPTEMBER  ST. LOUIS  STOCKHOLM  SUR  SWEDEN  WASHINGTON 
WISCONSIN)) 

(ORD  23  (EIGHTEENTH  EIGHTH  ELEVENTH  FIFTEENTH  FIFTH  FIRST 
FOURTEENTH  FOURTH  LAST  NEXT  NINETEENTH  NINTH  SECOND 
SEVENTEENTH  SEVENTH  SIXTEENTH  SIXTH  TENTH  THIRD 
THIRTEENTH  THIRTIETH  TWELFTH  TWENTIETH)) 


-2H1- 


APPENDIX  III 


THE  VOCABULARY 


(PARTICLE  3 (IN  ON  OUT)) 

(POSS  5 (HER  HIS  MY  THEIR  l\fHOSE)) 

(PRECONJ  2 (BOTH  EITHER)) 

(PREP  IS  (about  above  AFTER  AT  BEFORE  BY  DUETTO  DURING  FOR 
IN  OF  ON  OUT  PER  SINCE  TO  WITH  WITHIN)) 

(PHO  23  (ANYONE  EVERYONE  HE  HER  HIM  I IT  ME  ONE  SHE 

S^ShL  ““T 

(QADV  2 (WHEN  WHERE)) 

(QDET  5 (HOWMANY  HOWMUCH  WHAT  WHICH  WHOSE)) 

(QUANT  (ALL  ANY  BOTH  EACH  EITHER  ENOUGH  EVERY  HOWMANY 
HOWNulH  many  more  much  other  SOME)) 

(OWORD  7 (HOW  HOWMANY  HOWMUCH  WHAT  WHICH  WHO  WHOM)) 

HUNDRED  K NO  THAN  THANKMOU  THOUSAND 

(V  85  (WFORD  AM  anticipate  ARE  ARRANGE  ASK  ASSUME  ATTEND 
BE  BEEN  BEGINNING  BEING  BUDGET  CAN  CANCEI  PHAMPP 
CONTINUE  COST  COSTING  COSTS  DID  DO  DOES  d™f  pSn 
ESTIMATE-V  EXPECT  FIGURE  GET  GETS  3et??n3  rfXr 
GIVEN  GIVES  GIVING  GO  GOES  GOING  CONE  TOT  CO?^™ 
had  has  HAVE  HAVING  IS  KNOW  LAST  LEFT  its?  mIS 

Make  makes  making  need  note  pay  prm?  pSec3  v 
remain  revise  SCHEDULE  SEND  SENDING  SEND?  wm’? 
SPEND  SPENDING  SPENDS  SPENT  START  OTPTOSE 

w33?"wE^33"Sl[£3f°  V?s"^Sa^NT^^® 


-2ii2- 


APPi^NDlX  III 


THE  VOCABULARY 


The  syntactic  features: 


(INGCOMP  (CANCEL  CONTINUE  GIVE  START  START)) 
(INTRANS  (CONTINUE  GO  GO  GO  START)) 

(PASSIVE  (CANCEL  CONTINUE  FIGURE  GET  GIVE  MAKE 
SEND  START  START  TAKE)  ) 


MAKE  SEND 


(QCOMP  (CANCEL  CONTINUE  FIGURE  GIVE  SEND  SEND  TAKE)) 
(THATCOMP  (END  FIGURE))  ^ 

(TRANS  (CANCEL  CONTINUE  END  FIGURE  GET  GIVE  MAKE  MAKE  SFND 
SEND  START  START  TAKE)) 

((ANAPHORIC)  (WHICH)) 

((DETERMINED)  (ANYONE  I IT  ME  THAT  THESE  THIS  THOSE  US  W 
WHO  WHOM  YOU)) 

((INDOBJ  FOR)  (MAKE  MAKE)) 

((NUMBER  PL)  (HALVES  PEOPLE  THEM  THESE  THEY  THOSE  US  WE)) 


THAT  THESE  THIS  THOSE 


YOU)) 


CANCEL  FIGURE  FIND 


GOTTEN 


LEFT 


((NUMBER  SG ) (ANYONE  HE  HER  HIM  I IT  ME  ONE  SHE  SOMEONE 
THAT  THIS  WHO  WHOM  WHOM)) 

((NUMBER  SG/PL)  (WHAT  WHAT  WHICH  WHO  YOU)) 

((PARTICLEOF  (LEAVF  PUT  ADD))  (IN)) 

((PARTICLEOF  (ADD  CONTINUE))  (ON)) 

((PARTICLEOF  (LEAVE  PRINT  SEND  MAKE  CANCEL  FIGURE  FIND 
GO ) ) ( OUT ) ) 

((PASTPART)  (BEEN  COST  DONE  GIVEN  GONE  GOTTEN  HAD  LEFT 
MADE  SENT  SPENT  TAKEN)) 

((PNCODE  13SG)  (WAS)) 

((PNCODE  1SG)  (AM)) 

((PNCODE  3SG)  (COST  COST  COST  COST  COSTS  DOES  DOES  GETS 
GIVES  GOES  HAS  IS  MAKES  SENDS  SPENDS  TAKES)) 
((PNCODE  ANY)  (CAN  CAN  DID)) 

((PNCODE  X13SG)  (ARE  V.  RE)) 

((PNCODE  X3SG)  (COST  DO  WILL)) 

((PRESPART)  (BEGINNING  BEING  COSTING  GETTING  GIVING  GOING 


HAVING  MAKING  SENDING  SPENDING  TAKING)) 

(^ROLE  OBJ)  (HER  HIM  ME  THEM  US  WHOM  WHOM)) 

((ROLE  SUBJ)  (HE  I SHE  WE)) 

((ROLE  SUBJ/OBJ)  (WHAT  WHICH  WHO  WHO)) 

((TNS  FUTURE)  (WILL  WILL)) 

((TNS  PAST)  (COST  DID  DID  GOT  HAD  MADE  SENT  SPENT  TOOK  WAS 
WENT  WERE)) 

((TNS  PRESENT)  (AM  ARE  CAN  CAN  COST  COST  COST  COST  COST 
COSTS  DO  DOES  DOES  GETS  GIVES  GOES  HAS  IS  MAKES 
SENDS  SPENDS  TAKES  WILL)) 

((UNTENSED)  (BE  WILL))))  ) 


-2^t3- 


T 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[1]  Aho,  Alfred  V.  anu  Ullman,  Jeffrey  D,  (1972) 

THE  THEORY  OF  PARSING,  TRANSLATION,  AND  COMPILING 
(volume  1:  Parsing) 

Prentice-Hall  Inc.,  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.,  1972 

[2]  Allen,  Jonathan  and  0 'Shaughennsy , Douglas  (197^) 

Fundamental  Frequency  Contours  of  Auxiliary  Phrases 

in  English 

Presented  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Association 
for  Computational  Linguistics,  July,  197^ 

[3]  Anonymous  (0000) 

unfortunately  some  of  the  examples  cited  are  part  of 
the  folklore  and  are  not  attributable  to  their 
originators  (Answer  to  problem  on  page  12:  ’’That 
which  is,  is.  That  which  is  not,  is  not.  Is  not 
that  so?”) 

[4]  Baker,  James  K.  (1975a) 

The  DRAGON  System  - an  Overview 

IEEE  Trans,  on  ASSP,  23:1  (Feb.  1975),  p.  2^1-29 

[5]  Baker,  James  K.  (1975b) 

Stochastic  Modeling  as  a Means  of  Automatic 
Speech  Recognition 

PhD  thesis.  Speech  and  Computer  Science, 
Carnegie-Mellon  Univ.,  April  1975 

[6]  Barnett,  Jeffrey  (1973) 

A Vocal  Data  Management  System 

IEEE  Trans,  on  Audio  and  Electroacoustics, 

AU-21:3  (June  1973)  p.  I85-I88 

[7]  Bates,  M.  (197^) 

The  Use  of  Syntax  in  a Speech  Understanding 
System 

in  Erman,  IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition, 
p.  226-233 

[8]  Bates,  M.  and  Wolf,  J.  (1975) 

Prosodies 

technical  report  in  BBN  Speech  Understanding 
System  QPR  no.  2,  BBN  Report  no  3080  (AI 
Report  no.  30),  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc, 
Cambridge,  Mass.  (May,  1975) 


i! 


73 


i 


I 


2 


L 


1 

! 


-24i|- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


r 


I 

I 

i 


L! 

f. 


i . 


[9]  Bobrow,  D.G.  (I963) 

Syntactic  Analysis  of  English  by  Computer  — 

A Survey 

Proc.  FJCC,  1963,  p.  365-387 

[10]  Bobrow,  D.G.  and  Fraser,  J.B.  (I969) 

An  Augmented  State  Transition  Network  Analysis 
Procedure 

Proc.  IJCAI,  1969,  p.  557-567 

[11]  Bobrow,  D.G.,  et.al.  (1972) 

TENEX,  a Paged  Time  Sharing  System  for  the  PDP-10 
CACM,  15:3  (March  1972)  p.  135-143 

[12]  Bruce,  Bertram  (1976) 

Pragmatics  in  Speech  Understanding 
to  appear  in  Proc.  IJCAI,  1976 

[13]  Carroll,  Lewis  (i960) 

THE  ANNOTATED  ALICE 

(Alice's  Adventures  in  Wonderland) 
with  notes  by  Martin  Gardner, 

Bramhall  House,  N.Y.  I960 

[14]  Chomsky,  Noam  (1957) 

SYNTACTIC  STRUCTURES 
Mouton,  The  Hague,  1957 

[15]  Chomsky,  Noam  (1964) 

A Transformational  Approach  to  Syntax 
in  Fodor  and  Kat?,,  The  Structure  of  Language, 
p.  211-245 

[16]  Chomsky,  Noam  (1965) 

ASPECTS  OF  THE  THEORY  OF  SYNTAX 
MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  Mass.  1965 

[17]  Coker,  C.H.  and  Umeda,  N.  (1974) 

Speech  as  an  Error  Correcting  Process 

Bell  Laboratories,  Murry  Hill,  N.J.  (Aug.  1974) 

[181  Cuadra,  Carlos  A.  (ed.)  (1968,  1974) 

ANNUAL  REVIEW  OF  INFORMATION  SCIENCE  AND 
TECHNOLOGY 

Interscience,  N.Y.  1968,  1974 

[19]  David  E.E.  and  Denes  P.B.  (1972) 

HUMAN  COMMUNICATION 
McGraw  Hill,  N.Y.  (1972) 


I 

1 


1 

I 


-245- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


[20]  Dixon,  N.R.  and  Tappert  C.C.  (1972) 

Derivation  of  Phonetic  Representation  by  Combining 
Steady-State  Transemic  Classification  in 
Automatic  Recognition  of  Speech 
in  Conference  Record,  1972  Conference  on  Speech 
Communication  and  Processing,  IEEE  catalogue  no. 

72  CH0596-7  AE 

[21 ] Earley,  J . ( 1970) 

An  Effecient  Context-Free  Parsing  Algorithm 
CACM,  13:2  (Feb  1970)  p.  9'»-102 

[22]  Flanagan  (1972) 

SPEECH  ANALYSIS,  SYNTHESIS,  AND  PERCEPTION,  2nd  ed . 
Springer-Verlag,  N.Y.  1972 

[23]  Fodor,  Jerry  A.  and  Katz,  Jerrold  J.  (19610 
THE  STRUCTURE  OF  LANGUAGE 

Prentice-Hall  Inc.,  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.  (197I1) 

[2H]  Forgie,  James  W.  (1973) 

Speech  Understanding  Systems;  Semiannual  Technical 
Report 

Lincoln  Laboratory,  Lexington,  Mass.  30  Nov.  1973 

[25]  Forgie,  James  W.  (1974a) 

Overivew  of  the  Lincoln  System 

in  Erman,IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition,  p.  27 

[26]  Forgie,  James  W.  (1974b) 

Speech  Understanding  Systems;  Semiannual  Technical 
Summary 

Lin’coln  Laboratory,  Lexington,  Mass.,  31  May  1974 

[27]  Fromkin,  V.A.  (1971) 

The  Non-Anomalous  Nature  of  Anomalous  Utterances 
Language,  47  (1971)  p.  27-52 

[28]  Fu,  K.C.  (1975) 

PATTERN  RECOGNITION 
Springer-Verlag,  N.Y.  (in  press) 

[29]  Garrett,  M.,  Bever,  T.G.,  and  Fodor,  J.A.  (1966) 

The  Active  Uses  of  Grammar  in  Speech  Perception 
Percept,  and  Psychophysics,  1 (1966)  p.  30-32 


-246- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


1 


[30]  Goldman-Eisler , F.  ( 1972) 

Pauses,  Clauses,  and  Sentences 
Language  and  Speech,  15  (1972)  p.  103-113 

[31]  Grishman,  R.,  et.al.  (1973) 

The  Linguistic  String  Parser 

AFIPS  Conf.  Proc.  vol.  U2,  1973,  p.  ^127-^13^ 

[32]  Harris,  Zellig  S.  (1962) 

STRING  ANALYSIS  OF  SENTENCE  STRUCTURE 
Mouton  and  Co.,  The  Hague,  1962 

[33]  Hopcroft,  John  E.  and  Ullman,  Jeffrey  D.  (1969) 
FORMAL  LANGUAGES  AND  THEIR  RELATION  TO  AUTOMATA 
Addison-Wesley , Reading,  Mass.  1969 

[3'1]  Hyde,  S.R.  ( 1968) 

Automatic  Speech  Recognition:  Literature  Survey  and 
Discussion 

Report  No.  ^15,  Post  Office  Research  Dept. 

Dollis  Hill,  London,  I968 
also  in  David  and  Denes,  Human  Communication 

[3f^]  Jakobson,  R.  ( 1972) 

Verbal  Communication 

Sci.  Am.  227  (1972)  p.  72-80 

[36]  Joshi,  A.K.  et  al  (1972) 

String  Adjunct  Grammars: 

I.  Local  and  Distributed  Adjunction 

II.  Eouational  Representation,  Null  Symbols, 

and  Linguistic  Relevance 
Info,  and  Control,  21  (1972),  p.  93-116  and 
p.  235-260 

[37]  Kaplan,  Ronald  M.  (1973) 

A General  Syntactic  Processor 

in  Rustii,  Natural  Language  Processing,  p.  193-2M 

[38]  Kay,  ^ar•tin  ( 1973) 

The  MIND  System 

in  Rustin,  Natural  Language  Processing,  p.  155-188 

[39]  Kay,  Martin  and  Sparck  Jones,  Karen  (1971) 

Automated  Language  Processing 

in  Cuadra,  Ann,  Review  of  Inf.  Sci.  and  Tech., 
vol . 6,  p.  141-166 


t 


-247- 


I 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


Klatt,  D.h,  and  Stevens,  K.N.  (1973) 

On  the  Automatic  Recognition  of  Speech: 
Implications  from  a Spectrogram-Reading 
Experiment 

IEEE  Trans,  on  Audio  and  Electroacoustics,  21 
(June  1973)  p.  210-217 


[41] 


Klovstad,  John  W.  (1975) 
personal  communication 


[42] 


Klovstad,  John  W.  and  Mondshein,  Lee  F.  (1974) 
The  CASPERS  Linguistic  Analysis  System 
in  Erman , IEEE  Symposii)'»'  on  Speech  Recognition, 
p.  234-240 


[43] 


[45] 


[46] 


[47] 


[48] 


Kuno,  S.  and  Oettinger,  A.  (1963) 

Multiple  Path  Syntactic  Analyzer 

Information  Processing  62,  North-Holland , Amsterdam, 
p.  306-312 


[44] 


Lea,  W.,  Medress  M. , an'  Skinner,  T.  (1972) 
Prosodic  Aids  to  Speech  Recognition: 

I.  Basic  Algorithms  and  Stress  Studies 
Univac  Report  no.  PX7940,  Oct.  1972 


Lea,  W.,  Medress,  M. , and  Skinner,  T.  (1973) 
Prosodic  Aids  to  Speech  Recognition: 

II.  Syntactic  Segmentation  and  Stressed 
Syllable  Location 

Univac  Report  no.  PX10232,  April  15,  1973 


Lea,  Wayne  A.  (1972) 

Intonational  Cues  to  the  Constituent  Structure  and 
Phonemics  of  Spoken  English 
PhD  thesis,  Purdue  Univ. , EE  dept.,  June  1972 


Lehiste,  Use  ( 1967) 

READINGS  IN  ACOUSTIC  PHONETICS 
MIT  Press,  I967 


Lehiste,  Use  ( 1970) 
SUPRASEGMENTALS 
MIT  Press.  1970 


-248- 


11 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


[51  ] 


[52] 


[53] 


[^9]  Lehiste,  Use  (19751 

Role  of  Duration  in  Disambi^^uatinp  Syntacticallv 
Ambiguous  Sentences 

Presented  at  the  89th  Meeting  of  the  Acoustical 
Society  of  America,  University  of  Texas  at 
Austin,  7-11  April,  1975 
Abstract  in  JASA  57 : supplemen t no.  1 
(Spring  1975)  S47 

[50]  Lipton,  Richard  J.  and  Snyder,  Lawrence  (197^1) 

On  the  Optimal  Parsing  of  Speech 

Research  Report  37,  (Oct.  197M  Dept,  of  Computer 
Science,  Yale  University,  New  Haven,  Conn. 

[51]  McAlli.ster,  R.  (1971) 

Prediction  Physical  Aspects  of  English  Stress 
Speech  Transmission  Laboratory,  QPR,  April  15,  1971 

[52]  Meltzer,  Bernard  and  Michie,  Donald  (eds)  (19711 

MACHINE  INTELLIGENCE  6 ^ ^ ^ vm; 

American  Elsevier,  New  York,  1971 

[53]  Miller,  Perry  (1974) 

A Locally  Organized  Parser  for  Spoken  Input 
CACM,  17:11  (Nov.  1974)  621-630 
also  PhD  thesis,  MIT  EE  Dept.,  1973 
also  Lincoln  Lab  Tech  Rept  503,  1973 

[54]  Mitre  Corp.  (1965) 

English  Preprocessor  Manual 

Mitre  Corporation  Report  No.  SR-132,  May,  1965 

[55]  Nash-Webber,  Bonnie  (1974) 

Semantic  Support  for  a Speech  Understanding  System 
IEEE  Trans,  on  ASSP,  23:1  (Feb.  1975),  p.  124-129 

[56]  Neely,  R.B.  (1973) 

On  the  use  of  Syntax  and  Semantics  in  a Speech 
Under.ntanding  System 
PhD.  thesis,  Stanford  Univ,  1973 
also  Tech  Rept.  Comp.  Sci.  Dept.  CMU,  May,.  1973 

[57]  Newell,  A.  et  al  (1973) 

SPEECH  UNDERSTANDING  SYSTEMS; 

Final  Report  of  a Study  Group 
Nor th-Holland , Amsterdam 

[58]  0 Malley,  Michael  H.  and  Herman,  Steve  J.  (1972) 

The  Acoustic  Features  of  Prosodies: 

Survey  and  Libliographv 
U.  of  Mich.  P.'ronetics  Lab,  May  31,  1972 


[54] 


[55] 


[56] 


-249- 


I 


t- 

f 


f- 


I 

i 

I 


b 

[ 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newnan  Inc. 

[59]  Paxton,  William  H.  (1974) 

A Best-First  Parser 

in  Erman , lEEC  Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition. 

p.  218-225 

[60]  Paxton,  William  H.  and  Robinson,  Ann  E.  (1973) 

A Parser  for  a Speech  Understand inp:  System 

Proc.  3rd  IJCAI,  Stanford,  August,  1973,  p.  216-222 

[61]  Patrick,  S.R.  (1965a) 

A LISP  Program  for  the  Parsing  of  Sentences  with 
Respect  to  a Transformational  Grammar 
Proc.  IFIP  Congress,  1965,  528-529 

[62]  Petrick,  S.R.  (1965b) 

A Recognition  Procedure  for  Transformational 
Grammars 

PhD  thesis,  MIT  Dept,  of  Modern  Languages,  Hay,  1965 

[63]  Petrick,  S.R.  (1966) 

A Program  for  Transformational  Syntactic  Analysis 
AFCRL-66-698  Air  Force  Cambridge  Research  Labs, 
Bedford  Mass,  Oct  I966 

[64]  Petrick,  S.R.  (1973) 

Transformational  Analysis 

in  Rustin,  Natural  Language  Processing,  p.  27-41 

[ 65 ] Poal , Ira  (1971) 

Bi-Directional  Search 

in  Meltzer  and  Miahie,  Machine  Intelligence  6 
p.  127-140 

[66]  Reddy,  D.R.,  Erman,  L.,  and  Neely,  R.B.  (1970) 

The  CMU  Speech  Recognition  Project 

IEEE  System  Sciences  and  Cybrenetics  Conf., 

Pgh.  Pa.,  1970 

[67]  Reddy,  D.R.,  Erman,  L.,  and  Neely,  R.B.  (1973a) 

A Model  and  a System  for  Machine  Recognition  of 

Speech 

IEEE  Trans,  on  Audio  and  Electro-acoustics.  ^1 
p.  229-238  ’ ■ ’ 

[58]  Reddy,  D.R.,et.al.  (1973b) 

The  HEARSAY  Speech  Understanding  System: 

An  Example  of  the  Recognition  Process 
Proc.  3rd  IJCAI,  Stanford,  August,  1973,  p.  185-193 


-250- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


[69]  Ritea,  H.B.  (1974) 

A Voice-Controlled  Data  Management  System 
in  Erman , IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition, 
p.  28-31 

[70]  Rovner,  P.,  Nash-Webber,  B. , and  Woods,  W.  (1974) 
Control  Concepts  in  a Speech  Understanding  Sy.stem 
IEEE  Trans,  on  ASSP,  32:1  (Feb.  1975),  p.  136-140 

[71]  Rovner,  P.,  et.al.  (1974) 

Where  the  Words  are: 

Lexical  Retrieval  in  a Speech  Understanding  System 
in  Erman,  IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition, 
p.  160-164 

[72]  Rustin,  Randall  (ed.)  (1973) 

NATURAL  LANGUAGE  PROCESSING 
Algorithmics  Press,  N.Y.  1973 

[73]  Sager,  Naomi  (1973) 

The  String  Parser  for  Scientific  Literature 
in  Rustin,  Natural  Language  Processing,  p.  6I-87 

[74]  Scholes,  R.J.  (1971) 

ACOUSTIC  CUES  FOR  CONSTITUENT  STRUCTURE 
Mouton  and  Co.,  The  Hague,  1971 

[75]  Schwartz,  R.  and  Makhoul,  J.  (1974) 

Where  the  Prionemes  are: 

Dealing  with  Ambiguity  in  Acoustic-Phonetic 
Recognition 

IEEE  Trans,  on  ASSP,  23:1  (Feb.  1975),  p.  50-53 

[76]  Shirai,  K.  and  Fujisawa,  H.  (1974) 

An  Algorithm  for  Spoken  Sentence  Recognition  and  its 
Application  to  the  Speech  Input-Output  System 
IEEE  Trans,  on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybrenetics, 

Sept  1974,  p.  1475.479 

[77]  Simmons,  Robert  F.  (I965) 

Answering  English  Questions  by  Computer:  a Survev 
CACM,  8:1  (Jan  1965),  p.  53-70 

[78]  Simmons,  Robert  F.  (1970) 

Natural  Language  Question-Answering  Systems:  1969 
CACM,  13:1  (Jan  1970),  p.  I5-30 


-251- 


Report  No.  3116  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

n 

Ll 

1 

1 

' 

1 

[79] 

Teitelman,  Warren  (197^) 

INTIiRLISP  Reference  Manual 

Xerox  Palo  Alto  Research  Center,  P^lo  Alto, 
California,  1974 

Li 

!l 

t 

[80] 

Thorne,  J.P.,  Bratley,  P.,  and  Dewar,  H.  (1968) 
The  Syntactic  Analysis  of  English  by  Machine 
in  Michie,  Ma<.hine  Intelligence  3,  p.  281-309 

[81] 

Turn , Rein  ( 1974) 

The  Use  of  Speech  for  Man-Computer  Communication 
The  Rand  Corp.,  R ,port  R-1386-ARPA,  Jan.  1974 

[82] 

Vicens , P . ( 1 Q69 ) 

Aspects  of  Speech  Recognition  by  Computer 
Report  CS-127,  Comp.  Sci.  Dept.,  Stanford,  1969 

[83] 

Yeager,  M.  and  O'Malley,  M.H.  (1974) 

Speech  Styles  and  Fitch  Contour  on  Negatives 
J.  Acoust.  Soc . Am.  55,  Supplement,  p.  543 

[8il] 

Wal!cer,  Donald  E.  ( 1972) 

Speech  Understanding  Research 

SRI  Annual  Technical  Report,  Oct  1971  - Oct  1972 

[85] 

Walker,  Donald  E.  (1973a) 

Speech  Understanding  Through  Syntactic  and  Semantic 
Analysis 

Proc.  3rd  IJCAI,  Stanford,  Aug.  1973,  p.  208-215 

i i 

[86] 

Walker,  Donald  E.  (1973b) 

Automated  Language  Processing 

in  Cuadra,  Annual  Review  of  Information  Science  and 
Technology,  vol  8 

also  SRI  Technical  Note  77  (June  1973) 

: 1 

[87] 

Walker,  Donald  E.  (1974) 

The  SRI  Speech  Understanding  System 
in  Erman,  IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition 
p.  32-37 

1 

i 

[88] 

Warren,  R.  and  Sherman,  G.  (1974) 

Phonemic  Restorations  Based  on  Subsequent  Context 
Percept,  and  Psychophys.,  16:1  (Aug  1974)  p.  150-157 

1 t 

[ i 
• ' 

i 

i 

-252- 

! 

1 

i 

L 

i 

^ 

I 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


1 


I 

i 

1 


I 

I 


I 

i 


I 

I 


[89]  Weinstein,  C.J.,  et.al.  (197^) 

A System  for  Acoustic  Phonetic  Analysis  of 
Continuous  Speech 

in  Erman , IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech  Recof«,nition , 

p.  89-100 

[90]  Wolf,  Jared  (1975) 

Speech  Recognition  and  Understanding 

in  Fu,  Pattern  Recognition  (in  press) 

[91]  Woods,  W.A.  (1969) 

Augmented  Transition  Networks  for  Natural  Language 
Analysis 

Rep.  CS-1,  Comp.  Lab.  Harvard,  I969 

[92]  Woods,  W.A.  (1970) 

Transition  Network  Grammars  for  Natural 
Language  Analysis 

CACM,  13:10  (Oct  1970)  p.  591-606 

[93]  Woods,  W.A.  (1973) 

An  Experimental  Parsing  System  for  Transition 
Network  Grammars 

in  Rustin,  Natural  Language  Processing,  p.  111-15^ 

[9^]  Woods,  W.A.  (1974) 

Motivation  and  Overview  of  BBN  SPEECHLIS: 

An  Experimental  Prototype  for  Speech 
Understanding  Research 

IEEE  Trans,  on  ASSP,  ?3:1  (Feb.  1975),  p.  2-10 

[95]  Woods,  W.A.  (1975) 

Syntax,  Semantics,  and  Speech 

in  Reddy,  Speech  Recognition:  Invited  Papers 
Presented  at  the  IEEE  Symposium,  Academic  Press, 
(in  press) 

also  BBN  Report  no.  3067  (AI  Report  no.  27), 

Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass., 
April,  1975 

[96]  Woods,  W.A.  et.  al.  (1974) 

Natural  Language  Communication  with  Computers, 
Final  Report,  Volume  I,  Speech  Understanding 
Research  at  BBN 

BBN  Report  2976,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc., 
Cambridge,  Mass.,  Dec.,  1974 


] 


-253- 


Report  No . 3116 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


[97]  Woods,  W.A.,  et.al.  (1972) 

The  Lunar  Sciences  Natural  Language  Information 
System:  Final  Report 

Report  No.  2378,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc., 
Cambridge,  Mass. 


[98]  Yeager,  M.  and  O'Malley,  M.H.  (197^1) 

Speech  Styles  and  Pitch  Contours  on  Negatives 
J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.,  55,  p.  5^3  (abstract) 

[99]  Zwicky,  A.M.,  et.al.  (1965) 

The  MITRE  Syntactic  Analysis  Procedure  for 
Transformational  Grammars 
FJCC,  Nov-Dec  1965,  p.  317-326 


-25^- 


