*  « L 


AD-A216  898 

i 


A  RAND  NOTE 


DTIC 

ELECTE 
JAN  19  1990 


The  RAND-ABEL®  Programming  Language: 
Reference  Manual 


Norman  2,  Shapiro,  H.  Edward  Hall, 
Robert  H.  Anderson,  Mark  LaCasse, 
Marrletta  S.  Glllogly,  Robert  Weissler 


December  1988 


PPE  ^  release 

Jfattlbuooa  Uajjmi^ 


9  0  01  18  018 


The  research  described  in  this  report:  yes  sponsored  by  che 
Director  of  Net  Assessment,  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense 
(OSD),  under  RAND’s  National  Defense  Research  Institute,  an 
OSD-supportcd  Federally  Funded  Research  and  Development  Center, 
Contract  No,  MDA903-85-C-0Q30. 


The  RAND  Publication  Series:  The  Report  is  the  principal  publication  doc¬ 
umenting  and  transmitting  RAND’s  major  research  findings  and  final  research 
results.  The  RAND  Note  reports  other  outputs  of  sponsored,  research  fw 
general  distribution.  Publications  of  The  RAND  Corporation  do  not  neces> 
sarily  reflect  the  opinions  or  policies  of  the  sponsors  of  RAND  research.. 


Published  . by  The  RAND  Corporation 
1700  Main  Street,  P.O.  Box  2138,  Santa  Monica,  CA  90406-2138' 


A  RAND  NOTE 


N-2367-1-NA 


The  RAND-ABEL*  Programming  Language: 
Reference  Manual 


Norman  Z.  Shapiro,  H.  Edward  Hall, 
Robert  H.  Anderson,  Mark  LaCasse, 
Marrietta  S.  Giliogly,  Robert  Weissler 


RAND 


December  1988 


Prepared  for 

The  Director  of  Net  Assessment, 
Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense 


AcCOSIOii  For 


NTIS  CRA&I 
OTIC  TAB 
Unannounced 
Justification 


□ 

□ 


By _ 

Distribution/ 


Availability  Codes 


Dlst 


ft' I 


A  research  publication  from 
The  RAND  Strategy  Assessment  Center 


Avail  and/or 
Special 


APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE,  DISTRIBUTION  UNLIMITED 


-  iii  - 


PREFACE 


The  RAND-ABED51  was  developed  at  The  RAND  Corporation,  originally 
for  use  in  writing  complex  decision-model  "agents"  as  part  of  a 
knowledge-based  simulation  for  automated  war  gaming.  It  was  designed 
and  implemented  initially  by  Norman  Z.  Shapiro,  H.  Edward  Hall,  and  Hark 
LaCassa.  Robert  Weiss  lor  has  made  important  subsequent  contributions. 

RAND-ABEL  is  an  evolving  operational  languago  that  is  now  being 
used  in  a  number  of  diverse  projects.  It  will  be  available  in  the 
public  domain.  This  Note,  which  updates  a  1985  publication,  documents 
tho  RAND-ABEL  language  as  it  existed  in  March  1988.  It  is  intended 
primarily  for  programmers.  It  gives  a  torse  but  complete  description  of 
tho  language.  It  assumes  the  reader  is  fluent  in  at  least  one  high- 
level  programming  language  and  is  familiar  with  the  notation  and 
concepts  used  to  describe  tho  formal  syntax  of  programming  languages. 

For  background  on  RAND-ABEL's  origin  and  underlying  principles,  see: 

Shapiro,  Norman  Z.,  H.  Edward  Hall,  Robert  H.  Anderson,  and 
Mark  LaCasse,  Tho  RAND-ABEL'*  Programming  Languago: 

History,  Rationalo,  and  Design ,  Tho  RAND  Corporation, 

R-3274-NA,  August  1985. 

Current  plans  are  to  complete  by  the  end  of  1988  the  addition  of 
several  now  RAND-ABEL  features.  Those  new  features  will  broaden  the 
scope  of  problems  addressed  by  RAND-ABEL,  and  allow  for  clearer  and  more 
efficient  modoling.  The  features  include:  sets  (with  cnumcrative 
values  as  legal  members),  type-unions  (with  dynamic  type  assignment  and 
checking) ,  data  structures  of  arbitrary  complexity,  and  lists  (including 
a  variety  of  operators  for  manipulating  them).  Readers  having  versions 
of  RAND-ABEL  produced  after  this  manual's  publication  should  check  tho 
relevant  on-line  documentation  to  see  what  additional  features  their 
software  supports  (see  file  UPDATES  in  the  main  RAND-ABEL  source 
directory) . 


lRAND-ABEL  is  a  trademark  of  The  RAND  Corporation. 


-  iv  - 


This  work  was  conducted  by  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment  Center  and 
sponsored  by  the  Director  of  Not  Assessment  in  the  Office  of  the 
Secretary  of  Defense,  undar  the  auspices  of  RAND's  National  Defense 
Research  Institute,  a  Federally  Funded  Research  and  Development  Conter 
sponsored  by  the  Office  of  the  Secretary  of  Defonse. 

Inquiries  and  comments  arc  welcome  They  may  bo  sent  directly  to 
the  authors  or  to  Dr.  Paul  K.  Davis,  Director  of  the  RAND  Strategy 
Assessment  Contor. 


-  v  - 


summary 


This  reference  manual  describes  the  RAND-ABEL  programming  language. 
In  designing  Che  RAND-ABEL  language/  wo  docormir.od  that 


•\'f}RAND-ABEL  should  be  suitable  for  large,  rule-based  systems. 

-  It  should  lend  itself  to  program  development  by 
multimcmbor  programming  tooms. 

-  It  should  bo  relatively  oasy  to  maintain. W 

'  RAND-ABEL  should  bo  suitable  for  war  gaming  and  mulciscenario 

sensitivity  analysis. 

-  Domain-substantive  RAND-ABEL  rules  should  be  readable  by 
domain  specialists  who  arc  not  RAND-ABEL  programmers,  and 
the  code  should  be  relatively  self-documenting. 

-  RAND-ABEL  should  be  efficient  in  execution.  'S 

•  ^RAND-ABEL  should  be  suitable  for  use  by  any  of  several 

governmental  gaming  and  analysis  organizations. 

-  It  should  be  transportable  to  various  computers  capable 
of  hosting  the  UNIX  operating  system. 


The  RAND-ABEL  language  was  designed  for^tho  specific  requirements 
of  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment  Center  (RSAC).  The  RSAC  has  dcveloped^a 
large  system  for  automated  and  semiautomated  war  gaming  in  which 

JR—  -  ' 

separate  models  represent  U.S.,  Soviet,  and  third-country  behavior. 
RAND-ABEL  is  a  preprocessor  for  the  C  programming  language  under  the 
UNIX  operating  system,  which  makes  RAND-ABEL  quite  portable  Gcross 
different  computers.  RAND-ABEL  is  very  fast  in  execution  time  compared 
with  other  languages  of  similar  readability.  We  estimate  that  C 
language  programs  execute  no  more  than  three  times  faster  than 
comparable  RAND-ABEL  programs.  ^ {  . 


i  /_ 


xSee  Davis  and  Winnefeld,  1983;  Davis,  Bennett,  and  Schwabe,  1988; 
Davis,  1988;  and  Davis  and  Hall,  forthcoming. 


-  Vi  - 


In  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment  System  (RSAS)  environment, 

RAND-ABEL  is  used  with  a  data  dictionary,  a  data  editor,  and  support  for 
coroutines.  This  allows  n  flexible,  hierarchical  modeling  system, 
allowing  human  teams  to  replace  some  of  the  models.  Although  designed 
for  the  RSAS,  we  anticipate  that  RAND-ABEL  will  bo  of  interest  for  ocher 
applications  on  UNIX  systems  requiring  a  highly  readable  languoge,  fast 
performance,  and  early  discovery  of  errors  (for  example,  in  the  dosign 
of  large  rulo-boscd  models  and  simulations). 

The  RAND-ABEL  language  provides  a  numbor  of  unique  capabilities, 
including  support  for  tables  within  the  source  code.  Tables  con  be  used 
as  decision  cables  or  to  govern  an  iterative  execution.  Wo  find  that 
tabla  statements  provide  a  much  more  succinct  and  readable  alternative 
to  long  sequences  of  sentence-like  rules  typical  of  rula-bascd 
languages.  When  used  as  decision  cables,  RAND-ABEL  cables  correspond 
closely  to  the  decision  crocs  analysts  and  reviewers  use  in  working  out 
a  logically  complete  argument.  RAND-ABEL  tables  havo  a  syntax  chat  is 
inherently  two  dimensional. 

RAND-ABEL  is  a  strongly  typed  language,  permitting  certain  types  of 
errors  in  complex  programs  to  bo  uncovered  early.  Many  of  RAND-ABEL's 
features  are  derived  from  constructs  in  the  C  programming  language. 


“  vii  - 


acknowledgments 


Joan  LaCasso  tested  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator's  robustness  and 
diagnostics  at  various  stages,  helped  debug  some  o£  the  code,  and  wrote 
preliminary  documentation. 

Sovoral  other  members  of  the  RAS'D  Scratogy  Assessment  Center  (RSAC) 
staff  have  made  valuable  suggestions  regarding  RAND-ABEL  syntax  and 
requisite  foaturos.  These  include  Steven  Bankas,  Arthur  Bullock,  Paul 
Davis,  William  Jones,  Christo  McHonomy,  Ross  Quinlan,  and  Horbort  Shukiar. 

We  especially  wish  to  acknowledge  strong  and  continuing  support  for 
the  development  of  ehe  RAND-ABEL  language  by  Paul  Davis  and  Herbert 
Shukiar  of  RSAC.  Paul's  stubborn  refusal  to  bo  satisfied  with  anything 
loss  than  our  best  effort  at  meeting  RSAC's  real  needs,  Herb's  effective 
and  knowledgeable  guidance,  and  choir  allocation  of  resources  to  RAND-ABEL 
when  its  future  was  uncharted  are  responsible  for  RAND-ABEL* s  success  to 
dace. 


CONTENTS 


WfFACE  . iii 

SUMMARY  . v 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  .  vii 

Section 

X.  INTRODUCTION  .  1 

Notations!  Conventions  .  5 

II.  NAMES,  IDENTIFIERS,  WHITE  SPACE,  AND  COMMENTS  .  7 

Names  and  Identifiers  . . .  7 

A  Note  on  White  Space  and  Comments  .  9 

III.  DATATYPES  .  II 

Basic  Data  Types  .  II 

Enumerated  Data  Types  . 13 

IV.  VALUES,  EXPRESSIONS,  AND  OPERATORS  .  16 

Values  and  Simple  Expressions  .  16 

Operators  .  30 

V.  DECLARATIONS  .  28 

To  Declare  a  Variable  . 28 

To  Declare  an  Array  .  29 

To  Declare  a  Function  . 30 

VI .  FUNCTIONS  .  33 

Dofining  a  Function  . . 33 

Named  Function  Calls  and  Function  Invocations  .  3A 

VII.  RAND-ABEL  STATEMENTS  .  37 

Assignment  . 37 

Conditional  Execution  . 39 

Repetitive  Execution  .  AO 

Table  Statement  .  A3 

Functions:  Invoking  and  Exiting  .  50 

Inrnt/Output  .  52 

Compound  and  Null  Statements  .  59 

VIII.  META-STATEMENTS  .  62 

, '/define  .  62 

Include  .  63 

Debugging:  Trace  and  Untracc  .  6A 


-  x  - 


IX.  DATA  DICTIONARY  .  6S 

Defining  Declarations  . 67 

Identifying  Declarations  . 72 

Informative  Declarations  . . 72 

Creating  and  Recoving  Default  Declarations  .  73 

Example  of  a  Data  Dictionary  Declaration  Section  .  75 

X.  COPRQCESSES  . 76 

Creating  a  Coproeess  . . . . .  76 

Rutting  a  Process  to  Sleep  . . . .  76 

Terminating  a  Coprocess  . . . 77 

Reserved  Coproeess  Variables:  Self  and  Parent  . .  77 

Rules  for  the  Use  of  Coprocesses  . . .  77 

XI.  TOP-LEVEL  RAND-ABEL  DECLARATION'S,  DEFINITIONS,  AND 

STATEMENTS  . 79 

APPENDIXES 

A.  ”  LOCAL  SUPPORT  ENVIRONMENT  FOR  RAND-ABEL  .  01 

B.  QUICK  REFERENCE  GUIDE  TO  THE  RAND-ABEL  LANGUAGE  .  87 


INDEX  .  105 

BIBLIOGRAPHY  .  113 


-  1  - 


I,  INTRODUCTION 


RAND-ABEL  is  a  computer  programming  language  implemented  on  the 
UNIX1  operating  system.  A  program  called  the  "RAND-ABEL  Translator" 
compiles  RAND-ABEL  statements  into  a  C  program  (Kernighan  and  Richie, 
1978),  which  is  in  turn  compiled  and  run. 

RAND-ABEL  was  developed  at  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment  Center 
(RSAC),  to  bo  used  in  the  development  of  complex  models.  Six  primary 
design  goals  guided  the  development  of  RAND-ABEL.  RAND-ABEL  is  intended 
to  be: 

•  Reasonably  self-documenting.  Tito  RAND-ABEL  code,  by  itself, 
should  convey  the  meaning  of  a  program. 

•  Understandable  by  English  spoakors  familiar  with  the  subject 
matter.  Readers  of  the  program  should  not  need  detailed 
programming  knowledge  to  comprehend  the  program. 

•  Reasonably  easy  to  learn  and  use  by  individuals  with  good 
analytic  capability  and  modest  programming  skills.  Analysts 
and  application  specialists  with  only  some  prior  experience  in 
a  high-level  programming  longuage,  such  as  FORTRAN,  should  be 
able  to  program  effectively  in  RAND-ABEL  without  extensive 
training  and  study. 

•  Rapid  in  execution.  Since  RAND-ABEL  was  specially  designed  for 
building  rule-based  programs  with  many  qualitative  variables, 
it  is  important  that  these  large  programs  be  able  to  execute 
rapidly  and  efficiently. 

•  Portable  across  different  types  of  computer  hardware. 

RAND-ABEL  and  systems  developed  in  it  should  not  be  unique  to  a 
single  computer  or  manufacturer's  computers  but  rather  be 
portable  across  a  range  of  minicomputers  and  powerful 
microcomputers. 

•  Supportive  of  specialized  needs  of  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment 
System  (RSAS),  such  as  coroutines  and  tabular  data,  and  well- 
suited  to  the  creation  of  complex  simulations  by  groups  of 
developers. 


‘UNIX  is  a  trademark  of  AT&T  Bell  Laboratories. 


-  2  - 

Although  reading  and  changing  RAND-ABEL  programs  is  relatively  easy 
and  within  the  capabilities  of  many  analysts  who  know  some  othor 
computer  language,  some  RAND-ABEL  programming,  such  as  changing  the  RSAS 
Data  Dictionary,  requires  relatively  high  levels  of  programming  skill 
and  knowledge.  RAND-ABEL  is  not  unique  in  requiring  high  skill  levels 
in  order  to  exploit  the  full  capabilities  of  the  lang*ngc;  however,  its 
friendly  readability  can  give  an  orroncous  impression  regarding 
wrienbility. 

Prior  to  the  development  of  RAND-ABEL,  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment 
Center  used  the  R0SIEs  language  (Fain  ot  al.,  1981)  for  programming  the 
Scenario  Agent.  The  ROSIE  program  representing  the  Scenario  Agent  of 
the  Nark  II  RSAC  system  is  documented  in  Schwabc  and  Jamison  (1982).  Wo 
found  that  ROSIE  was  too  slow  for  our  future  needs,  which  included 
operating  large-scale  simulations  in  a  matter  of  minutes.  Also,  wo 
sought  special  foaturos  such  as  docision  cables  chat  wore  not  likely  to 
be  available  in  ROSIE.  Therefore,  RAND-ABEL  was  developed  os  a  soparaco 
language.1  Nevertheless,  much  of  the  form  and  stylo  of  the  statements  in 
RAND-ABEL  derives  from  its  ROSIE  heritage.  Because  analysts  wore  using 
only  a  portion  of  the  features  of  ROSIE,  it  was  possible  to  design 
RAND-ABEL  as  a  simpler  language. 

The  goals  of  speed  in  execution  and  portability  were  achieved  by 
writing  a  RAND-ABEL  compiler  (called  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator)  that 
translates  RAND-ABEL  statements  into  statements  in  the  C  language. 
Because  C  and  its  host  operating  system,  UNIX,  arc  available  on  many 
different  computers,  RAND-ABEL  is  similarly  portable.  In  addition, 
efficient  C  language  compilers  arc  available,  thereby  permitting  the 
efficient  compilation  of  RAND-ABEL  statements  through  this  two-stop 
compilation  process.  As  a  result,  RAND-ABEL  can  be  used  on  any  computer 
running  the  UNIX  4.2bsd  operating  system  and  having  a  C  language 
compiler.  Moving  RAND-ABEL  to  later  versions  of  AT&T's  UNIX  system 
should  be  trivial. 

2 ROSIE  is  a  registered  trademark  of  The  RAND  Corporation. 

1The  history,  rationale,  and  design  of  RAND-ABEL  is  described  in 
Shapiro  ct  al.,  1985. 


-  3  - 


RAND-ABEL  has  proven  to  bo  exceptionally  useful  for  know ledge - 
based  modeling  and  has  been  used  to  generate  approximately  250,000  linos 
of  code  representing  modols  dealing  with  political-military 
decisionmaking,  situation  assessment,  command-control,  and  adjudication 
of  results  of  force  interactions.  It  should  bo  noted,  howovor,  that 
RAND-ABEL  is  a  procedural  language  and  does  not  have  an  "inference 
engine."  It  is  therefore  quite  suitable  for  representing  knowledge  of 
v.\o  form  If  <sicuneion>  Then  <action>,  but  it  does  not  have  the 
particular  inforoncing  capabilities  of,  for  example,  LISP,  PROLOG,  and 
ROSIE. 

RAND-ABEL  is  a  strongly  typed  language;  that  is,  tha  properties  of 
all  identifiers  arc  declared  before  they  are  used.  The  RAND-ABEL 
compiler  uses  these  properties  to  test  the  validity  of  RAND-ABEL 
statements  so  that  certain  types  of  errors  (particularly  control -related 
and  daca-relaced  errors)  may  be  caught  at  the  earliest  possible  time. 

The  RAND-ABEL  language  contains  a  number  of  novol  fcacu:  *s . 

Perhaps  the  most  novel  construction  in  RAND-ABEL  is  the  table  statement, 
described  in  detail  in  Sec.  VII  of  this  manual.  The  following  is  valid 
RAND-ABEL  code.  (In  this  and  other  examples  within  this  manual, 

RAND-ABEL  keywords  are  printed  in  boldface  to  distinguish  them  from 
identifiers,  constants,  and  comments  chosen  by  the  user  to  describe  a 
particular  application.  Comments  appear  within  square  brackets.) 

Table  Deploy 

(This  table  orders  deployment  of  forces] 


ih% 

unit-type 

unit-owner 

to-arca 

20 

% 

Troops 

Denmark 

CEur-res 

20 

% 

Troops 

Netherlands 

CEur-res 

20 

% 

Troops 

FRG 

CEur-res 

1 

0 

Troops 

UK 

CEur-res 

All  RAND-ABEL  tables  consist  of  column  headings  followed  by  rows 
containing  data.  In  this  example,  there  are  five  columns.  The  meaning 
of  the  top  row  of  the  table,  as  defined  by  the  Deploy  function,  orders 
20  percent  of  the  troops  "owned  by"  Denmark  to  deploy  to  CEur-res 


-  u  - 


(Central  European  theater  rcsorves).  The  table  calls  the  Deploy 
function  four  times  (once  for  oach  rew  of  data)  with  five  parameters 
(corresponding  to  the  ontry  in  each  column  of  the  table).  On  tho  fourth 
call,  one  division  of  British  troops  (the  "0"  moons  number,  rather  than 
percent)  are  deployed. 

The  table  statement  is  a  powerful  device,  capable  of  both  defining 
iterative  processes  and  creating  decision  eablcs.  Its  syntax  is  fully 
two  dimensional.  A  function  call  or  RAND-ABEL  statement  (possibly  a 
compound  statement)  occurring  immediately  aftor  tho  table  keyword  is 
called  once  for  each  row  in  the  table,  with  tho  table's  column  headings 
being  parsed  and  matched  with  function  parameters  or  variables  in  the 
statement.  Tho  table  statement  was  developed  because  tablos  of 
information  arc  commonly  used  by  many  types  of  planners  and  analysts. 

A  second  noteworthy  feature  of  RAND-ABED  is  "declaration  by 
example."  Ail  identifiers  are  declared  by  giving  oxamplos  of  their  use, 
usually  by  an  assignment  statement  such  as: 

Declare  message  by  example:  Let  messago  be  "I  havo  Checkmate", 
or  more  briofly 

Declare  message:  Let  message  be  "I  havo  Checkmate". 

which  declares  the  variable  "message"  to  be  a  character  string.  In  this 
manner,  the  data  type  associated  with  an  identifier  is  declared  without 
requiring  the  use  of  a  whole  vocabulary  (o.g.,  integer,  real,  character 
string,  Boolean,  process,  enumerated  variable,  array)  that  may  not  bo 
meaningful  to  analysts  who  are  not  professional  programmers. 

Furthermore,  it  is  especially  useful  in  rule-based  systems  with  many  nd 
hoc  data  types  that  otherwise  would  require  names  for  strong  typing 
(i.e.,  the  data  types  to  which  enumerated  variables  belong). 

RAND-ABEL  also  has  a  built-in  set  of  functions  to  handle  coroutines 
and  a  "data  dictionary"  to  coordinate  external  data  references  among 
program  modules  being  developed  independently.  These  language  features 
are  discussed  in  Secs.  IX  and  X  of  this  manual. 


-  s  - 


NOTATIONAL  CONVENTIONS 

This  manual  presents  the  form  and  content  of  the  RAND-ABEL 
programming  language.  In  doing  so,  it  must  use  a  set  of  stylistic 
conventions  to  represent  RAND-ABEL1 s  form.  These  conventions  must  not 
be  confused  with  the  form  of  the  RAND-ABEL  syntax  itself.  The 
conventions  used  in  this  document  are: 


1.  The  RAND-ABEL  language  relies  on  a  number  of  special  keywords, 
or  reserved  words,  which  have  a  particular  meaning.  Appendix  B 
contains  a  complete  list  of  RAND-ABEL  keywords.  As  mentioned 
earlier,  in  this  manual  RAND-ABEL  keywords  arc  printed  in 
boldface,  to  distinguish  them  from  ocher  language  constructs. 

In  a  RAND-ABEL  program,  these  keywords  must  be  written  in  lower¬ 
case,  with  the  first  lotcor  optionally  upper-ease.  Therefore, 
tho  only  two  valid  ways  of  writing  a  keyword  are: 

Declare,  declare 

This  same  case  freedom  does  not  extend  to  RAND-ABEL  identifiers 
or  character  strings.  The  variable  name  "Country"  is  distinct 
from  the  (dangerously  similar)  name  "country". 

2.  The  syntax  of  RAND-ABEL  is  sometimes  best  dascribcd  in  terms  of 
a  set  of  syntactic  categories,  which  themselves  have  a  defined 
structure.  These  syntactic  categories  are  represented  by  a 
word  or  phrase  in  italics,  like  expression.  What  is  allowed  in 
place  of  those  categories  is  described  in  various  sections  of 
this  manual.  To  find  tho  definition  of  one  of  these 
categories,  look  under  chat  category  in  the  index  to  this 
manual;  it  tolls  on  which  page  that  definition  occurs.  A  list 
of  syntactic  categories  is  given  in  Appendix  B. 

3.  To  represent  a  set  of  options,  one  of  which  must  bo  chosen,  we 
use  a  single-spaced  vertical  stack  of  options.  For  example, 

Trace  If. 

Trace  Function. 


This  notation  means  that  the  TRACE  statement  can  take  the  forms 
"Trace  If."  or  "Trace  Function.".  To  represent  a  continuation 
of  the  previous  line,  we  indent  the  second  part  of  the 
definition.  For  example, 

Declare  variable-name: 

Let  variable-name  be  expression . 


-  6  - 


Let  variable-name  be  identifier  constant. 
Let  variable-nama  be  enumerated  variable. 


indicates  that  the  phrase  "Let  variable-name  be"  is  a  required 
part  of  the  Declare  statement,  and  that  it  must  bo  followed  by 
a  representative  of  one  of  the  throe  syntactic  categories 
listed:  expression ,  identifier  constant,  or  enumerated 
variable.  One  valid  form  of  the  Declare  statement  is  therefore 

Declare  variable-name:  Let  variable-name  be  expression. 


4.  Ellipses  (i.o.,  "throe  dots"  notation)  are  used  to  represent  a 
sequence  of  zero  or  more  RAND-ABEL  constructs.  For  oxamplo, 

statement  .  .  .  statement 

means  that  zero  or  more  statements  can  occur  in  a  sequence.  By 
extension,  if  a  delimiter  is  used  after  the  first  occurrence 
and  boforo  the  second  occurrence  with  the  threo-dot  notation  in 
between,  it  moans  zero  or  more  instances  of  that  construct  can 
occur  in  sequence,  separated  from  each  othor  by  that  delimiter. 
For  example, 


nama  ,  .  .  .  ,  name 

moans  that  zero  or  more  RAND-ABEL  names  can  occur,  separated  by 
commas  (the  delimiter  here).  When  ONE  or  more  oexurrcnccs  are 
required,  the  above  notation  is  sometimes  used  for  convenience, 
with  a  no.:*  immediately  below  the  syntax  diagram  stating  that 
restriction. 

S.  The  structure  representing  a  particular  RAND-ABEL  language 
category  is  boxed  so  that  it  can  be  found  easily.  Rules 
specifying  various  restrictions  and  notes  regarding  this 
structure  then  follow.  The  particular  syntactic  category  being 
(perhaps  partially)  dofined  is  shown  within  the  top  border  of 
the  box.  For  example: 

+-statement - + 

I  I 

|  If  Boolean-expression  Then  statement  | 


If  Boolean-expression  Then  statement  Else  statement  | 


-  7  - 


II.  NAMES,  IDENTIFIERS,  WHITE  SPACE,  AND  COMMENTS 


NAMES  AND  IDENTIFIERS 

The  entities  of  a  RAND-ABEL  program  (o.g. /variables)  have  names. 
Each  is  represented  by  a  RAND-ABEL  idanttfSar,  which  is  composed  of  a 
sequence  of  one  or  more  of  the  following  characters,  without  intervening 
spaces: 

upper-  and  lower-case  lectors  (A-Z,  a-z) 
digits  (0-9) 

the  hyphen  (-)  (or  its  synonym,  the  underscore  (_)) 

the  number  or  pound  sign  (0) 

the  percent  sign  (X) 

the  plus  sign  (+) 

the  ampersand  sign  (&) 

the  slash  (/) 

the  period  (.) 

Rules: 

1.  An  identifier  cannot  end  with  a  period. 

2.  An  identifier  should  not  begin,  with  a  hyphen  (-),  its  synonym 
underscore  (_)  or  a  period  (.). 

3.  An  identifier  cannot  extend  ovor  a  line  of  text  (i.c.,  it 
cannot  contain  a  carriage-return  or  lino-food  character).  It 
also  cannot  extend  ovor  a  lino  of  text  by  being  hyphenated; 
the  hyphen  is  treated  just  as  any  other  character.  (An 
identifier  used  as  a  column  heading  in  a  tablo  statement  is  an 
exception  to  this  rule.  See  the  discussion  of  the  table 
statement  in  Sec.  VII.) 

4.  Upper-case  letters  arc  distinct  from  lower-case  letters  within 
identifiers;  for  example,  the  following  identifiers  represent 
different  data  items: 

Country,  country,  COUNTRY,  CounTry 

Within  RAND  we  recommend  a  programming  style  in  which  global 
variables  are  capitalized  and  local  variables  arc  not.  For 
instance,  "British-mood"  indicates  a  global  variable,  while 
,;british-mood"  signifies  a  local  variable.  It  should  bo  noted 
that  this  is  a  programming  convention,  not  a  requirement  of 
RAND-ABEL  syntax. 


-  8  - 


5.  A  sequence  of  characters  mooting  the  above  restrictions,  and 
intended  as  an  identifier,  must  also  not  bo  recognizable  as 
anything  else,  such  as  an  integer  or  real  number. 

There  is  no  restriction  on  length,  ocher  than  the  one-lino 
limitation  (Rule  3  above). 

K  should  bo  noted  chat  various  text  formatters  in  use  at  RAND  and 
elsewhere  interpret  a  period  (.)  in  column  1  as  a  special  formatting 
instruction,  thereby  causing  problems  if  chat  is  not  intended.  No 
RAND-ABEL  statement  begins  with  a  period,  but  one  could  inadvertently 
appear  in  column  1  if  an  identifier  begins  with  a  period  and  a  statement 
is  continued  onto  a  following  lino,  causing  an  identifier  to  appear 
first  on  the  succeeding  lino.  It  is  safest  not  to  start  any  identifier 
with  a  period. 

The  C  compiler  generates  variables  that  begin  with  initial  hyphens 
(-)  and  initial  underscores  (_).  To  preclude  the  possibility  of 
confusion,  it  is  recommended  that  RAND-ABEL  identifiers  avoid  this 
usage:  i.e.,  do  not  begin  an  identifier  with  a  hyphen  or  on  underscore. 

Examples  of  valid  RAND-ABEL  identifiers: 
country 

Order-WTVDl- force-assignment 

assumptions-re-Europc-On-Call 

84flightfl-2 

An  identifier,  having  the  form  described  above,  can  also  be  an 
"identifier  constant"  as  a  member  of  the  range  of  an  enumerated  data 
type.  Sec  Sec.  Ill  for  more  information  on  enumerated  data  types. 

In  RAND-ABEL  variables  and  functions  may  be  assigned  attributes 
such  as  ownership.  Variables  may  be  global,  owned,  or  local;  functions 
may  be  owned  or  global.  The  majority  of  variables  and  functions  in  the 
RSAS  are  owned.  Ownership  is  described  in  detail  in  Sec.  IX. 


-  9  - 


A  NOTE  ON  WHITE  SPACE  AND  COMMENTS 

RAND-AbEL  statements  and  definitions  consist  of  a  sot  of  words, 
some  of  them  reserved  keywords,  some  of  them  names  (of  variables, 
functions,  ctc.)»  and  some  of  them  unexecuted  noise  words  or  comments, 
made  up  by  the  program's  author.  The  following  rules  hold  in  writing 
RAND-ABEL  programs.  Since  RAND-ABEL  is  built  upon  the  C  language,  the  C 
conventions  for  program  form  should  be  followed  in  ease  of  uncertainty. 

Form  Rules: 


1.  One  or  more  spaces  separating  RAND-ABEL  language  constructs  is 
considered  to  be  "white  space"  that  acts  as  a  separator.  Any 
comment  enclosod  by  square  brackots  is  also  considered  to  bo 
white  space.  Examples: 

Let  (the  variable)  Country  be  US. 

Letftho  variablejCountry  be  US. 

Both  of  these  statements  are  equivalent  to  the  statement: 

Let  Country  be  US, 

White  space  occurring  within  a  RAND-ABEL  table  header  has 
special  meaning;  those  rulos  do  not  strictly  apply  within  it. 
Sco  the  subsection  "Table  Stctcment"  in  Sec.  VII  for  further 
information. 

2.  Carriogo  returns  or  line  feeds  are  equivalent  to  space 
characters  in  creating  white  space;  they  have  no  other 
syntactic  or  semantic  meaning.  Examples: 

Declare  (the  function)  plan  by  example: 

Let  (the)  plan  of  US,  (the  originator] 

(in)  1984,  [the  time  period) 
(within)  Europe  (the  locale) 
be  Dcfend-bordcrs. 


The  above  statement  is  equivalent  to  the  statement: 


Declare  plan  by  example: 

Let  plan  of  US,  1984,  Europe  be 

Def end-borders. 


Spaces  and  ocher  characters  occurring  within  a  string  enclosed 
in  double  quotes  (“)  are  taken  licornlly  and  are  not  considered 
white  space  ns  the  term  is  boing  used  in  this  discussion.  For 
further  information  about  character  strings,  see  Sec.  Ill  or 
the  syntax  of  character  strings  in  the  C  language  definition. 

Also,  spaces  are  treated  specially  within  cable  hoadors.  See 
the  discussion  of  the  table  statement  for  further  information. 


-  11  - 


III.  DATATYPES 


BASIC  DATA  TYPES 

Tho  RAND-ABEL  language  recognizes  nine  basic  data  types.  In 
addition,  the  use  of  enumerated  data  typos  and  the  ability  to  create 
pointers  and  arrays  allow  the  user  to  construct  an  arbitrary  number  of 
additional  data  types.  Every  simple  variable,  value,  and  expression  in 
the  language  is  of  one  of  these  data  types,  either  through  explicit 
declaration  or  (in  tho  ease  of  expressions)  by  derivation  from  tho  form 
of  constants  and  the  prior  declaration  of  variables  used  within  them. 

Tho  nine  basic  RAN’D-ABEL  data  types  are  shown  on  page  12. 

Integer,  real,  string,  Boolean,  process,  and  stream  data  types  are  built 
into  the  RAND-ABEL  language.  Enumerated  data  typos,  pointors,  and 
arrays  are  constructed  data  types.  Process  and  stream  data  typos  are 
usually  hard-wired  into  RSAS  underlying  code  where  casual  users  do  not 
encounter  them. 

Strong  Typing 

RAND-ABEL  is  a  "strongly  typed"  language.  That  is,  the  data 
variables,  values,  or  expressions  on  either  sida  of  an  assignment 
statement,  or  binary  operator,  or  used  in  place  of  a  function's  formal 
parameter,  must  agree.  This  strong  typing  is  possible  because  all 
identifiers  must  bo  declared  explicitly  prior  to  use,  thereby 
associating  tho  identifier  with  a  data  type  (or  in  the  caso  of  a 
structure  or  function,  a  sequence  ol  data  types).  The  RAND-ABEL 
translator  will  flag  a  statement  as  being  in  error  if  thoro  is  a 
mismatch  of  data  typos  within  the  statement.  (The  only  exception  to 
this  statement  relates  to  tho  integer  data  type  as  explained  under 
"Comparison  Operators"  in  Sec.  IV.) 


-  12  - 


Data  Typo  _ Description 


Examplc(s) 


1.  Integer1 

2.  Real5 

3.  String1 

4.  Boolean 

5.  Enumerated 

6.  Array 

7.  Pointer 

8.  Process4 

9.  Stream 


I,  -3567,  0,  +45 


"Ally 

mi 


Whole  number  with  +  or 
-  prefix  optional  (no 
intervening  space)  and  no 
decimal  point  explicitly 
given. 

Decimal  numeric  value  with 
+  or  -  prefix  optional  (no 
intervening  space)  and  with 
decimal  point  explicitly 
positioned. 

String  of  aero  or  more 
characters  delimited  by 
quotation  marks. 

A  logical  data  item 
that  can  take  on  only 
one  of  the  two  values: 

Yes,  No. 

An  explicit,  finite-ordored 
list  of  values,  consisting 
of  RAND-ABEL  identifiers. 

A  tablo  of  values  of  one  or 
more  dimensions,  indexed  by 
integors  and/or  enumerated 
data  type(s). 

A  variable  whose  value  is 
the  address  of  a  variable 
or  function. 

An  identifying  number  for  a 
RAND-ABEL  coprocoss.  Two  rosorved 
RAND-ABEL  keywords  represent  the 
current  process  (Self)  and 
its  parent  (Parent). 

Output  file  pointers.  log-file 


5.34,  -.0079,  0.0,  3. 

6.02  E  23  (=  6.02  x  10**23) 
4  E  3  (=  4000.0) 

4  E  -3  (=  .004) 


is  not  responsive. 


Yes,  No 


Red,  Blue,  Green 
USA,  France,  FRG 


‘Integers  arc  implemented  in  R/\ND-ABEL  os  the  C  language  data  type 
"long  int",  and  arc  therefore  subject  to  C  restrictions  for  that  data 
type. 

IThosc  numbers  must  have  a  decimal  point  contained  in  them,  or  use 
"F."  (exponential)  notation  to  represent  a  power  of  10.  If  they  use  "E" 
notation,  the  number  following  the  "E"  must  bo  a  whole  number.  Sinco 
use  of  the  E  operator  could  be  construed  os  part  of  an  identifier  (c.g., 
in  4E3  or  even  4.0E3),  it  must  bo  separated  from  its  arguments  by  white 
space  as  shown  in  the  examples  above.  Real  numbers  arc  implemented  in 
RAND-ABEL  as  tho  C  language  data  type  "float",  (i.e.,  single  precision 
floating-point  numbers)  end  are  therefore  subject  to  C  restrictions  for 
that  data  type. 

3A  string  may  be  up  to  256  characters  in  length  and  may  contain 
embedded  special  characters  such  as  carriage  returns  and  lino  feeds. 
These  are  specified  by  the  special  escape  sequence  backslash  (\),  such 
as  \n  for  line  feed  (see  "Format  Specification"  in  Sec.  VII).  The 
normal  syntax  and  rules  for  character  strings  in  the  C  language  apply 
for  character  strings  in  RAND-ABEL. 

‘How  coprocesses  arc  started  and  manipulated  is  described  in  Sec.  X. 


-  13  - 


In  fact,  the  strong  typing  goes  considerably  deeper  for  constructed 
data  typos.  Consider  the  following  examples: 


*  A  pointer  is  declared  to  point  to  an  array  of  real  numbers. 

The  array  has  two  indices:  an  integer  and  on  enumerated  data 
type.  All  assignments  of  this  pointer  to  other  data  constructs 
must  retain  all  of  these  characteristics:  a  two-dimensional 
array  scoring  real  numbers,  indexed  by  an  intogor  and  that  same 
enumerated  data  type,  respectively. 

*  A  function  is  declared  to  return  a  process  as  its  valuo  and 

has  throe  formal  parameters:  a  Boolean,  a  character  string,  and  a 
pointer  to  an  array  having  the  characteristics  given  in  the 
previous  example.  All  calls  on  this  function  must  meet  all 
these  dace  type  constraints,  including  the  corrocc  data  types 
on  the  indices  and  scored  values  of  the  array  pointed  to  by  the 
third  parameter. 


ENUMERATED  DATA  TYPES 

In  addition  to  the  six  built-in  data  types,  additional  data  types 
may  be  constructed  by  the  following  mechanisms:  enumerated  data  typos, 
arrays,  and  pointers  to  various  data  constructs. 

Enumerated  data  types  are  constructed  by  definitions  of  the 
following  form: 

Define  Enumeration  Type-country:  Franco,  Germany. 


This  defines  a  '•ew  data  type,  Typo-country,  that  can  cake  on 
exactly  two  values:  the  identifiers  France  and  Germany.  Those  values 
will  dc  called  "identifier  constants"  within  this  document.* 

definitions  of  enumerated  data  types  are  always  made  in  the  Data 
Dictionary  files.  (See  Sec.  IX.) 

Enumerated  types  arc  used  in  declarations*  of  the  form: 

Declare  country  by  example:  Let  country  be  Typo-country. 

Declare  Maginot-line:  Let  Maginoc-linc  be  Type-country. 


-  14  - 


These  declarations  create  the  two  distinct  variables  "country"  and 
"Maginot-linc"  that  can  each  take  on  only  the  values  listed  in  che 
definition  of  Type-country:  either  "France"  or  "Germany".  (See  Sec.  V 
for  a  description  of  declaration  options.)  Tho  phrase  by  example  is 
optional.  It  should  be  noted  that  a  declaration  is  NOT  an  assignment 
statement.  In  tho  above  exnmplos,  neithor  variable  has  any  value  yet. 

Enumerated  data  typos  are  simply  data  typos  that  take  on  an 
explicit,  finito-ordorod  list  of  values.  Tho  values  are  simple 
RAND-ABEL  identifiers.  In  the  above  example,  because  Franco  is  listed 
first,  it  can  bo  said  to  be  "less  than"  Germany.  This  property  can  be 
used  effectively  in  conditional  statements  when  a  specific  portion  of 
the  list  of  tho  enumerated  data  typo  needs  to  be  referenced. 

The  only  way  an  identifier  constant  is  established  is  by  the 
declaration  of  an  enumerated  data  type,  including  that  identifier 
constant  in  its  range  (i.c.,  as  part  of  tho  specified  lisc).  Tho  set  of 
valid  identifier  constants  is  given  in  a  definition  of  the  form: 

Define  Enumeration  Typo-color:  Red,  Green,  Blue. 

In  this  example,  "Typo-color"  is  a  new  data  type,  and  "Red,"  "Green," 
and  "Blue"  arc  the  (only)  identifier  constants  in  its  range. 

There  is  one  reserved  enumerated  value  that  is  a  member  of  all 
enumerated  data  types,  even  chough  it  is  not  explicitly  listed.  It  is 
tho  value  Unspecified.  Any  enumerated  data  type  can  cake  on  this  value. 
The  value  can  be  explicitly  given  to  an  enumerated  type  through  uso  of 
the  keyword  Unspecified  (or  its  synonym  "--")  used  in  place  of  an 

declarations  using  enumerated  data  typos  are  usually  made  in  the 
Data  Dictionary  files,  unless  the  variable  is  a  local  variable.  For 
local  variables,  declarations  arc  made  in  the  relevant  RAND-ABEL  source 
code. 


-  15  - 


Identifier  constant  in  an  assignment  statement.  Koto  that  it  is  KOI 
automatically  assigned  by  RANQ-ABEL,  however.  Enumerated  types  have  KQ 
value  before  one  is  explicitly  assigned  (i.e.,  Unspecified  is  KOT  the 
default  value  for  enumerated  types). 

All  enumerated  data  types  are  distinct  from  ono  another. 

Therefore,  the  value  of  one  enumerated  data  type  cannot  be  assigned  to 
another  (because  this  violates  the  "strict  type  checking"  rule  that  only 
the  same  data  types  may  be  compared,  assigned,  or  operated  on  together). 
Furthermore,  all  identifier  constants  are  distinct  from  each  othor.  For 
example  consider  the  two  declarations: 

Define  Enumeration  Type-color:  Red,  Green,  Blue. 

Declare  color:  Let  color  be  Typo-color. 

Define  Enumeration  Type-mood:  Angry,  Slue,  Querulous. 

Declare  mood:  Let  mood  be  Typo-mood. 

If  the  two  assignment  statements  wore  executed: 

Let  color  be  Blue, 

Let  mood  be  Blue. 

chon  not  only  is  it  KOT  true  that  the  value  of  color  equals  the  value  of 
mood  (because  the  two  Bluos  ore  distinct  identifier  constants),  BUT  IN 
ADDITION,  THEY  CAN'T  EVEN  BE  COMPARED,  ns  in: 

If  color  =  mood  Then  . . . 

because,  as  stated  earlier,  color  and  mood  are  two  distinct  data  types, 
and  therefore  it  is  illegal  to  compare  them. 


-  16  - 


IV.  VALUES,  EXPRESSIONS,  AND  OPERATORS 


VALUES  AND  SIMPLE  EXPRESSIONS 

In  a  programming  language,  c.  value  Is  informally  considered  Co  be  a 
simple  term  chnc  can  be  evaluated  co  yield  oiehcc  a  storage  location  or 
the  contents  of  that  location.  If  it  appears  on  the  lofthand  side  or'  on 
assignment  statement,  its  evaluation  yields  a  location  at  which  the 
assignment  is  to  be  made;  if  it  appears  on  the  righthond  side  of  an 
assignment,  or  elsewhere,  its  evaluation  yields  a  data  value.  The 
description  of  the  syntax  of  RAND-ABKL  relies  on  the  following 
categories  of  values  and  expressions,  which  arc  explained  in  this 
section: 


Name 

Informal  meaning 

array-access 

Access  to  the  value  stored  at  one 
of  the  colls  in  an  array. 

lvaluo 

A  reference  that  can  appear  on  the 
lofthand  side  of  an  assignment 
statement;  that  is,  it  designates 
a  storage  location  at  which  a  value 
is  located. 

unitparam 

A  value  cnat  is  assigned  to  a  parameter 
in  a  function  call.  A  simple  value, 
or  else  a  parenthesized  expression. 

simple-expr 

Any  of  the  above  values,  or  in 
addition  a  pointer  to  a  function. 

expression 

A  value,  or  a  sequence  of  values 
related  by  operators. 

The  following  tables  give  more  precise  definitions  for  these  terms, 
nested  to  show  the  manner  in  which  some  definitions  include  others.  For 
example,  since  the  boxes  defining  unitparam  and  lvalue  are  contained 
within  the  box  labeled  simple-expr ,  all  of  the  varieties  of  unitparam 


-  17  - 


and  lvalue  (defined  by  the  contents  of  thoir  boxes)  can  be  used  wherever 
a  siaplo-oxpr  is  needed.  Similarly,  the  various  typos  of  array-access 
can  be  used  whenever  an  lvalue  is  needed. 


^-expression - + 

I  I 

|  Report  from  function- invocation  \ 

I  I 

I  Evaluate  unitparam  .  .  .  unitpacaa  \ 

j  Evaluate  with  format-spec  unitparan  .  .  .  unitparan  \ 

I  I 

|  unary-operator  expression  \ 

j  expression  binary-operator  expression  j 

I  I 

|  siaplo-oxpr  j 

I  I 

+ . + 


Rules: 

1.  The  Report  from  function-invocation  expression  calls  the  named 
function  and  returns  as  its  value  the  value  returned  by  the 
function.  Exomplo: 

Let  message  be  Report  from  plan  of  US,  1984,  Europe. 

2.  The  Evaluate  expression  allows  the  RAND-ABEL  writer  to  generate 
a  string  of  characters  (usable  in  further  RAND-ABEL  processing) 
from  a  sequcnco  of  arguments,  each  of  them  a  unitparam.  This 
string  may  then  bo  used  in  subsequent  RAND-ABEL  statements,  for 
example,  as  an  argument  to  a  function  that  requires  a  string  as 
one  of  its  parameters.  The  format-spec  is  a  string  of 
characters  that  can  control  the  formatting  of  the  resultant 
string;  the  syntax  and  options  available  for  a  format-spec  arc 
described  in  the  subsection  "Input/Output"  in  See.  VII. 

Example: 


Perform  date-logging 

using  Evaluate  "The  ally  of"  country  "is" 
(ally  of  country) 


as  message. 


-  18  - 


In  the  above  oxomple,  note  that  blanks  arc  not  requirod  within 
cho  character  strings  to  prevent  the  value  of  country  from 
running  into  "The  ally  of"  and  "is";  this  is  because  the 
default  print  format  for  an  enumerated  variable  contains  prefix 
and  postfix  blanks.  (Soo  "Default  Output  Formats"  within  the 
"INPUT/OUTPUT"  subsection  of  Sec.  VII.) 


A  siapio-axpr  is  defined  by  the  following  nosted  set  of  tables. 
The  nesting  again  shows  that  certain  terms  are  contained  within  cho 
definitions  of  others.  For  example,  a  unit  pawn  is  one  valid  type  of 
siapla-axpr,  so  any  of  cho  methods  of  constructing  a  unitparam  can  be 
used  wherever  a  siapla-oxpr  is  needed. 


-  19  - 


■b-simpla-oxpr - + 

I  I 

|  Function  (unecion-nama  I 

I  1 

|  +-uniCparaa - +  | 


Yes 

No 

onumo.accd-valuo 
numeric- litoral 
quoted-scring 
variablo-namo 
Unspecified 

(  expression  ) 


4 - -  ~  - - - - 

+-lvnluQ - - - + 


variable-noma 

Value  of  variabla-nnma 
Value  of  arrny-accoss 

Pointer  to  variablo-namo 
Pointer  to  Attribute  array-namo 

+-array-accass - + 

l  I 

\  array-namo  of  simplo-axpr  ,  ...  | 

!  in  ,  and  | 

I  by  ,  and  | 


,  simplo-axpr 
,  and 


Rules: 

1.  The  Function  keyword,  followed  by  the  name  of  a  RAND-ABEL 
function  returns  as  its  value  the  address  of  that  named 
function.  This  returned  value  is  of  type  pointer.  Note: 
Function  is  on  alios  for  Pointer  to. 


-  20  - 


2.  is  a  synonym  for  the  keyword  Unspecified,  which  is  used  in 
conjunction  with  enumerated  data  types.  (See  the  discussion  of 
enumerated  data  types  in  Sec.  III.)  In  tables,  the  "don't 
care"  symbol  "**"  is  also  available. 

3.  Tim  variablo-nnno  or  array-access  following  the  keywords  Value 
of1  must  be  of  data  typo  pointer.  Tito  clause  returns  the 
contents  of  the  storage  location  pointed  at  by  that  pointer. 

A.  The  Pointer  to*  clause  yields  a  value  of  typo  pointer.  For 
example: 

Pointer  to  Attribute  country-array 
roturns  a  pointer  to  the  array  named  "country-array". 


OPERATORS 

The  operators  used  to  construct  expressions  con  be  categorized  os 
numeric  operators,  comparison  operators  (providing  equality  and 
inequality  tests),  logical  operators  (yielding  a  Yes  or  No  rosult),  and 
string  operators.  Each  of  these  categories  is  described  below.  In  each 
cose,  we  list  a  "preferred  form"  for  roprosonting  these  operators  to 
create  os  much  consistency  and  roadability  in  RAND-ABEL  programs  as 
possible. 


'The  Value  of  keyword  is  identical  in  moaning  to  Occupant  of  used 
in  earlier  vorsions  of  RAND-ABEL.  Both  keywords  ore  currently 
supported,  but  Occupant  of  is  being  phased  out. 

*Thc  Pointer  to  keyword  has  the  same  meaning  as  Address  of  in 
earlier  versions.  Both  keywords  arc  currently  supported,  but  Address 
of  is  being  phased  out. 


-  21  - 


Numeric  Operators 


Mathematical 
Notation 
(Preferred  Form) 

"English- like" 
Notation 

Meaning 

plus 

Addition 

- 

minus 

Subtraction 

* 

times 

Multiplication 

/ 

divided  by 

Division 

modulo 

Modulo 

negative 

unary  sign 

When  on  integer  variable  accepts  che  resulc  of  the  division  of  two 
integers,  che  result  will  bo  truncated  coward  zero  to  an  integer. 
Examples: 


73/10  evaluates  to  the  value  7 
73/10  evaluates  to  tho  value  -7 


Division  by  zero  results  in  a  run-time  error. 

Those  operators  can  yield  floating  point  exceptions  (i.c.,  error 
conditions)  in  a  machino-dopendont  mannor. 

The  modulo  operator  returns  the  remainder  upon  division.  Example: 

23  modulo  8 


is  7.  The  modulo  operator  requires  integer  arguments. 

Only  integer  and  real  data  types  may  be  used  as  arguments  for  these 
operators.  (Exception:  the  more  stringent  requirement  for  modulo 


-  22  - 


Comparison  Operators 

Comparison  operators  arc  categorized  below  as  "equality”  or 
"inequality"  typo  operators.  All  comparison  operators  yield  a  value 
that  is  Boolean.  It  is  permissible  that  one  of  the  operands  to  these 
comparison  oporators  have  on  ambiguous  data  type,  IF  that  ambiguity  can 
bo  resolved  by  the  requirement  of  consistency  with  the  other  operand's 
data  type.  RAND-ABEL  does  not,  howevor,  accept  two  operands  of 
ambiguous  data  typo  and  attempt  to  resolve  the  mutual  ambiguity. 
(Ambiguity  can  ariso  from  a  value  like  the  identifier  constant  Blue,  if 
more  chan  one  enumerated  data  typo  contains  this  constant  in  its  range.) 

Equality  Tests 


Mathematical 

Notation 

"English- like" 

(Preferred  Form) 

Notation 

Meaning 

- 

is 

Is  equal  to 

(s  not 
are  not 

Is  not  equal  to 

Both  arguments  to  these  operators  must  have  tho  same  typo  (with  one 
exception:  an  integer  appearing  where  a  real  is  needed  is  interpreted  as 
a  real  for  that  purpose) . 

Two  operands  from  any  one  data  typo  may  be  compared  using  those 
equality  operators. 

Two  strings  arc  equal  only  if  they  have  the  same  length  (including 
possibly  zero  length--!. e. ,  tho  null  string)  and,  at  each  respective 
character  position,  their  corresponding  characters  arc  equal. 

(Upper-case  and  lower-case  versions  of  a  character  are  treated  as 
different  characters  in  this  test.) 


-  23  - 


Two  enumerated  values  are  equal  only  if  they  are  represented  by  cho 
same  identifier  constant  and  are  in  cite  range  of  the  same  (enumerated) 
data  type.  It  is  an  error  if  two  enumerated  values  ore  compared  that 
belong  to  different  (enumerated)  data  types.  The  reserved  word 
Unspecified  is  tho  only  exception  to  this  rule:  Any  enumeration  may  be 
compared  with  Unspecified. 


Inequality  Tests 


Mathematical 
Notation 
(Preferred  Form) 

"English- like" 
Notation 

Moaning 

>= 

is  at  least 

Greater  chan  or 

equal  to 

<= 

Is  at  most 

Less  than  or 

equal  to 

> 

is  greater  than 

Greater  chan 

< 

is  less  than 

Loss  than 

Both  arguments  to  those  operators  must  have  the  same  typo  (with  ono 
exception:  an  integer  appearing  whore  a  real  is  needed  is  interpreted  ns 
a  real  for  that  purpose) . 

Tho  following  data  typos  may  bo  compared  using  cho  inequality 
operators:  integer,  real,  string,  enumerated.  Note  that  Boolonn  data 
typos  CjVIHOT  bo  compared  using  those  operators. 

Integer  and  real  data  types  compare  according  to  their  values. 

Strings  a  and  b  compare  ns  follows.  (Note:  in  comparing  two 
individual  characters,  the  collating  sequence  for  the  individual 
computor  on  which  RAND-ABEL  resides  is  used;  this  test  is  therefore 
implementation  dependent.) 


-  24  - 


a.  If  a  And  b  Are  both  the  null  string,  they  Are 

b.  If  one  of  then  is  che  null  string  And  the  other  is  utu, 
the  null  string  is  less  then  the  other. 

c.  Otherwise,  compare  strings  a  And  b  character  by  ch&r&ei&v;  H 
each  of  these  comparisons  is  Yes  (i.e.,  true)  er  ?U«i  vise  rh* 
end  of  one  of  che  strings  is  reached,  but  the  cth*>,  scr.-ng 
still  has  additional  characters,  then  the  shorter  s*vlt£  ir 
less  chan  the  longer  one. 

d.  v  Setwise,  compare  strings  a  and  b  character  by  ch&. 

i 'ch  of  chose  comparisons  is  Yes  (i.e.,  true'  up  to  c«  acter 
position  k,  but  is  No  (i.e.,  false)  at  charatet  position  k+1, 
then  if  string  a's  character  in  position  k+l  is  less  than,  or 
greater  than,  string  b's  character  in  position  k+l,  then  string 
a  is  less  than,  or  greater  than  (respectively)  string  b. 


Knuiatkaied  values  compare  with  the  inequality  operators  according 
to  che  following  rules: 


a.  If  either  or  both  values  is  Unspecified  (or  its  synonym  "--"), 
then  che  result  is  No. 

b.  If  the  values  belong  to  different  (enumerated)  data  types,  it 
is  an  error. 

c.  Identifier  constant  Cl  is  less  chan  identifier  constant  C2  if 
and  only  if  Cl  appears  before  C2  in  the  sequence  of  identifiers 
defining  the  range  of  their  common  (enumerated)  data  type.  If 
they  are  che  same  identifier  within  this  data  type,  they  are 
equal.  For  example,  for  che  enumerated  data  type  defined  as 

Define  Enumeration  Type-color:  Red,  Green,  Blue,  Purple. 

comparisons  will  show 

Red  <  Green 
Purple  >  Blue 
Green  *  Green 


Logical  Operators 


Logical  operators  arc  used  to  combine  two  different  Boolean 
operands--that  is,  ones  taking  the  values  Yas  or  No--to  yield  a  new 
Boolean  value.  For  example,  a  RAND-ABEL  program  might  require  the 
logic: 


-  25  - 


If  Agreement  and  (Red-violatcs  or  Blue-violatos) 
Then  Let  Agreement  be  No. 


The  assignment  of  the  value  No  to  the  variable  "agreement"  will 
take  place  only  if  the  existing  value  of  agreement  is  Yes,  and  in 
addition  either  "Rad-violaees"  or  "Blue-violatos"  (or  bosh)  is  Yes. 


"English- like" 

Mathematical  Notation 

Notation  (Preferred  Form)  Meaning 


& 

and 

Logical  "and" 

1 

or 

Logical  "or" 

not 

(unary)  Logical 

«•  it 

The  meanings  of  those  operators  ore  given  by  the  following  toble: 


I  II  I  I 

a  |  b  ||  not  o  |  a  and  b  |  a  or  b 

- + . ++ . + . + . 

yes  |  yes  | |  no  |  yes  |  yes 

yes  j  no  j |  no  j  no  j  yes 

no  j  yes  j  j  yes  |  no  j  yes 

no  j  no  j  j  yes  j  no  j  no 


The  logical  operators  roquire  Boolean  values  (that  is,  Yes  or  No) 
as  their  arguments  and  return  a  Boolean  value  as  the  result. 

Remember,  Boolean  variables  are  not  enumerations.  That  is,  they 
cannot  be  Unspecified.  In  tables,  can  be  used  to  denote  "don't 

care"  for  Booleans  as  for  any  other  data  type.  However,  or 
"Unspecified"  con  be  used  only  for  enumerated  data  types. 


-  26  - 


String  Operator 

There  is  one  string  operator,  which  performs  concatenation  of  two 
strings  to  yield  one  resulting  string.  Concatenation  may  bo  used,  for 
example,  in  the  creation  of  tailored  messages,  ns  in: 


Let  outstr  be  "WARNING:  "  $  message  $  "  PLEASE  RESPOND  (Y/N): 

In  this  example,  the  string  variable  "outstr"  receives  a  string 
containing  a  variable  "message",  along  with  standard  prefix  and  suffix 
strings. 


Mathematical 
Notation 
(Preferred  Form) 

"English-liko" 

Notation 

Moaning 

$ 

concatenated  with 

Concatenation 

Only  string  values  may  be  concatenated  togothcr.  The  result  is  a 
string  consisting  of  the  first  string  followed  by  the  second  string. 
Example: 

"This  is  "  $  "a  test." 

"This  is  "$"a  test." 

"This  is  "  concatenated  with  "a  tost." 


"This  is  a  test." 


are  all  equivalent  to: 


-  27  - 


There  is  a  way  to  include  values  of  other  data  typos  by  converting 
thea  to  strings  with  the  Evaluate  statement  as  described  under  "Values 
and  Simple  Expressions"  at  the  beginning  of  this  seceion. 

Order  of  Precedence 

Whenever  there  is  any  ambiguity  or  uncertainty,  parentheses  should 
bn  used  to  specify  the  order  in  which  operators  should  be  applied  within 
an  expression.  When  more  than  one  operator  is  used  in  a  sequence, 
precedence  relations  aro  used  to  resolve  the  order.  Operators  with 
higher  precedence  arc  performed  first;  within  the  same  precedence, 
operators  are  performed  within  the  expression  from  left  to  right. 
Operators  of  cho  same  precedence  associate  to  the  loft.  For  example, 

(a  &  b  &  c)  «  ((a  t  b)  &  c). 

The  following  table  gives  the  precedence  of  RAND-ABEL  operators. 
Operators  in  cho  same  row  aro  of  equal  precedence. 


Highest  precedence: 


~  (not) 

-  (unary) 

*  / 

modulo 

<  > 

<=  >: 

Z  mZ 

&  (and) 

1  (°r) 

Lowest  precedence: 


-  25  - 


V.  DECLARATIONS 


TO  DECLARE  A  VARIABLE 

^-declaration - - - - + 

1  ,  I 

|  Declare  variable-naze:  | 

I  Declare  variable-naze  by  example:1  j 


Let  variable-nano  be  expression. 

Let  variable-nano  be  identifier  constant. 
Let  variable-nane  be  enumerated  variable. 


Rules: 


1.  The  type  of  the  variable  becomes  the  same  os  the  type  of  the 
expression. 

2.  The  type  of  the  expression  must  be  uniquoly  determinable  at  the 
time  this  statement  is  encountered.  (For  example,  if  the  some 
identifier  constant  appears  in  tho  range  of  several  enumerated 
data  types,  chon  it  may  not  be  used  in  on  assignment  uithin  o 
declaration.)  If  Typo-color  includes  Red,  Blue,  and  Green, 
while  Type-mood  consists  of  Happy,  Blue,  and  Quorulous,  then 

Declare  tint:  Let  tint  be  Green. 

declares  the  variable  "tint"  to  be  of  type  "Type-color",  but 

Declare  tint:  Let  tint  be  Blue. 

is  ambiguous  and  therefore  an  error. 

Examples: 

Declare  troop-strength: 

Let  troop-strength  be  10000. 

Declare  force-ratio: 

Let  force-ratio  be  5.8. 

Declare  mossngo: 

Let  message  be  "Help!". 


lThe  phrase  by  example  is  optional  in  a  declaration. 


-  29  - 


Declare  agreement; 

Let  agreement  be  Yes. 

Declare  current-force-tesc  by  example; 

L«t  eurrene-force-tese  be  Function  calel. 

Declare  alliance-member: 

Let  alliance-member  bt  Franct. 


The  spatial  alignment  of  these  statements  is  not  important; 
they  are  aligned  by  variable  name  here  merely  for  ease  in 
reading. 


TO  DECLARE  AN  ARRAY 

The  syntax  diagram  below  shows  how  to  declare  a  RAND-ABRL  array. 


^-declaration - - - — - - + 

I  I 

|  Declare  array- name:  | 

j  Declare  array-naze  by  example:  I 

i  Let  array-naze  of  siaple-expr  ,  .  .  .  j 

l  Let  array-naze  In  siaple-expr  ,  and  j 

j  Let  array-naze  by  siaple-expr  ,  and  j 

I  I 

|  .  .  .  ,  siaple-expr  \ 

j  .  .  .  ,  and  siaple-expr  | 

I  I 

|  be  expression.  | 


Rules: 


1.  There  must  bo  at  least  one  siaplo-axpr. 

2.  The  type  of  the  array  is  the  typo  of  the  expression ,  which  must 
bo  determinable  at  the  time  this  statement  is  encountered. 

3.  Arrays  con  have  one  or  more  indices.  (Arrays  with  zero  indices 
are  equivalent  to  variables.) 


-  30  - 


A.  The  sSppla-exprs  that  are  used  to  index  the  array  muse  be 
either  of  type  integer  or  enumerated. 

5.  If  any  index  is  of  eypo  integer,  ie  is  designated  by  a  single 
integer  constant,  n,  in  place  of  sipple-expv.  This  index  can 
then  take  on  the  integral  values  0  .  .  .  n  .  Note  that  index  n 
means  chat  the  index  can  eake  on  n+1  distinct  values. 


Note  that  a  one-dimensional  array,  indexed  by  the  smallest  positive 
integers  (1,  2,  3,  .  .  .  )  is  ofeen  called  a  "vector"  in  some  oeher 
computer  languages.  A  two-dimensional  RAND-ABEL  array  indexed  by  the 
smallest  positive  integers  corresponds  with  the  term  "matrix"  in  other 
computer  languages. 

Example  of  an  array  with  integer  indices  and  enumerated  value: 


Declare  chessboard-square: 

Let  chessboard-square  of  1 ,  and  7  be 
Typo-ehoss-piece. 


where  Typa-che.ss-piece  has  been  previously  defined  as 

Define  Enumeration  chessboard-square: 

king,  queen,  knight,  bishop,  rook,  pawn,  empty. 


TO  DECLARE  A  FUNCTION 

Every  function  that  is  used  must  bo  declared.  Every  function 
either  always  returns  a  value,  or  never  returns  a  value.  The  function 
declaration  indicates  which  of  these  cases  applies,  as  well  ns  the  data 
typo  of  elm  arguments  and  value  returned,  if  any. 


-  31  - 


•^•declaration . - - - + 

I  I 

|  Declare  func-narte:  | 

j  Declare  func-nama  by  example;  j 

I  I 

S  Let  expression  be  Report  from  named- function-call .  j 

\  Perform  naned- function-call .  i 

I  I 

+ . - . + 


Rules: 


1.  The  first  form  must  be  used  when  cho  function  returns  a  value. 
The  typo  of  the  axprcssion  must  be  the  same  as  the  type  of 
value  returned  by  the  function.  The  typo  of  the  expression 
must  bo  determinable  at  cho  time  this  statement  is  encountered. 

2.  The  second  form  is  used  only  when  a  function  does  not  return  a 
value, 

3.  A  function  must  bo  doclarcd  before  it  is  defined,  and  it  must 
bo  defined  before  any  \so.  See  Sec.  VI  for  a  description  of 
function  definitions. 


A  named- function-call  is  one  that  explicitly  uses  the  function  namo 
to  invoke  it,  not  a  poincor  to  choc  function.  See  Sec.  VI  for  a 
description  of  named- function-call . 


Examples: 


Declare  select-country: 

Let  France  be  Report  from 

select-country  using  alliance  as  range, 

and  strength  as  criterion. 

Declare  force-calc  by  example: 

Let  5.0  be  Report  from  force-calc  using 

France  as  country. 

Declare  validity-check: 

Perform  validity-check. 


-  32  - 


Functions  may  have  parameters  associated  with  choir  use.  F.ach  such 
parameter  is  given  a  keyword  chat  is  used  in  the  declaration  of  the 
function,  in  its  definition,  and  in  all  calls  to  tho  function.  The 
pairing  of  this  keyword  with  a  value  means  chat  arguments  to  a  function 
can  bo  listed  in  any  order.  Within  the  definition  itself  the  keyword 
behaves  like  a  local  variable  chat  has  been  assigned  the  associated 
argument  value  from  eho  function's  coll.  Such  keywords  muss  bo  unique 
for  a  given  function,  but  can  be  (and  frequently  are)  reused  for  ocher 
functions. 


-  33  - 


VI.  FUNCTIONS 


DEFINING  A  FUNCTION 

RAND-ABEL  hns  two  typon  of  functions:  those  that  return  a  value 
(always),  and  those  that  do  not  (over).  The  function  declaration 
indicates  which.  A  declaration  is  any  of  the  declaration  types 
(starting  with  the  keyword  Declare)  listed  in  Sec.  V  titled 
Doc’ jrations.  It  is  an  essential  part  of  the  function  definition. 

+- function-definition - + 

I  I 

|  Define  named- function-call  :  declaration  ...  I 

j  declaration  j 

{  stataaant  ...  j 

j  stataaant  | 

I  I 

|  End.  | 

I  I 

+ . - . + 


If  the  function  returns  a  value,  at  least  one  of  the  statements 
within  the  function  definition  must  be  "Exit  Reporting  sinple-oxpr" . 
Moreover,  one  such  statement  must  bo  reached  during  execution  of  the 
function,  otherwise  a  run-time  error  will  occur. 

If  the  function  does  not  return  a  value,  it  is  exited  either  by  on 
explicit  Exit  statement  or  else  by  "falling  through"  the  statements  to 
the  End  statement. 

Local  variables  may  bo  declared  after  the  definition  heading  of  a 
function  and  before  any  executable  code.  These,  along  with  any  function 
parameters  (which  are  NOT  declared  in  the  function  heading),  may  be 
referenced  like  any  other  variable  throughout  the  function  body  but  are 
not  accessible  to  any  other  functions  called  from  within  that  function. 

A  function  may  call  itself,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  but  is  given 
a  new  set  of  local  variables  each  time. 


-  34  - 


Note  that  local  variables  may  also  bo  declared  after  the  opening 
brace  and  before  any  executable  code  within  an  internal  program  block. 
Such  a  variable  will  bo  valid  until  the  corresponding  closing  brace  is 
reached. 


Examples: 


Define  Timed-wakoup: 

If  Time  is  at  least  Timo-to-wako  of  (Command-id  of  self) 
Then 

{  Record  "Starting  move  at  maximum  time  =  "  Time 
Exit  Reporting  Yes. 

) 

Else  Exit  Reporting  No. 

End. 


NAMED  FUNCTION  CALLS  AND  FUNCTION  INVOCATIONS 

A  naaad- function-call  is  an  invocation  of  a  function  in  which  the 
name  of  the  function  appears  explicitly.  It  is  required,  for  example, 
as  part  of  the  declaration  of  chat  function  (which  announced  tho  names 
and  data  types  of  its  arguments,  and  the  typo  of  its  returned  valuo,  if 
any). 


^r-naaed- function-call - + 

I  I 

|  func-naao  I 

I  I 

|  func-ntimo  using  expression  as  param-noao  ,  .  .  .  I 

j  for  ,  and  | 


+ 


,  expression  as  param-naao 
,  and  for 


-  35  - 


Rules: 


1.  In  a  named- function-call ,  cho  func-namo  must  be  given 
explicitly;  a  pointer  to  a  function  is  not  allowed  in  this 
ease. 

2.  When  used  os  on  example  in  a  function  declaration,  the  typos  of 
each  expression  must  bo  determinable  at  the  time  the 
declaration  is  encountered. 


By  contrast,  a  function-invocation  has  the  same  form  as  a  named- 
function-call  ,  but  it  con  have  a  pointer  to  a  function  in  place  of  an 
explicit  function  name: 


+- function- invocation - + 

I  I 

|  named- function-call  | 

I  I 

|  func-ptr  | 

I  I 

|  func-ptr  using  expression  as  param-name  ,  ...  j 


for  ,  and 

expression  as  paraa-namo 


When  a  function  does  not  return  a  value,  it  is  invoked  through  the 
statement 


Perform  function-invocation . 


When  a  function  returns  a  value,  it  is  accessed  via  the  expression 


Report  from  function-invocation 


-  36  - 


Examples: 


Let  message  be  Report  from  noxc-movo 

using  pawn  as  whites- lnst-movc-picco. 

If  Report  from  Timcd-wakcup 

using  now  as  time  is  Yes 
Then  Perform  Work. 

Else  Perform  Error-handler. 


If  {unction-CQ-parHorm  is  a  function  pointer,  then 


Let  function-co-porform  be  the  Function  noxc-movo. 
Perform  funccion-to-pcrform  using  pawn  as 
whitos-lasc-movc-pioco. 


-  37  - 


VII.  RAND-ABEL  STATEMENTS 


Statements  arc  used  in  RAND-ABEL  to  define  the  operation  of  a 
function.  (Several  statements  can  also  occur  at  the  "top  level"  in 
RAND-ABEL  outside  of  a  function  definition  to  sot  the  global  context  in 
which  other  statements  will  operate:  namely,  declarations,  the  Data 
Dictionary  (see  See.  IN),  and  the  Trace  ond  Untrace  statements. 

The  various  forms  of  RAND-ABEL  statements  are  described  below 
within  the  following  categories: 

Assignment 

Conditional  Execution 

Repetitive  Execution 

Table  Statement 

Functions:  Invoking  and  Exiting 

Input/Output 

Compound  and  Null  Statements 

All  RAND-ABEL  statements  begin  with  a  keyword  that  uniquely 
identifies  the  statement  typo.  In  general  all  RAND-ABEL  statements  ond 
with  a  period;  the  only  exceptions  are  compound,  conditional,  and 
repetitive  statements  whoso  form  has  an  embedded  statenant  as  the  last 
entity  within  the  form;  In  those  eases,  the  period  ending  the  embedded 
statoaont  becomes  the  statement  delimiter. 

ASSIGNMENT 

Assignment  statements  are  used  to  store  a  value  into  the  location 
specified  by  either  a  variable  or  an  array  element. 


-  38 


+-scatenanc - + 

I  I 

|  Let  lvalue  be  expression .  1 

I  Let  pointer  be  expression .  | 


j  Increase  lvalue  by  expression.  j 
|  Decrease  lvalue  by  expression .  j 
|  Multiply  lvalue  by  expression.  j 
j  Divide  lvalue  by  expression .  j 

I  I 
+ . + 


Rule:  The  (data)  typos  of  tho  terms  on  cho  "lofthand  side"  and 
"righchnnd  side"  of  the  assignment  statement  must  match. 

Two  exceptions: 

1.  If  a  real  number  is  required  by  tho  lofthand  side,  then  if  the 
value  of  cho  expression  is  integer  chat  integer  is  coerced  into 
a  real  for  cho  purpose  of  this  statement. 

2  Tho  righchand  side  can  be  an  enumerated  identifier  constant  of 
ambiguous  data  type  if  that  ambiguity  is  rosolvcd  by  tho  typo 
of  the  lvalue  or  pointer  on  tho  lofthand  side.  For  oxamplo, 
the  "Blue"  in 

Let  color  be  Blue. 

could  be  "mood"  except  that  the  typo  associated  with  "color" 
unambiguously  identifies  cho  type  of  Blue  ns  a  member  of  the 
enumerated  data  typo  "Typo-color". 


Tho  terms  lvalue  and  expression  arc  defined  in  Sec.  IV.  In 
general,  nn  lvalue  is  what  can  normally  occur  on  the  lofthand  side  of  an 
assignment  statement:  namely,  a  term  giving  tho  address  of  a  named 
storage  location,  not  a  pure  value. 


-  39  - 


Examples : 


Let  gross-profit  be  gross-sales  -  cost-of-salos. 

Let  forco-racio  be  Report  from  force-calc 

using  France  as  side-1  and  Yugoslavia  as  sido-2. 

Decrease  forco-racio  by  2.S  . 


CONDITIONAL  EXECUTION 

Conditional  execution  is  controlled  by  the  If  statement.  It  allows 
certain  RAND-ABEL  statements  to  bn  executed  only  if  certain  conditions 
are  true.,  or  arc  false. 


+-statnmcnt - + 

I  I 

|  If  Boolean-expression  Then  statement  | 

I  I 

|  If  Boolean-expression  Then  statement  Else  statement  | 


Rules 


1.  The  Boolean-expression  is  any  expression  chat  evaluates  to  type 
Boolean  (i.o.,  chat  cakes  on  values  Yes  and  No). 

2.  If  the  Boolean-expression  evaluates  to  Yes,  then  the  first 
statement  is  executed. 

3.  If  the  Boolean-expression  evaluates  to  No  and  the  Else  clause 
is  present,  the  statement  following  the  Else  keyword  is 
executed.  If  the  Boolean-expression  is  No  and  no  Else  clause 
is  present,  no  action  is  taken. 

A.  As  is  normal  programming  language  practice,  if  conditional 
statements  are  nested,  an  Else  clause  is  attached  to  the 
nearest  previous  If  clause  chat  docs  not  yet  have  an  Else 
clause  attached.  (If  one  needs  a  null  If  or  Else  clause  to  keep 
the  logic  straight,  use  the  RAND-ABEL  null  statement, 
consisting  of  just  a  period,  as  in: 

If  king-unchecked  Then.  Else  Perform  Think. 

or 

If  king-in-check  Then  Perform  Think.  Else. 


-  AO  - 


This  statement  is  not  delimited  by  a  period  Cor  reasons  given  at 
the  beginning  oC  this  section:  the  last  statement  embedded  within  the  If 
statement  will  contain  its  own  delimiter. 

Either  statement  can  of  course  bo  a  compound  statement  (that  is, 
one  or  more  declarations  and  statements  contained  within  "("  and 
braces)  thereby  allowing  any  needed  r  nplexity  in  logic  to  be  stated  in 
the  Then  or  Else  clauses. 


Example: 

If  usor-rosponso  is  "Y"  or  user-response  is  'Y.’.S" 

Then 

(  Perform  Recalculation. 

Print  "Calculation  Completed.  More?  (Y/N):  " 

Let  user-response  be  Report  from  query-user. 

) 

Else  If  user-response  is  "N"  or  user-response  is  "NO" 

Then 

{  Print  "No  action  taken.  More?  CY/N) :  " 

Let  user-response  be  Report  from  query-user. 

) 

Else  If  user-response  is  "?" 

Then  Perform  Help-function. 

Else 

(  Print  "Your  response  not  understood." 

Perform  Help-function. 

) 

Note  that  If  .  .  .  Then  rules  can  also  be  formed  using  the  table 
statement. 


REPETITIVE  EXECUTION 

The  RAND-ABEL  For  and  While  statements  allow  one  or  more  statements 
to  be  executed  repetitively- -that  is,  zero  or  more  times,  depending  on 
the  controlling  variable  or  expression. 


-  41  - 


+-stacopicnt - + 

I  I 

|  For  variable  :  statement  j 

I  I 

|  While  Boolean-expression  :  statement  | 

I  I 

4- . + 


Rules: 


1.  In  the  firse  form,  chc  variable  muse  be  of  enumerated  data 
typo.  Tito  statement  is  executed  once  for  each  identifier 
constant  in  the  range  of  chc  variable,  with  the  variable  bound 
in  turn  to  each  identifier  constant,  in  the  order  in  which  tho 
identifier  constants  are  declared  as  being  the  range  of  the 
enumerated  data  typo. 

Examples: 


Define  Enumeration  Type-alliance:  Franco,  Germany,  Spain. 
Declare  alliance-members: 

Let  alliance-members  be  Type-alliance. 

For  aiiinnco-members  Perform  Force-cnlc. 

For  each-country  (US  or  UK  or  FRG  or  Belgium): 

< 

Let  Membership  of  each-country  bo  Nato. 

Let  Side  of  each-councry  be  Blue. 

) 


Noco  chat  chc  use  of  the  or  Keyword  hero  limits  the  execution 
of  this  for  statement  to  only  the  listed  identifier  constants 
within  the  enumerated  data  typo  "oach-country".  All  other 
elements  of  chat  data  type  arc  excluded  by  use  of  cha  or 
construct. 

2.  In  tho  While  form,  the  Boolean-expression  is  evaluated;  if  its 
value  is  Yes,  then  the  statement  is  executed;  if  the  value  is 
No,  no  further  action  is  taken.  If  the  statement  executes, 
the  Boolean-expression  is  then  re-evaluated,  and  if  Yes  the 
statement  is  re-oxccuted.  This  sequence  continues  until  the 
value  of  the  Boolean-expression  becomes  No. 


Example: 

Let  k  be  3. 

While  k>0:  { 

Print  resultsfilo  k. 

Decrease  k  by  l. 

) 

loads  to  the  following  records  sent  to  the  rosultsfilo: 


3 

2 

1 

The  following  two  RAND-ABEL  statements  are  used  within  a  repetitive 
execution  to  change  ehe  flow  of  the  program's  logic: 


+-sc/itcxenc - - - + 

I  I 

|  Continue  | 

I  I 

|  Break.  I 

I  I 

+ . + 


Rules: 


1.  Within  a  repetitive  execution,  the  Continue  statement  acts  as 
completion  of  the  current  repetition,  and  control  passes  to  the 
next  repetition  of  the  loop,  if  any. 

2.  The  Break  statement  acts  os  completion  of  all  repetitions  of 
the  loop,  and  control  passes  to  the  statement  following  the 
repetitive  statement. 

3.  In  both  cases,  control  returns  to  the  most  immediately 
inclusive  Table,  For,  or  While  statement.  That  is,  to  the 
innermost  repetitive  statement  if  they  arc  nested. 

Examples: 


Let  k  be  3. 

While  k>0: 

{ 

If  k=l  Then  Break. 

Else  {Print  resultsfilo  k.  Decrease  k  by  1.) 

) 


-  A3  - 


loads  co  the  sequence  of  records  in  rosultsfile: 

3 

a 

9» 

Let  k  be  3. 

While  k>0: 

( 

If  k=2  Then  Continue. 

Else  (Print  resulesfile  k.  Decrease  k  by  l.) 

) 

loads  co  one  printed  record  in  resulesfile: 

3 

followed  by  an  infinite  loop,  with  k«2  and  the  While  statement 
repetitively  executing  with  no  effects. 

Repetitive  execution  can  also  be  achieved  by  cho  RAND-ABEL  cable 
statement.  This  special  RAND-ABEL  statement  is  described  in  the 
following  section. 

TABLE  STATEMENT 

The  Table  statement  is  the  most  powerful  statement  in  RAND-ABEL. 

It  can  bo  used  co  call  a  function  repeatedly,  with  different  arguments, 

or  a  decision  cable.  It  is  an  example  of  a  statement  with  a  two- 
* 

dimensional  syntax;  the  spatial  layout  of  the  cable-header  is  important 
in  determining  cho  meaning  of  cho  cable  statement. 

+-stateaanc - + 

I  I 

|  Table  func-ntma  I 

|  Table  conpound-scotcacnt  I 

Decision  Table  I 


tahjo-hcodcr. 
table-body . 


-  A  A  - 


Function  Table 

Basically,  che  table  statement  allows  the  named  function  or  tho 
compound -scaCcaenc  to  be  executed  once  for  each  row  of  data  in  tho  Cable- 
body.  If  the  table  statement  contains  a  named  function,  then  the 
columns  of  data  within  the  cable-body  are  matched  up  with  the  function's 
formal  parameters  by  means  of  che  column  headings  within  the  Cable - 
header;  if  tho  table  statement  contains  a  cozpound-scacenonc ,  then  the 
local  variables  declared  within  the  highest  level  block  of  chat  compound 
statement  arc  matched  with  the  columns  of  data  within  tho  cable-body  by 
means  of  che  column  headings  within  the  Cablo-heador. 

Tho  concept  and  power  of  the  table  statement  is  best  illustrated  by 
example.  The  following  RASD-ABKh  cable  uses  che  function  "Deploy".  It 
is  similar  to  the  deployment  table  shown  in  Sec.  I  of  this  manual  but, 
here,  is  expanded  to  seven  columns. 

Table  Deploy 

(This  table  initiates  che  deployment  of  assigned  forces  to  tho 


Central  European  cheater) 

qty  a-\  unit -type 

unit-owner 

in-area 

assigned-to 

co-orea 

100 

%  Troops 

Denmark 

CEur 

All 

CEur-1 

100 

%  Troops 

Netherlands 

CEur 

All 

CEur-2 

25 

%  Troops 

FRG 

CEur 

All 

CEur-3 

100 

X  Troops 

UK 

CEur 

All 

CEur-A 

100 

m  Troops 

Belgium 

CEur 

All 

CEur-5 

This  tabic  statement  causes  che  function  Deploy  to  be  called  five 
times,  once  for  each  row  of  the  cable-body .  (Each  row  has  seven 
entries,  che  last  two  being  "folded  over"  so  that  they  appear  underneath 
che  columns  labeled  "unit-owner"  and  "assigned-to". ) 


-  A  5  - 


Decision  Table 

Another  important  use  of  a  table  statement  is  as  a  docision  table. 
It  is  required  by  the  syntax  of  the  table  statement  that  slash  (/)  bo 
used  within  the  table  header  of  a  docision  table  to  separate  the 
conditions  from  the  action  to  bo  token.  For  example,  consider  the 
following  decision  table  (a  macro  table)  used  as  the  "Then"  clause  of  o 
conditional  statement: 


If  Current-situation  is  Eur-demo-tac-nuc 


("Eur-dcrao-cac-nuc"  represents  the  situation  that  one  or  both 
superpowers  have  used  some  tactical  nuclear  weapons  in  Europe, 
but  have  done  so  primarily  for  demonstrative  purposes  —  i. o. , 
to  coerce  the  opponent  into  terminating! 

Then 

( 

Table 

{ 

Declare  Basic-status#:  Let  Basic-status#  be  Basic-status. 

Declare  Risks#:  Let  Risks#  be  Risks. 

Declare  Escalation-guidance#:  Let  Escalation-guidance# 
be  Escalation-guidance. 


) 


} 


If  (Basic-status#  is  Basic-status  or 
Basic-status#  is  Unspecified)  and 
(Risks#  is  Risks  or  Risks#  is  Unspecified) 

Then 

( 

Let  Escalation-guidance  be  Escalation-guidance#. 
Break. 

) 


Basic-status# 


Escalation 
Risks#  /  guidance# 


goals -met 
progress -good 
progress -marginal 
progress -good 
progress-marginal 


low 

low 

marginal 

marginal 


Eur-term 

Eur-demo-tac-nuc 

Eur-gen-tac-nuc 

Eur-demo-tac-nuc 

Eur-gen-tac-nuc 


Note  the  use  of  the  Break,  statement  within  the  compound  statement 


-  46  - 


defining  the  operation  of  the  Table  statement,  in  order  to  stop  the 
iteration  through  the  table  rows  as  soon  as  a  satisfactory  condition  is 
found. 

Using  tho  Decision  Table  construct,  the  macro  table  above  reducos 
to  the  succinct: 


Decision  Table 

Basic-status 

Risks  / 

Escalation- 

guidance 

goals-mot 

— - - -  J 

Eur-corm 

progress -good 

low 

Eur-dcmo-tac-nuc 

progress-marginal 

low 

Eur-gcn-tnc-nuc 

progress -good 

marginal 

Eur-dcmo-tac-nuc 

progress -marginal 

marginal 

Eur-gon-tnc-nuc 

Tho  rules  for  constructing  a  Cabla-hondov  arc  as  follows: 


1.  A  tabla-hendar  consists  of  one  or  more  "text  island,"  each 
representing  the  name  of  a  parameter  (if  a  function  is  named) 
or  tho  name  of  a  local  variable  (if  a  compound- staCaaont  is 
used)  or  tho  name  of  a  local  or  global  variable  (in  decision 
cables) . 

2.  A  "text  island"  is  a  two-dimensional  grouping  of  characters 
such  that  each  character  of  the  group  is  directly  adjacent 
(cither  horizontally  or  vortically-not  diagonally)  to  some 
ocher  character  in  the  group. 

3.  Spaces  ore  not  permitted  within  on  identifier  used  as  a  column 
header,  so  indications  of  ownership  in  such  on  identifier 
(c.g.,  "Red's  Prcsumed-opponenc")  are  not  permitted. 

4.  Newlines  ore  checked  for  in  tables  at  the  end  of  each  logical 
row.  There  may  bo  extra  newlines  interspersed  (allowing  the 
multilinc-per-row  table  as  shown),  but  the  newline  break  at  the 
end  of  the  row  must  occur.  This  is  quite  useful  for  finding 
errors  involving  table  rows  with  missing  or  extra  items. 

5.  In  addition  to  normal  "white  space"  characters  (space,  tab, 
newline)  and  comments  (enclosed  in  square  brackets),  the  equal 
sign  (=)  is  also  considered  "white  space"  in  determining  the 
"text  islands"  composing  a  table  header. 


-  47  - 


6.  If  ft  "connector  chnractor"  is  useful  in  retaining  the  integrity 
of  a  "text  island,"  the  following  characters  may  bo  used.  Thoy 
provide  the  adjacency  required  by  rule  ill  Gbovo,  but  are  not 
themselves  considered  part  of  tho  identifier  reprosonted  by  the 
text  island: 


I  C  ) 

(These  connector  characters  also  "count"  in  determining  tho 
ordering  of  eho  text  islands;  that  is,  their  position  ns  part 
of  a  column  heading  helps  determine  tho  relative  position  of 
that  coli«mn  heading.) 


The  following  example  is  a  table  header  contrived  to  demonstrate 
most  of  the  above  rules: 


Table  Ked-to-3rd-countries 


country- 

( 

affected 

France 

GDR 


cooper- 
side  at  ion 


White  Uncooperative 
Red  Combat-basing 


=ou  ropcan  -==swa  -== 
=involvcmcnt=involvcmcnt= 

Disengaged  Disengaged 

On-Call  Noncombatant 


This  example  colls  the  function  "Red~to-3rd-countrios"  twico  (once 
for  each  row  of  the  table).  Tho  data  in  the  table  body  are  matched  to 
five  function  parameters  having  the  following  names:  country-affected, 
side,  cooperation,  curopean-involvement,  swa- involvement.  Those 
function  parameters  need  not  have  been  declared  or  defined  in  that 
order. 

Tho  use  of  the  vertical  bar  (|)  as  a  conmctor  character  keeping  a 
"text  island"  together  within  a  tablo-haadar  allows  text  headings  to  be 
associated  with  individual  columns  of  a  table  in  a  very  flexible  way. 
Consider  the  following  valid  RAND-ABEL  table  statement: 


Table  Initialize 


Country *set  (is  it  a  country?,  not  a  region/sea) 

I 

|  Superpower *set  (is  it  one?] 

I  I 

|  ]  Player-status  (should  the  model  simulate  it?] 

|  j  |  Decision 

j  |  j  Borders -WP  -delay 

Mil  (l-366]| 

Mil  Assertive-country  (always  fight  if  attacked)  (  days]) 


1 

1 

1 

1  1 

Nuclear-capable 

Men 

Orion 

Red- 

Blue- 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1  1 

1 

ber 

ca 

Tempo %  i 

pres 

pres 

1 

Region 

1 

1 

1 

1  1 

|  Leader 

ship  tion 

merit 

ence 

ence 

1 

xsrssxrzszssxs 

3 

3 

3 

X  X 

s  xnsinRzrssss 

X3SK 

SX3BS 

x asss:  -*rn 

=33X3 

88IB3 

sr* 

Afghanistan 

Y 

N 

Y 

Y  N* 

N  USSR 

-- 

Red 

Captive 

Major 

None 

i 

Arabian-Sea 

N 

N 

N 

N  N 

N  — 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

-- 

Australia 

Y 

N 

Y 

N  N 

N  UK 

AN2S 

Blue 

Moderate 

None 

Token 

2 

Austria 

Y 

N 

Y 

Y  N 

N  — 

-- 

White 

Reluctant  None 

None 

4 

Belgium 

Y 

N 

Y 

N  N 

N  US 

NATO 

Blue 

Reliable 

None 

TripW 

1 

At  times,  more  table  columns  are  needed  to  describe  a  situation 
than  will  fit  in  the  width  of  a  single  page.  To  allow  wide  tables  to  be 
described,  the  following  additional  format  rules  for  a  table-header 
allow  a  "wrap-around”  header  to  be  created,  in  which  one  or  morn 
additional  rows  of  "text  islands"  provide  the  needed  continuation. 

Rules  for  constructing  a  multirow  table-header: 


(1)  Table  headers  may  be  continued  onto  succeeding  lines,  if  all 
characters  in  text  islands  composing  one  row  of  the  header  are 
below  all  characters  composing  the  previous  row  of  the  header. 

(2)  Within  a  row  of  text  islands,  column  headers  are  read  left- 
to-right. 

(Note  that  by  this  set  of  rules,  the  table  above  qualifies  as 
having  only  a  single  row  of  column  headers,  since  the  vertical  bars  (|) 
associating  text  strings  with  columns  keep  the  "text  islands"  defining 
each  column  header  from  being  separated  vertically.)  In  table 
construction,  the  keyword  --  can  be  used  as  a  synonym  for  Unspecified, 
and  **  is  used  to  indicate  "don't  care". 


Multircw  cable  headers  ore  best  understood  by  example.  Consider 
the  following  table  statement,  with  six  formal  parameters: 

Table  Function-of-6 

First-  Second-  Third-  Fourch- 

paromccer  parameter  parameter  parameter 


Fifth-  Sixth- 

parameter  parameter 


12.5 

Green 

512 

"String  T 

10002 

(A  +  10) 

9.0 

Blue 

221 

"String  2 

9943 

(A  -  24) 

Note  that  a  blank  line  has  boon  used  to  clearly  separate  the  first 
and  second  rows  of  the  table  header;  this  is  not  strictly  necessary, 
but  aids  in  keeping  the  text  islands  separate.  Note  also  that  the 
entries  in  the  table  body  "wrap  around"  in  the  same  manner.  In  fact, 
the  entries  arc  merely  read  line-ac-a-timc  and  matched  to  elm 
corresponding  headers  in  the  table  header.  Although  thoy  have  been 
staggered  so  that  they  may  be  plocod  beneath  their  corresponding  header, 
this  is  again  not  strictly  necessary;  it  simply  aids  in  human 
comprehension  of  the  table. 

The  rules  for  a  table-body  are  simple:  A  tabla-body  consists  of  a 
sequence  of  entries,  each  of  which  is  a  unitparam.  (Sec  the  section 
Values  and  Expressions  for  the  formal  definition  of  a  unitparam.  It  is 
essentially  a  primitive  value  or  a  parenthesized  expression.)  The 
following  additional  rule  holds  for  a  table-body : 


Rules: 


1.  If  the  tabla-haadcr  describes  n  formal  parameters  or  variable- 
names,  then  the  number  of  entries  in  the  table  body  must  be  a 
multiple  of  n.  (Normally  the  entries  are  placed  in  columns 
beneath  the  column  headers  within  the  table-hander ,  so  that 
each  row  of  the  table  naturally  consists  of  n  entries,  except 
when  wide  rows  "spill  over"  onto  the  next  line  as  in  the 
example  above.) 


-  so  - 


2.  Each  entry  must  match  in  typo  with  the  corresponding  formal 
parameter  or  local  variable.  For  example,  "Second-parameter" 
is  an  enumerated  data  typo  of  typo  Typo-color. 

The  tabla-hcadar  and  tablo-hody  are  each  followed  by  a  period  (.) 
os  delimiter. 

The  RAND-ABEL  Translator  that  interprets  a  table  merely  counts  n 
entries  in  the  table  body,  then  either  calls  the  named  function  or 
executes  the  compound- statement ,  then  acquires  the  next  n  entries  (until 
a  is  encountered  instead).  Thore  is  no  moaning  attached  to  the 
grouping  of  table  entries  into  rows. 

FUNCTIONS:  INVOKING  AND  EXITING 

The  declaration  of  functions  was  covered  in  Sec.  V  (Declarations). 
Section  VI  is  devoted  to  the  definition  of  functions  and  presented  the 
syntax  for  a  function- invocation .  Functions  returning  a  value  arc 
invoked  by  the  expression  Report  from  function- invocation .  Functions 
not  returning  a  value  (presumably  exocutod  for  their  sido-of focts)  are 
invoked  by  a  Perform  statement,  discussed  hero  as  part  of  a  description 
of  all  RAND-ABEL  statements.  We  also  present  hero  the  Exit  statement 
that  allows  completion  of  a  function's  execution,  whether  or  not  it 
returns  a  value. 

•^-statement - + 


I 

|  Perform  f unction- invocation .  | 


Rule:  This  statement  is  used  to  execute  a  function  that  does  not 

return  a  value.  (That  is,  it  is  executed  for  the  side-effects 
it  causes.) 


In  some  programming  languages,  a  function  not  returning  a  value  is 
called  a  subroutine.  In  RAND-ABEL,  all  program  logic  is  contained  in 
functions;  a  function  not  returning  a  value  is  equivalent  to  a 
subroutine. 


-  51  - 


Example: 

Perform  fovce-racio-calc 

using  France  as  side-1, 
Yugoslavia  as  sidc-2, 
and  3.5  E  4  as  multiplier. 


Within  the  statements  defining  a  function,  the  following  statement 
is  used  to  return  program  control  to  the  place  from  which  the  function 
was  invoked: 


+-scatoaont - 

I 

|  Exit. 

I  Exit  Reporting  sintpla-oxpr. 

I 

+ . - . 


4 


4 


Rules: 


1.  If  the  Reporting  clause  is  omitted,  then  the  function  does  not 
return  a  value. 

2.  If  the  Reporting  clause  is  used,  then  the  function  always 
returns  a  value  of  the  samo  data  typo  as  the  simpla-cxpr. 

3.  If  there  is  more  than  one  Exit  Reporting  statement  within  the 
definition  of  a  function,  then  oach  of  those  statements  must 
contain  an  expression  of  the  same  data  type.  Howavor,  the 
simpla-axpr  may  be  of  ambiguous  data  type  if  that  ambiguity  is 
resolved  by  the  function's  dccloration. 


If  a  function  does  not  return  a  value,  it  is  always  invoked  by  the 
RAND-ABEL  statement: 


Perform  function- invocation . 


If  a  function  returns  a  value,  then  it  is  always  invoked  using  the 
expression: 


Report  from  function- invocation 


-  52  - 


Even  functions  reporting  a  value  may  have  sido-offc&ts  and  in  that  sense 
are  not  equivalent  to  a  mathematical  function.  If  a  function  is 
declared  as  returning  a  value,  then  it  must  return  n  value  using  the 
Reporting  clause.  If  it  is  not  declared  as  returning  any  value,  it 
must  return  using  Exit. 

Examples: 

Exit. 

Exit  Reporting  ‘'Success. " 

Exit  Reporting  ({multiplier  *  force-ratio)/2.0) . 


INPUT/OUTPUT 
Print,  Log  Statements 

The  following  I/O  statements  are  used  to  communicate  with  the 
"outside  world"--chac  is,  the  computer  system  environment  within  which 
RAND-ABEL  is  running. 

Before  the  formal  syntax  description,  some  general  terms  should  be 
understood  by  the  render.  RAND-ABEL  operates  within  a  C  language 
environment,  within  the  UNIX  operating  system.  The  general 
characteristics  of  C  and  UNIX  are  assumed.  The  UNIX  system  has  the 
(very  powerful)  concepts  of  "standard  Input"  (which  is  often  a 
terminal's  keyboard)  and  "standard  output"  (which  is  often  a  terminal's 
display  screen).  Input  and  output  consist  of  a  stream  of  characters, 
which  is  usually  directed  to  the  standard  input  and  output  ports. 
However,  these  data  streams  can  be  redirected,  for  instance  into  a  file, 
or  into  the  output  or  input  streams  of  another  process  running  in  the 
computer. 

As  data  are  emitted  from  a  RAND-ABEL  program,  it  is  either 
formatted  (according  to  its  data  type)  in  a  standard  (i.o.,  default) 
manner,  or  else  the  programmer  can  exercise  some  control  over  the  format 
in  which  it  appears.  A  special  language  of  format  codes,  consisting  of 
a  string  of  characters,  is  used  to  specify  formatting  of  I/O.  The 
default  formatting  for  each  of  RAND-ABEL' s  data  types,  and  the  special 
format  codes,  are  described  within  this  section. 


-  53  - 


+-scaccncne - + 

I  I 

|  Print  unieparan  .  .  .  unieparan.  1 

j  Print  with  Comae -spec  unit  pars  a  .  .  .  unieparan.  I 

l  I 

|  Print  sereannano  unieparan  .  .  .  unieparan.  I 

|  Print  sercannano  with  Caveat- spec  unieparan  .  .  .  unieparan.  j 

I  I 

|  Log  unieparan  .  .  .  unieparan.  I 

|  Log  with  Comac-spcc  unieparan  .  .  .  unieparan,  j 


Log  sereannano  unieparan  ...  unit paean. 

Log  sereannano  with  Comae-spec  unieparan  .  .  .  nit  pa  tan. 


Rules: 


1.  The  Log  statement  causes  a  scream  of  data  (defined  by  the 
sequence  of  unieparans  within  the  statement  to  be  sent  to  the 
output  stream. 

2.  The  Print  statement  causes  a  scream  of  data  (defined  by  the 
sequence  of  unieparans  within  the  statement)  to  be  sent  to  an 
output  stream. 

3.  The  default  output  stream  is  the  UNIX  sCdouC',  if  n  stroannano 
is  given,  output  from  Print  or  Log  is  directed  to  chat  output 
scream  instead.1 

A.  If  the  optional  with  CornaC-spnc  clause  is  omitted,  all  output 
is  formatted  according  to  standard  defaults  determined  by  tho 
data  types  of  the  unieparans  being  output. 

5.  If  the  with  Cornae-spac  clause  is  included,  tho  Cormab-spoc  is 
a  RAND-ABEL  expression  of  type  string.  The  character  string  Is 
interpreted  as  a  specification  for  formatting  of  output,  and 
output  is  formatted  according  to  its  specifications. 

6.  A  value  of  type  pointer  can  be  output  as  a  hexadecimal  number 
for  debugging  purposes,  but  this  is  not  expected  to  be  used  in 
a  production  program. 


lIf  the  RAND-ABEL  program  is  executing  in  the  context  of  tho  RSAC 
system,  output  should  not  be  sent  to  the  default  stdout ,  as  this  will 
conflict  with  system  CRT  screen  management. 


-  5 6  - 


The  definition  of  a  unicpuraa  is  contained  in  the  subsection  Values 
and  Expressions  within  Sec.  IV.  Basically,  it  is  a  simplo  value  or  a 
parenthesized  RAND-ABEL  expression. 

Default  output  formats  arc  used  for  each  data  typo  when  no  control 
is  provided  by  an  explicit  forcac-spcc.  These  default  oueput  formats 
are  described  in  the  following  subsection. 

Examples  of  the  Print  and  Log  statements  arc  given  at  the  end  of 
this  subsection,  after  ehe  various  formatting  options  are  presented. 

Default  Output  Formats 

If  no  special  format  controls  are  given,  each  data  type  has  a 
standard  way  in  which  its  value  is  printed.  These  default  output 
formats  are  given  by  the  following  table. 


Data  Typo 


Default  Output  Format 


Integer 


Real 


String 


Boolean 


Pointer 


A  string  of  digits,  with  on  optional 
profix  minus  sign.  No  decimal  point. 
Delimited  by  one  blank  on  each  sida. 

A  string  of  digits  with  nn  embedded 
decimal  point.  At  least  one  digit 
is  printed  before  and  after  the  decimal 
point,  even  if  it  is  a  zero.  Optional 
profix  minus  sign.  Numbers  loss  than 
one-millionth  (1  E  -6)  are  considered 
a  zero.  Otherwise,  for  numbers  less  than 
one,  enough  decimal  places  arc  printed  to 
show  at  least  two  digits  of  significance. 
Delimited  by  one  blank  on  each  side. 

The  string  is  printed  literally,  with 
no  surrounding  quotation  marks,  and 
not  delimited  by  blanks. 

The  string  "Yes"  or  "No"  is  printed, 
without  surrounding  quotation  marks. 
Delimited  by  one  blank  on  each  side. 

A  pointer-type  value  is  output  as  a 
hexadecimal  number  for  debugging  purposes, 


-  55  - 


using  the  some  conventions  as  tho 
integer  data  typo. 

Enumerated  The  identifier  constant  is  printed 

without  surrounding  quotation  marks. 
Delimited  by  one  blank  on  oach  side. 


Format  Specification 

A  formac-sptc  is  used  to  control  the  formatting  of  output.  It  is  a 
sequence  of  characters  that  are  printed  os  listed,  except  when  tho 
special  characters  "X"  and  "\"  ore  encountered.  Tito  3*  is  followed  by  a 
special  formatting  code.  The  formatting  codes  recognized  by  RAND-ABEL 
are  as  follows: 

%i  Enumerated  data  typo 
»s  String 

Sb  Boolean  (Yes  or  No) 

!Sd  Integer  without  a  decimal  point 

to  Real  (or  floating  point)  scientific  notation 

tf  Real  (or  floating  point)  fixed  decimal  point 

tg  Real  (or  floating  point)  general;  uses  scientific  notation 

or  fixed  decimal  point,  whichever  is  shortest. 

A  litoral  percent  sign  is  entered  in  a  format  string  as 

A  number  may  bo  placed  between  the  percent  sign  and  the  letter. 

That  number  specifics  the  overall  number  of  characters  allocated  to  tho 
value.  If  a  number  is  used,  the  field  will  bo  blank  padded,  unless  the 
field  width  number  begins  with  a  loading  zero,  in  which  caso  the  field 
will  bo  zero  padded.  The  field  width  number  can  optionally  bo  followed 
by  a  decimal  point,  and  then  another  number.  Tho  second  number  will  bo 
the  number  of  digits  to  appear  after  the  decimal  point  for  *e,  %f,  or  %g 
formats . 

There  are  other  special  options  that  can  be  used  in  these  format 
strings.  They  obey  the  conventions  of  "printf(3)"  in  Section  3  of  the 
UNIX  Programmer' s  Manual,  Ball  Laboratories.  That  document  should  be 
consulted  for  more  detailed  information. 


D 


-  56  - 


The  backslash  (\)  is  followed  by  a  character  or  sequence  of  3  octal 
digits  that  represent  special  characters: 


\n  Newline  (line  feed) 

\r  Carriage  return 

\t  Horizontal  tab 

\b  Backspace 

\£  Formfeed 

\\  Backslash 

\*  Single  quote 

\ddd  Any  bit  pattern  (exactly  3  digits  in  octal  notation) 


These  special  escape  sequences  allow  any  ASCII  character  to  bo 
produced.  For  example,  "\n"  allows  more  chan  one  lino  of  text  to  bo  put 
in  the  some  string,  and  "\f"  causes  a  page  eject.  By  using  a  3-digit 
octal  (i.e.,  base  8  number  system)  code,  any  ASCII  character  can  bo 
produced;  o.g.,  one  could  make  the  CRT  terminal  "bell"  ring  by  the 
following  statement: 


Print  "\007". 


Streams 

A  stream  is  a  pathway  through  which  information  is  tronsf erred  from 
a  program  to  a  terminal,  file,  or  other  program.  The  information  is 
transferred  ns  a  stream  of  characters. 

The  normal  output  stream  for  Log  and  Print  statements  is  the  UNIX 
"standard  output,"  which  is  initially  sot  to  the  user's  terminal. 

If  a  scrc/imtwaa  has  been  used  in  a  Log  or  Print  statement,  but 
chat  stream  has  not  yet  been  opened,  then  a  runtime  error  will  be 
generated. 

The  three  predcclorcd  and  preopened  streams  are:  "Input", 

"Output",  and  "Error".1  "input"  is  tho  stream  of  characters  received 
from  the  user's  terminal  keyboard.  Reading  a  character  from  Input 
causes  UNIX  to  wait  for  tho  user  to  typo  in  a  line  of  input  text. 

*  It  will  rvelp  the  C  programmer  to  know  that  those  correspond 
directly  to  C's  stdin,  stdout ,  and  stdarc. 


-  57  - 


"Output"  corresponds  to  the  user's  terminal  screen.  Printing  n  line  on 
the  stream  "Output"  causes  the  line  to  appear  on  the  user's  terminal. 
"Error"  is  also  directed  to  the  user's  terminal.  Ie  is  defined 
separately  from  "Output"  since  the  program  may  wont  to  redefine  one  of 
these  to  go  somewhere  clso. 

RAND-ABEL  supports  three  predefined,  stream-oriented  functions. 
They  ore: 


Function  Name 

Argument  1 

Argument  2 

Roturn  Value 

Open-scream 

fiJa-naso 

zodti 

scraannaao 

Closo-scrcaro 

screasnane 

(none) 

Flush-scream 

screaznaza 

(none) 

In  the  above  function  calls,  fila-naao  is  a  string  argument  chat  Is 
eichor  a  UNIX  file  name  or  else  a  full  UNIX  pathname  (i.c.,  giving 
directory,  subdirectory,  etc.).  Mode  is  one  of  the  strings:  "read", 
"write",  "append".  The  valuo  returned  from  the  Open-stronm  function 
should  bo  assigned  to  an  integer  variable  that  stores  the  ID  of  the 
scream.  This  same  variable  is  then  used  as  an  argument  to  the 
Close-stream  and  Flush-stream  functions. 

The  Open-stream  function  associates  a  UNIX  file  or  path,  in  road, 
write,  or  append  mode,  with  a  scraaanaea.  If  a  file  is  opened  in  write 
mode  and  the  file  does  not  exist,  it  is  created.  If  tho  file  does 
exist,  it  is  deleted  first.  If  a  file  is  opened  in  append  mode,  all 
writing  to  choc  file  is  appended  to  the  end  of  the  existing  file,  if 
any. 

Tho  Close-stream  function  closes  a  stream,  making  it  unavailable 
for  further  use  (until  reopened).  It  is  stondard  practice  to  close 
streams  when  they  will  no  longer  be  used  by  the  program. 

Tho  Flush-stream  function  is  useful  primarily  for  debugging 
purposes.  Typically,  when  a  RAND-ABEL  program  executes  a  Log  or  Print 
statement,  the  only  effect  is  Vo  fill  that  file's  buffer  in  the 
operating  system.  Later,  tho  operating  system  will  perform  the  actual 


-  58  - 


write  to  the  file  on  disk.  This  buffering  of  output  provides 
significant  performance  advantages.  This  buffer  will  bo  written  to  the 
appropriate  file  when  a  RAND-ABEL  program  stops  execution  in  tho  normal 
manner.  However,  it  is  possible  for  a  RAND-ABEL  program  chat  has  on 
error  to  abnormally  exit  without  first  writing  the  buffer  to  disk.  This 
can  causo  tho  programmer  to  chink  that  his  RAND-ABEL  program  terminated 
at  a  point  much  earlier  than  is  actually  the  case.  To  got  around  this 
problem,  the  Flush-stream  function  con  be  called  to  write  the  contents 
of  the  buffor  to  disk.  Because  continued  use  of  this  function  can 
degrade  system  performance,  it  is  used  primarily  for  debugging  purposes. 

Since  "Input",  "Output",  and  "Error"  are  olroady  prodoclnred  by  tho 
system,  thoy  con  bo  used  to  declare  other  stream  variables.  For 
example: 


Declare  Output-file  by  example:  Let  Output-file  be  Output. 

Examples  of  Input/Output  Statements  and  Functions 

Tho  following  examples  illustrate  many  of  the  possible  uses  of  tho 
various  input/output  statements  and  functions  described  in  this  section. 


I  Dcclaro  Message-file  to  be  a  strenmnome  ] 

Declare  Message-file  by  example:  Let  Messnge-filo  be  Output. 

(  Use  the  Open-stream  function  to  associate  a  UNIX  file  with  this 
streomnamo,  and  set  its  mode  to  write-only  ] 

Let  Message-file  be  Report  from  Open-stream 

using  "~andcrson/ABEL/programs/mossages"  for  file-name, 
and  "write"  for  mode. 

(  Perform  a  set  of  writes  to  that  file  J 

Print  Message-file  with  "Threat  level  is  now:  %5d  in  country:  %i\n" 

threat  (Report  from  select-country 

using  Country-list  as  options). 
Print  Message-file  with  "Force  ratio  is  %3.1f  at  time  %d  \n" 

ratio  game-time. 

Print  Message-file  "End  of  game  reached.  \n\n" 

[  Close  file  ] 

Perform  Close-stream  using  Message-file  as  streamname. 


-  59  - 


COMPOUND  AND  NULL  STATEMENTS 

A  compound  statement  is  a  sequence  of  aero  or  more  declarations 
followed  by  a  soquenco  of  zero  or  moro  RAND-ABEb  statements,  all 
delimited  by  braces.  It  can  occur  wherever  a  statement:  can.  It  allows 
moro  complex  program  logic  to  bo  described  than  is  allowed  by  the  basic 
sot  of  RAS’D -ABEL  statements: 

+-statcaent - 

I  I 

|  (  declaration  .  .  .  declaration  \ 

I  I 

|  statement  .  .  .  statement  }  | 

I  I 

+ . + 


Rules: 


1.  All  declarations  occurring  within  a  compound  statement  aro 
local  to  that  statement;  they  have  no  effect  outside  that 
statement. 

2.  Each  declaration  is  processed  in  turn,  then  each  statement  is 
executed  in  cum.  To  obtain  moro  control  flow  options, 
conditional  and  repetitive  execution  statements  con  be  used,  as 
wall  as  function  invocations. 


Notice  that  a  function-dofinition  is  not  allowed  within  a  compound 
statement.  All  function  definitions  aro  at  the  "top  level"  of  a 
RANB-ABEL  program. 

The  compound  statement  is  not  terminated  by  a  period,  since  a 
period  occurs  as  a  delimiter  to  the  lart  statement  within  its  body. 

If  the  compound  statement  requires  more  than  one  line  of  program 
text,  it  is  traditional  to  line  up  the  braces  vertically,  for  case  in 
visualizing  the  matches  between  balancing  braces.  This  positioning  is 
for  human  consumption  only;  it  is  not  used  by  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator. 


-  60  - 


Example:  The  following  sot  of  nested  conditional  statements  uses 

compound  statements  to  denote  the  set  of  RAND-ABEL 
statements  to  be  executed  at  various  places  within  the 
conditional  logic.  This  oxamplo  is  repeated  from 
earlier  in  this  manual. 

If  usor-responso  =  "Y"  or  usor-responso  =  "YES" 

Then 

{  Perform  Recalculation. 

Print  "Calculation  Completed.  More?  (Y/N):  " 

Let  user-response  be  Report  from  quwry-uscr. 

) 

Else  If  user-response  =  "N"  or  usor-responso  =  "NO" 

Then 

{  Print  "No  action  talon.  More?  (Y/N):  " 

Let  user-response  be  Report  from  query-user. 

) 

Else  If  user-response  =  "?" 

Then  Perform  Help-function. 

Else 

{  Print  "Your  response  not  understood." 

Perform  Help- function. 

) 


A  null  statement  consists  of  a  period,  the  normal  terminating 
delimiter  on  a  RAND-AEEL  statement,  only.  It  is  useful  within 
conditional  statements  to  control  logic  flow.  Empty  curly  braces  are 
also  a  null  statement. 

b-statanent - + 

I  I 

I  I 

I  O  I 

I  I 

+ . + 


Rule:  This  statement  causes  no  effect. 

Note  that  a  side  benefit  of  this  statement  is  that  extraneous 
periods  used  in  error  as  statement  delimiters  (for  example,  after  a 
conditional  statement)  do  not  cause  a  syntax  error  and  have  no  effect. 


-  61  - 


Example:  The  following  example,  repeated  from  carlior  in  this 
manual,  illustrates  tho  uso  of  the  null  statement  to  control 
logic  flow  within  a  conditional  statement. 

If  king-unchecked  Then.  Else  Perform  Think. 


-  62  - 


VIII.  META-STATEMENTS 


The  following  special  statements  can  bo  used  to  influence  how 
RAND-ABEL  programs  are  writton  and  interpreted. 

^DEFINE 

The  #define  statement  provides  an  ability  to  create  a  macro  giving 
a  synonym  or  alias  for  a  string  of  characters  to  bo  substituted  wherever 
that  macro  identifier  appears: 


+-mQta-statcmont - + 

I  I 

|  #define  nam  [  unquoted-string  ] .  | 

I  I 

- - - 


Rules : 


1.  The  noma  may  be  any  RAND-ABEL  identifier. 

2.  Wherever  that  identifier  appears,  it  is  replaced  by  the 
unquoted-string  sequence  of  characters  BEFORE  THE  RAND-ABEL 
TRANSLATOR  INTERPRETS  THE  RESULTING  STATEMENT. 

3.  After  replacement,  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator  continues  its  scan 
at  the  beginning  of  the  replacement  string,  so  any  #define 
identifiers  it  contains  will  similarly  bo  replaced.  #define 
statements  may  be  nested  to  any  level. 


This  form  of  "macro  string  substitution"  can  be  used  to  change  the 
surface  appearance  of  RAND-ABEL  programs.  It  should  be  used  cautiously, 
since  the  resulting  programs  might  well  become  less  readable  to  persons 
who  know  the  RAND-ABEL  language. 


-  63  - 


Example: 

^define  c-docl 

[  Declare  country: 

Let  country  be  Franco. 

]• 


INCLUDE 

^-aac/i-scotamonc — - — - + 


j  Include  "filonaaa".  j 


Rules: 


1.  The  contents  of  the  file  whose  name  (or  pathname)  is  givon  aro 
inserted  at  this  point  in  the  RAND-ABEL  (or  C)  program.  The 
file  name  or  pathname  is  interpreted  rolativo  to  the  UNIX 
directory  containing  the  current  source  file. 

2.  After  the  text  insertion  tokos  place,  the  interpretation  of  the 
resulting  file  begins  at  the  start  of  the  newly  inserted  text 
linos,  so  if  they  contain  Include  statements,  those  statements 
are  executed  os  they  arc  encountered.  Include  files  can  bo 
nested  up  to  eight  levels  deep. 


An  Include  statement  is  often  used  to  incorporate  a  standard  sot  of 
declarations  or  definitions  into  a  RAND-ABEL  program. 


Example: 


Include  "librarics/rcd-agcnt/dictionary.D". 


-  64  - 


DEBUGGING:  TRACE  AND  UNTRACE 

+-statcaant - + 

I  I 

j  Trace  If.  j 

j  Trace  Function.  j 

I  I 

j  Untrace  If.  j 

j  Untrace  Function.  1 

I  I 

+ . . . . + 

Rules: 

1.  Trace  turns  on  reporting  for  either  If  statements  or  function 
invocations;  Untrace  turns  off  reporting. 

2.  All  trace  data  arc  appended  to  a  sipccinl  file  named  "debug. out" 
within  the  current  UN'IX  directory. 

Function  trace  data  consists  of  readable  statements  upon  entrance 
to  a  function  stating  tho  function's  name  and  the  values  assigned  to 
each  of  its  formal  parameters.  If  the  function  returns  a  value,  that 
value  is  reported  to  the  file  upon  exit  from  tho  function. 

"If"  trace  data  writes  to  the  same  "debug. out"  file.  Each 
execution  of  a  conditional  statement,  when  Trace  If  is  on,  causes  the 
conditional  statement  itself  to  be  written  to  tho  file,  along  with  an 
indication  of  whether  tho  Bool oan- expression  evaluated  to  Yes  or  No. 

Trace  and  Untrace  arc  not  executable  statements.  Rathor,  thorc 
arc  commands  to  the  RAN’D-ABEL  Translator  to  embed  tracing  information 
within  the  generated  C  program.  Trace  and  Untrace  statements  can  be 
nested;  an  Untrace  turns  off  the  corresponding  nearest  Trace  of  the 
same  type. 

Tracing  can  significantly  reduce  tho  speed  of  RAND-ABEI,  program 
execution  and  tends  to  generate  largo  amounts  of  output.  It  should 
therefore  be  used  selectively  and  only  during  program  development. 

Currently,  tho  Interpreter  allows  two  additional  forms  of  tracing, 
namely  Trace  Decision  Table  and  Trace  Let. 


-  65  - 


IX.  DATA  DICTIONARY 


Tho  Data  Dictionary  facility  in  RAND-ABEL  permits  largo,  complex 
systems  to  bo  developed  from  separate  modules  that  nro  created 
individually  by  different  programmers.  It  is  a  much,  more  elaborate  and 
useful  facility  than  the  old  concept  of  a  "common"  area  in  programs  that 
sti.es  data  used  in  common  by  tho  different  programs. 

Tho  RAND-ABEL  Data  Dictionary  describes  the  contents  and  attributes 
of  a  data  sot  to  bo  used  in  common  by  all  tho  RAND-ABEL  modules 
constituting  a  system. 1  This  common  data  sot  contains  tho  specification 
of: 

•  A  list  of  items  (variables,  attributes,  tables,  otc.)  to  be 
included  in  the  common  data  sot 

•  A  list  of  items,  similar  to  tho  list  above  but  including  sub- 
procoduros  and  functions,  which  are  not  part  of  the  common  data 
sot 

•  A  structuring  of  tho  source  filos  chat  make  up  the  system 

•  Access  restrictions,  ownership,  method  of  implementation,  and 
other  such  attributes  for  data  items  and  source  code 

•  Ancillary  information,  such  as  the  author,  module  name,  and 
other  administrative  attributes  associated  with  data  items  and 
source  code 

Tho  Data  Dictionary  consists  of  a  set  of  files  that  arc  maintained 
in  an  extended  RAND-ABEL  language.  The  RAND-ABEL  processor  translates 
these  files  into  C  language  data  structures.  Tho  resulting  C  code  can 
be  used  by  a  system  monitor  (a  special  program  providing  the  foundation 
for  the  system  being  developed)  for  allocating  memory  for  the  data  items 
described  and  also  by  a  front-end  data  editor  that  can  be  used  for 
display  and  manipulation  of  these  items. 

lIn  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment  System  (RSAS),  this  common  data 
set  is  called  the  World  Situation  Data  Set  (WSDS) . 


-  66  - 


A  Data  Dictionary  entry  begins  with  a  Declare  statement.  (See  the 
earlier  section  of  this  manual  on  Declarations.)  After  this  declaration 
of  an  item  arc  a  numbor  of  statements  describing  the  item.  Tho  sequence 
of  descriptions  is  ended  when  a  new  Declare  is  found  for  the  next  item, 
a  new  Default  statement  is  reached,  or  the  End  Declarations  statement  is 
encountered. 

Many  attributes  that  can  bo  associated  with  a  data  item  will  be  tho 
same  for  an  entire  group  of  items  (o.g.,  author,  access  restrictions, 
otc).  To  avoid  tho  need  for  typing  a  wholo  list  of  attributes  for  each 
item,  "default"  attributes  may  be  declared.  When  a  default  is  dcclarad, 
it  affects  all  subsequently  declared  data  items  within  the  current  file 
and  any  files  "Included"  within  that  file.  A  default  docs  NOT  affect 
any  files  that  have  "Included"  tho  file  that  contains  it.  This  nested- 
default  mechanism  allows  higher- lovol  files  to  create  default 
environments  for  lower-level  files  without  worry  of  a  default  in  a  lower 
level  file  causing  side-effects. 

The  set  of  Data  Dictionary  declarations  has  tho  following  syntax: 

+-dnta  dictionary  s pacification  block - + 

I  I 

|  Begin  Declarations.  | 

|  [No]  Default  DDdoclaration  ...  j 

I  I 

|  declaration  \ 

I  I 

|  DDdoclaration  ...  j 

I  I 

|  DDdoclaration  \ 

I  I 

|  declaration  | 

I  I 

|  DDdoclaration  ...  | 

I  I 

|  DDdoclaration  | 


End  Declarations. 


-  67  - 


The  individual  data  dictionary  declarations  (i.o.,  DDdaclarations)  arc 
of  throe  types: 


1.  Defining  declarations.  Information  that  actually  affects  the 
object  code,  such  as  typo,  size,  or  access  data. 

2.  Identifying  declarations.  Information  that  is  documentary  but 
mandatory. 

3.  Informative  declarations.  Information  that  is  optional  but 
useful  as  documentation. 


Each  of  these  categories  of  declarations  is  described  below. 


DEFINING  DECLARATIONS 

These  declarations  aro  mandatory  for  each  external  data  item  but 
may  bo  handled  by  default  declarations  that  arc  in  effect.  (See  Creating 
and  Removing  Default  Declarations  below.) 


+-DDdaclaration - + 

I  I 

|  Method:  Direct.  | 

j  Method:  Function.  j 

|  Method:  Macro.  j 

I  .  I 

|  Function:  func-namo .  1 

I  I 

|  Macro:  string-literal .  \ 

I  I 

+ . + 


Rule:  Method  means  "method  of  access."  An  item's  access  method 
tolls  whether  the  variable  is  accessed  directly  or  via  a 
function  or  macro.  If  an  item  is  accessed  via  a  macro,  the 
macro  must  be  defined  using  a  Macro  statement.  If  it  is 
accessed  via  a  function,  the  name  of  the  function  must  be 
given  using  the  Function  statement.  The  Macro  or  Function 
statement  must  immediately  follow  the  Method  declaration. 


-  68  - 


Examples: 

Method  Function. 

Function:  calculato-atfcrition. 

whore  "calculatc-attrition"  muse  be  a  function  that  returns  a  value. 
Method  Macro. 

Macro:  ((*GQVERN_ontry)(char  *)F  +  2)  -  F->govcrns  +  1  . 
+-DDdcclaraCion - - - + 


Use:  Clone. 
Use:  No  Clone. 
Use:  Constant. 


Rule:  The  Use  declaration  indicates  whether  an  item  is  to  bo 
created  dynamically  (Clone)  when  the  Push  function  is 
invoked  and  discarded  when  tho  corresponding  Pop  function  is 
executed;  or  whether  one  instance  of  the  data  item  is  to  be 
maintained  throughout  a  Push  and  Pop  (No  Clone) .  Data  that 
are  never  changed  during  program  execution  are  declared  with 
tho  Constant  option. 


Currently,  No  Clone  is  not  implemented.  Variables  declared  No 
Clone  will  behave  os  declared  Clone. 


Example: 


Use:  Clone. 


+-DDdacJaration - **+ 

I  I 

|  Owner:  ownor-nano.  ! 

I  I 

|  Owner:  Global.  | 

I  I 

+ . + 


Rule:  This  declaration  allows  different  modules  to  have  separate 

items  with  the  same  name.  Source  code  also  has  an  owner  and 
automatically  accesses  either  its  own  or  "global"  data 
items,  unless  otherwise  specified  by  this  declaration. 


-  69  - 


The  "awnor-naeia"  is  one  of  a.  set  of  commonly  agreed-upon  names  by 
which  the  various  groups  developing  code  are  identified.  The  keyword 
Global  is  used  if  there  is  no  specific  owner. 

Examples: 

Owner:  Red. 

Owner:  Global. 


+-DDdQclarnciotv 


Read 

Read 

Read 


Everyone. 

ownov-naao 

ownor-naao 


Noread  Everyone. 
Noread  ovnar-naaa 
Noread  ounar-nana 

Write  Everyone. 
Write  ounov-naao 
Write  ouncr-nana 

Nowrite  Everyone. 
Nowrite  ownar-nana 
Nowrite  ownar-naao 


.  .  .  owner-name. 

,  .  .  .  ,  owner-name. 

.  .  .  aunor-naao. 
.  owner-name. 

.  .  .  ovnor-nano. 
...  .  oumr-rtana. 


.  .  .  ounor-nano . 

.  .  .  ,  owner-name. 


Rule:  These  declarations  specify  which  source  code  owners  (i.o., 
"access  groups")  con  road  or  write  this  item.  The  "No" 
prefix  con  turn  off  a  default  or  serve  documentary  purposes 
by  establishing  a  lack  of  access  for  a  particular  group. 


The  special  group  Everyone  applies  to  all  access  groups  and  can  bo 
used  to  grant  or  deny  access  for  all  groups. 


-  70  - 


Examples: 

Noread  Blue,  Neutral, 
Write  Everyone. 


■i-OtklccIaration - - - - - - — - - — - - + 

I  I 

|  Read  Format:  stcing-JAtarftl  •  | 

I  '  I 

|  Write  Format:  string-i/cerai,  j 


Rule:  The  preferred  format  for  roading  and  writing  this  data  item 
is  seated  as  a  quoted  string  of  format  descriptors.  (See  the 
subsection  Format  Specification  within  the  INPUT/OUTPUT 
portion  of  Sec.  VII,  RAND-ABEL  Statements.)5 


It  is  desirable  to  specify  output  formats  for  string  variables, 
integers,  and  real  (floating  point)  data  whenever  possible,  since  it 
holps  the  display  programs  format  the  data  in  a  consistent  manner.  It 
is  unnecessary  to  specify  output  formats  for  enumerated  variables  since 
the  fiold  width  neoded  to  display  them  is  easily  determined  by  the 
display  programs. 


Example: 


Write  Format:  "%5.3f". 


sFor  programmers  familiar  with  the  C  language:  the  format 
specification  is  the  same  as  those  used  for  the  scan/  and  print/ 
functions. 


-  71  - 


^-DCdeclacaiion - — . — - + 

I  I 

j  Validation  Range:  nuaocaJ  to  nuaocaJ.  | 

j  j 

j  Validation  Function:  /wnc-na«e.  j 

I  I 

+- . - . - . - . -- . - . - . + 


Rule:  In  the  first  fora,  on  inclusive  range  of  numeric  values 
(either  integer  or  real)  is  given.  In  the  second  form,  a 
Boolean  function  is  named  that  is  expected  to  return  Yes 
for  a  valid  item,  and  No  otherwise. 

Examples: 

Validation  Range:  2.7  to  8. 75  . 

Validation  Function:  Check-value. 


+~PDdccJacaCion - + 

I  I 

|  Prompt  Function:  func-naao.  I 

j  Prompt  String:  string" Jieeral .  I 

I  I 

+ . + 


Rule:  In  the  first  form,  the  named  function  will  be  called  prior 
to  input  for  this  data  item.  It  returns  a  string  that  will 
bo  displayed  on  the  user's  CRT  screen.  In  the  second  form, 
a  quoted  character  string  is  given  for  display  prior  to 
input  of  tho  data  item.  In  the  RSAS  environment,  the  input 
of  data  is  performed  from  the  Data  Editor  program. 


Examples: 

Prompt  Function:  Show-message. 

Prompt  String:  "Type  ratio  as  a  decimal:  ". 

+-DDdaclaration - + 

I  I 

Initialize. 


No  Initialize. 


Rule:  This  declaration  indicates  whether  the  item  can  be 
initialized  by  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator  or  not. 


-  72  - 


Ac  this  cine,  the  Initialize  declarations  may  bo  used  in  a  program, 
but  choir  effect  has  not  been  implemented.  Consequently,  they  do  not 
alter  program  behavior. 

Examples: 

Initialize. 

No  Initialize. 

IDENTIFYING  DECLARATIONS 

These  declarations  are  mandatory  but  toko  an  arbitrary  comment  ns 
an  argument.  They  arc  used  for  standardized  documentation  of  a  module. 

+-DDdcclarntion - - - - - * - + 

I  I 

|  Author:  cocaanc.  j 

I  I 

|  Date:  coanont.  | 

I  I 

|  Definition:  coamant.  | 


Rule:  The  conaant:  may  be  a  freo-format  comment  enclosed  in  the 
documentation  of  the  program  or  data  item. 

Examples: 

Author:  [  Mark  LaCasso  ). 

Date:  [  83/02/05  ). 

Definition:  [  This  function  returns  a 
string  value  that  should 
bo  displayed  prior  to  input 
of  the  force  structure  ratio  ] . 

INFORMATIVE  DECLARATIONS 

These  declarations  are  optional.  They  provide  additional 
structured  documentation  of  a  RAND-ABEL  program  module. 


-  73  - 


+-DDdcclaration - 

I 

j  References:  coancnt. 

i 

|  Comments:  conaan t. 

I 

|  Status:  conaant. 

I 

+ . 

Rule:  The  coaaont  may  be  a  froo-format  comment  enclosed  in  square 
brackets  "[  )"  that  aids  in  tho  documentation  of  the  program 
or  data  item. 

Tho  Status  declaration  is  often  used  to  represent  whothor  a 
variable  is  "proposed"  (indicating  tho  author  is  willing  to  ontortain 
proposals  for  change)  or  "confirmed"  (indicating  tho  author  has  closed 
debate  on  the  subject). 

Examples: 

References:  (  See  R-1258,  Section  II  ). 

Comments:  [  This  function  is  a  placeholder 
until  «  more  complete  computation 
can  be  developed  ] . 

Status:  [  Proposed  j. 

CREATING  AND  REMOVING  DEFAULT  DECLARATIONS 

As  mentioned  above,  all  the  mandatory  Data  Dictionary  declarations 
;.ecd  not  be  given  for  each  data  item  or  function.  Many  of  these 
declarations  can  be  covered  by  use  of  declared  defaults. 

Any  of  the  DDdcclarations  described  in  this  section  may  be  preceded 
by  the  keyword  Default.  If  that  is  done,  that  setting  for  the 
particular  DDdoclaration  remains  in  force  within  the  current  file  (and 
files  Included  within  it)  until  a  now  default  is  given  cr  a  No  Default 
is  declared  for  that  typo  cf  DDdoclaration .  Any  default  setting  may  be 
overridden  by  individual  DDdoclarations  associated  with  a  particular 
data  item  or  function. 


-  74  - 


Examples: 

Default  Owner:  Rod-Agent. 

Default  Method:  direct. 

Default  No  Initialize. 

Default  Author:  [  Mark  LaCassc,  randvaxllncassc  ). 


Tha  following  No  Default  statements  may  bo  issued  to  remove  a 
dofault  sotting  on  a  type  of  DDdaeJaracdon: 


+-DDdcclaracion - 

I 

!  No  Default  Author, 

j  No  Default  Comments, 

i  No  Default  Date. 

1  No  Default  Definition. 

\  No  Default  Initialize, 

j  No  Default  Method, 

j  No  Default  Owner. 

)  No  Default  Prompt  Function, 

j  No  Default  Prompt  String, 

j  No  Default  Read  Format. 

|  No  Default  Write  Format. 

|  No  Default  References. 

]  No  Default  Status. 

|  No  Default  Use, 

|  No  Default  Validation  Function, 

j  No  Default  Validation  Range. 


+ 


+ 


When  No  Default  is  specified  for  any  mandatory  DDdoclarations , 
such  a  DDdaclacation  must  accompany  each  data  item  or  function  until  the 
next  Default  or  End  Declarations  statement  is  reached. 


Examples  of  No  Default  statements: 

No  Default  Comments. 

No  Default  Prompt  String. 

No  Default  Read  Format. 

No  Default  Validation  Function. 


-  75  - 


EXAMPLE  OF  A  DATA  DICTIONARY  DECLARATION  SECTION 
The  following  is  a  comploto  example  of  a  Data  Dictionary 
declaration  soccion  within  a  RAND-ABEL  program.  Such  a  RAND-ABEL  code 
section  is  often  contained  in  a  file  that  can  bo  Included  within  another 
RAND-ABEL  file  to  obtain  the  standard  defaults  and  definitions  required. 


(  Sample  Data  Dictionary  Entries  for  Blue  Agent  January  1984  J 

Begin  declarations. 

Default  Owner:  Blue. 

Default  Method:  Direct. 

Default  Read:  Bluo. 

Default  Write:  Blue. 

Default  Use:  Clone. 

Default  No  Initialize. 

Default  Author:  (  Mark  LoCasso,  randvax! lacasso  ). 

Default  Date:  [  84/01/05  ). 

Define  Enumeration  Type- lookahead-opponent:  BR1,  BR2. 

(  BR1  is  Blue's  Red  version  one  ] 

[  BR2  is  Blue's  Red  version  two  ) 

Declare  Lookahead-opponent  by  example: 

Let  Lookahcad-opnnncnt  be  Typo-lookahcad-opponent. 

Definition:  (  Blue's  Red,  opposes  Blue  in  Lookaheads  ). 

Declare  Timo-to-wnkc  by  example: 

Let  Time-to-wake  be  45786. 

Prompt  String: 

"Enter  the  date  and  time  in  the  format:  MMM  DD,  hh.mm". 
Validation  Function:  Check-time- input. 

Definition:  [  General  purpose,  future  time  to  wake  Bluo  ). 


End  Declarations. 


-  76  - 


X.  COPROCESSES 


A  coprocoss  is  an  executing  program  (a  process)  that  is  started  by 
another  executing  program  (its  parent).  The  two  then  execute 
independently  and  asynchronously  of  one  another  This  section  discusses 
how  coprocesses  are  created,  put  to  sleep,  and  terminated. 

CREATING  A  COPROCESS 

Coprocesses  arc  created  by  calling  a  built-in  RANU-ABEL  function 
called  Startup-plan.  It  takes  two  arguments,  plan-start  and  plan-name. 
Plan-start  is  given  an  object  representing  the  top-level  function  of  the 
to-be-created  process.  This  object  can  be  created  by  use  of  the 
function  expression.  Plan-name  is  a  string  identifying  the  new  process. 
The  function  Startup-plan  returns  an  object  that  is  of  type  process. 
Therefore,  the  initiation  of  a  new  process  might  bo  performed  by  a 
statement  such  as  the  following: 

Declare  ncw-proc:  Let  now-proc  be  Self. 

Let  now-proc  be  Report  from  Startup-plan 

using  (Function  Top-of-plan)  as  plan-start 
and  ‘'Offensive  strategy"  as  plan-name. 

Note  the  use  of  the  expression  (Function  Top-of-plan)  to  create  an 
object  representing  the  user's  function  named  "Top-of-plan",  which  is  to 
be  executed  as  tins  beginning  of  the  new  process. 

The  execution  of  the  Startup-plan  function  is  the  only  method  by 
which  a  value  of  typo  process  can  be  created. 

PUTTING  A  PROCESS  TO  SLEEP 

A  process  can  cause  itself  to  "go  to  sleop"--that  is,  to  stop 
processing  until  it  is  awakened  by  some  external  program.  This  is  done 
by  calling  a  built-in  function  called  "Sleep".  Sleep  takes  no  arguments 
and  returns  no  value: 


Perform  Sleep. 


-  77  - 


There  ore  no  facilities  within  the  RAND-ABEL  language  itself  for 
awakening  a  function  once  it  is  sleeping;  at  present,  those  facilities 
arc  part  of  the  support  environment  in  which  a  RAND-ABEL  procoss 
resides  and  must  bo  invoked  directly  within  that  support  environment. 
(See  Appendix  A  for  some  further  information  on  the  support  environment 
for  RAND-ABEL.) 

TERMINATING  A  COPROCESS 

To  terminate  a  coprocoss,  the  "Remove-plan"  function  is  used.  It 
takes  ono  argument,  called  procoss:  an  object  of  typo  procoss  that 
identifies  the  process  to  be  terminated.  Therefore,  to  terminate  the 
process  created  by  the  example  above,  one  would  write: 


Perform  Rcmovo-plan  using  now-proc  as  procoss. 

RESERVED  COPROCESS  VARIABLES:  SELF  AND  PARENT 

The  RAND-ABEL  system  contains  two  reserved  process-type  variables: 
Self  and  Parent.  Self  is  always  equal  to  the  current  process.  Parent 
always  rofors  to  the  parent  process  that  spawned  a  given  process.  Thoso 
variables  con  also  be  used  in  Declare  statements  ns  examples  of 
processes,  so  that  new  variables  of  typo  process  can  be  declare'*. 

RULES  FOR  THE  USE  OF  COPROCESSES 

The  following  rules  govern  the  use  of  coprocesses. 


1.  A  coprocoss  may  not  call  Remove-plan  on  itself. 

2.  Processes  can  be  the  object  of  assignment  statements,  so  that 
statements  such  as: 

Let  me  be  Self. 

are  valid. 

3.  Processes  can  be  values  of  suitably  defined  variables  or 
arrays.  This  was  illustrated  in  above  example,  where  "me"  is  a 
variable  taking  on  a  process  as  its  value. 


-  7C  - 


4.  Procosscs  can  bo  arguments  of  suitably  declared  arrays.  For 
example: 

Declare  activo_proeoss: 

Let  activo_procoss  be  Self. 

Declare  array:  Let  array  of  activo_proccss  be  17. 

5.  Processes  cm  bo  parameters  of  functions.  For  example,  tho 
built-in  function  "Remove-plan"  has  ns  its  single  parameter  an 
object  of  tyyc  process. 

6.  Processes  aro  subject  to  no  other  operations. 

In  the  RSAS  environment,  coproccsses  correspond  to  decisionmaking 
agents  or  othor  simulation  models.  At  tho  top  level,  a  system  monitor 
controls  tho  execution  of  coproccsses. 

A  given  agent  (coprocoss)  may  create  several  subordinate 
coproccsses  to  create  an  organizational  hierarchy  (such  ns  a  hierarchy 
of  command  in  a  military  command  structure  os  demonstrated  by  RSAS 
decision  models). 


-  79  - 


XI.  TOP-LEVEL  RAND-ABEL  DECLARATIONS,  DEFINITIONS, 

AND  STATEMENTS 


The  RAND-ABEL  "language"  is  a  complocc  programming  language. 
However,  only  certain  of  the  RAND-ABEL  statements  and  declarations  can 
occur  at  the  top  lovol  of  a  RAND-ABEL  program.  All  other  RAND-ABEL 
constructions  occur  within  these  top-level  statements  and  declarations. 

The  only  RAND-ABEL  declarations  and  statements  that  can  occur  at 
the  cop  level  arc: 


•  Any  valid  RAND-ABEL  Declare 

4  Any  valid  RAND-ABEL  Define 

♦  The  RAND-ABEL  stataaonts : 

Trace  If. 

Trace  Function. 

Untrace  If. 

Untrace  Function. 

*  One  of  the  two  mutually  exclusive  statements: 

Owner:  name. 

Owner:  Global. 

•  A  special  top-level-only  Declare: 

Declare  Ignore  name  .  .  .  name. 

Declare  Ignore  name,  ...»  name. 

*  The  set  of  declarations  providing  information  to 
the  Data  Dictionary  facility  (see  Sec.  IX). 

Begin  Declarations. 
declaration 

DDdeclaration  .  .  .  DDdeclaration 
declaration 

DDdeclaration  .  .  .  DDdeclaration 


End  Declarations. 


-  80  - 


The  meanings  of  all  normal  RAND-ABEL  Declares,  Defines,  and 
statements  are  found  in  earlier  sections  of  this  document.  The  moaning 
of  tne  ownership  statements  (Owner)  is  found  in  Section  IX;  when  used 
here,  the  statements  declare  the  ownership  tag  to  bo  put  on  all 
subsequent  RAND-ABEI.  code. 

The  Declare  Ignoro  statement  is  used  to  add  a  set  of  identifiers 
to  a  list  (initially  null)  that  the  RAND-ABEI#  Translator  will  ignoro 
whenever  they  are  encountered.  These  identifiers  can  then  bo  used  as 
"noise  words"  in  RAND-ABEL  statements,  presumably  to  increase  choir 
readability. 

For  example,  elm  declaration: 

Declare  Ignore  a,  an,  the. 
allows  one  to  write  a  KASD-ABF.L  statement  such  as: 

Lot  the  color  of  a  piece  be  white. 

which  is  equivalent  to  the  RAND-ABEI#  statement  using  explicit  comments: 

Let  (the)  color  of  (a)  piece  be  white, 
or,  the  more  brutally  simple: 

Let  color  of  piece  be  white. 

Care  should  bn  taken  in  the  declaration  and  use  of  such  noise 
words,  since  readers  of  RAND-ABEI#  code  might  overlook  the  Declare 
Ignore  statement  and  belie.vo  that  these  words  arc  port  of  valid 
RAND-ABEI.  syntax,  possibly  leading  them  to  write  incorrect  RAND-ABEI. 
programs.  Also,  it  should  bn  noted  chat  in  normal  English  the  phrases 
"a  piece."  and  "the  piece"  mean  qiutc  different  things,  whereas  they  do 
not  in  a  RAND-ABEI.  program  in  which  both  "a"  and  "the"  arc  declared  to 
be  noise  words,  again  creating  the  possibility  of  confusion  in  the 
RAND-ABEL  reader's  mind. 


-  81  - 


Appendix  A 

LOCAL  SUPPORT  ENVIRONMENT  FOR  RANO-ABEL 


This  appendix  briefly  discusses  the  use  of  RAND-ABEL  at  The  RAND 
Corporation.  Its  contents  ace  specific  to  this  site.  Currently, 
RAND-ABEL  is  used  at  RAND  only  in  the  context  of  the  RAND  Strategy 
Assessment  System  (RSAS).  Consequently,  the  following  guidelines  are 
KSAS-specific. 

The  RAND~ABEL  Translator  is  generally  used  in  two  modes:  (1)  ns  an 
aid  in  preparing  syntactically  correct  RAND-ABEL  rules,  and  (2)  to 
produce  compilable  C  code  for  actual  incorporation  into  the  executable 
RSAC  model.  The  basic  difference  between  (1)  and  (2)  is  the  handling  of 
the  Data  Dictionary. 

Essentially,  in  preparing  RAND-ABEL  programs  data  items  are 
frequently  added,  changed,  or  removed;  as  a  result,  the  writer  connot 
use  the  master  data  dictionary,  but  must  use  his/her  own  extract  of  it. 
This  seeming  inconvenience  can  actually  be  an  aid,  as  it  forces  the 
writer  to  be  aware  of  how  his/her  program  integrates  with  the  other 
parts  of  the  model. 

In  all  cases  the  writer  incorporates  the  Data  Dictionary  into  the 
program  by  the  RAND-ABEL  Include  statement  (described  in  Sec.  VIII). 
Since  this  mechanism  allows  nesting  (that  is,  included  files  can  contain 
ocher  include  statements),  a  two-level  approach  is  used.  At  the  top  of 
o  RAND-ABEL  program  file  is  an  Include  for  a  single  Data  Dictionary 
file;  this  file  in  turn  contains  Includes  for  all  needed  Data  Dictionary 
components.  In  the  finished  program,  the  program  file  instead 
incorporates  the  master  Data  Dictionary  file. 

All  Data  Dictionary  files  end  in  ".D",  while  all  RAND-ABEL  program 
files  end  in  ".A",  The  RAND-ABEL  Translator  is  applied  to  the  ".A" 
files  only  (with  the  Includes  introducing  the  Data  Dictionary).  The 
result  of  applying  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator  is  (possibly)  a  series  of 


-  82  - 


«rror  massages  and  two  flits:  a  ".A.c"  flit  and  a  ".A. I"  flit.  Thtsa 
files  art  chtn  ustd  to  build  tht  Integrated  RSAS  model. 

All  Data  Dictionary  and  RAND-ABEL  program  files  art  evtntually 
registered  vith  the  RSAC  Data  Dictionary  administrator  for  the  final 
integration. 

Running  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator  itself  is  quite  simple.  Applying 
it  to  the  file  "rules. A"  would  involve  typing  (on  a  Sun  workstation1 
used  by  RSAS): 


/pl/install/bin/anabei  rules. A 

Most  people  will  probably  want  to  use  an  alias  f >r  this  and  so  will 
place  the  line: 

alias  enabel  /pl/install/bin/enabel 
into  their  ".cshrc"  files. 

In  reviewing  the  error  messages  produced  by  the  RAN!) -ABEL 
Translator,  two  things  should  be  kept  in  mind: 


(1)  The  range  of  legal  RAND-ABEL- language  inputs  is  quite  large; 
sometimes  it  takes  several  keywords  for  the  enAbeler  to  detect 
that  an  error  has  occurred.  Thus,  net  only  should  the  line 
number  and  word  printed  by  the  RAND-ABEL  Translator  bo  checked 
for  the  error,  but  tho  code  immediately  preceding  it  as  well. 

(2)  A  problem  with  block-structured  languages  (like  RAND-ABEL)  in 
general,  and  with  top-down  parsers  like  the  RAND-ABEL 
Translator  in  particular,  is  a  difficulty  in  recovering  from 
certain  errors.  (That  is,  there  is  often  a  problem  with  finding 
the  start  of  legal  statements  after  the  error  and  in  recovering 
context  skipped  over  because  of  the  error.)  As  a  result,  it  is 
quite  possible  for  a  single  error  to  produce  a  hundred  error 
messages.  Thus,  there  are  occasions  where  o.'ly  the  first  error 
reported  is  an  actual  problem,  while  subsequent  error  messages 
are  a  result  of  declarations,  definitions,  or  statement 
boundaries  having  been  missed.  Note  that  this  is  not  always 
the  case.  If  a  several-line  gap  appears  between  errors,  there 
is  a  good  chance  that  the  later  error  is  valid.  However,  an 


*Sun  workstations  running  Sun  operating  system  Release  3.2  (a 
System  V/Berkeley  UNIX  derivative  operating  system)  are  supported. 


-  83  - 


error  in  a  declaration  con  cause  spurious  errors  wherever  the 
item  being  declared  is  subsequently  used,  oven  it  thousands  of 
error-free  lines  intervene. 


In  all  cases,  the  RAND-ABKL  pcogram  writer  has  to  do  a  certain 
amount  of  learning  through  experience  and  through  sharing  experience 
with  other  writers.  Also,  there  are  certainly  cases  where  the  RAND-ABKL 
Translator  can  do  a  better  Job  of  finding  and  reporting  errors,  and  in 
recovering  from  them.  Communication  is  thus  very  important. 

CHANGING  RAND-ABEL  RULES  (SOURCE  CODE) 

To  make  changes  to  the  rules  governing  program  execution,  the 
analyst  must  edit  the  relevant  RAND-ABKL  source  file  (denoted  by  a  ".A" 
suffix  on  the  filename).  Those  changes  can  be  checked  for  correct 
syntax  and  incorporated  into  the  RSAS  game  by  either  of  two  methods. 

The  first  involves  the  use  of  the  RAND-ABKL  Interpreter,  while  the  other 
compiles  the  code  using  the  so-called  "Knabolor"  or  RAND-ABKL 
Translator.  These  methods  ore  described  briefly  below. 


Interpreting  Source  Code 

The  fastest  way  to  incorporate  new  rules  into  the  RSAS  gaming 
environment  is  to  move  the  functions  containing  those  rules  into  a 
special  Interpreter  directory  called  INT  under  Rsas/Run.  Anytime  a  ".A" 
RAND-ABKL  source  file  is  created  or  modified  in  that  directory,  the  RSAS 
monitor  will  use  that  code,  instead  of  the  compiled  version  of  the 
source  coda,  when  the  game  is  star'  -d  or  restarted  from  the  RSAS  Control 
Panel. 

Some  words  of  caution  will  help  to  avoid  confusion  and  mistakes 
when  moving  RAND-ABEL  rules  to  the  INT  directory.  First,  copy  the 
source  files  containing  the  functions  of  interest  to  the  INT  directory. 
Then,  edit  the  interpreted  files  to  remove  (1)  all  Include  "filename" 
statements  in  the  file,  and  (2)  any  other  functions  that  have  been  left 
unchanged  from  their  compiled  counterparts.  Removing  unchanged 
functions  simply  reduces  the  amount  of  code  interpreted  and  results  in 
faster  execution,  since  compiled  code  executes  approximately  an  order  of 


magnitude  faster  than  interpreted  code.  Also,  make  certain  that  there 
is  an  Owner:  statement  at  the  beginning  of  the  file  (Owner:  Blue.** 
for  example). 

The  file  ".defines"  contains  all  BOefine  macro  statements  identical 
to  the  ones  in  Rsas/Inic/incl.D  that  are  used  during  compilation.  This 
file,  along  with  the  Data  Dictionary  itself,  is  automatically  included 
by  the  Interpreter. 

To  temporarily  prevent  interpretive  executic'  of  a  source  file, 
move  the  source  file  to  the  Hide  directory  that  exists  under  the  1ST 
directory.  When  it  is  desired  to  interpret  the  source  file  again, 
merely  move  it  back  up  to  the  1ST  directory. 

The  following  diagram  illustrates  the  relationship  of  source 
directories  to  the  interpreted  source  directory. 

Source  and  Interpreter  Directory  Structure 

Rsas 

/  \ 

'  Src  Run 

/  \ 

SCL  Awp  Green  ...  INT 

/  \  \ 

Red  Blue  Hide 

When  the  System  Monitor  begins  or  resumes  running  a  game,  it  will 
first  check  the  INT  directory  for  source  files  to  interpret  and  invoke 
the  Interpreter  to  process  these  files.  If  the  files  are  free  of  syntax 
or  ocher  errors,  the  Interpreter  will  log  a  message  in  the  scrollable 
text  window  under  the  Control  Panel  (the  game  log  window)  indicating 
chat  the  functions  in  these  files  will  be  interpreted,  and  System 
Monitor  will  then  continue  the  game.  Otherwise,  error  messages  will 
appear  in  the  game  log  window  and  the  game  will  stop  immediately.  If 
the  game  is  resumed  a  second  time,  no  further  files  will  be  interpreted 
(until  the  user  edits  them  correcting  the  errors),  and  the  game  will 
continue  using  the  compiled  versions  of  the  functions. 


-  85  - 


Compiling  and  Loading  Source  Code 

Thore  ore  two  steps  involved  in  producing  on  executable  RSAS  from 
the  RAND-ABEL  source  files.  The  first  step  is  to  "cnnbol"  the  source 
code,  checking  syntax,  producing  C  code  and  eventually  ".o"  object 
files.  The  next  step  is  to  combine  the  various  ",o"  modules  into  a 
single  executable  (binary)  file  called  run. sun  in  Rsas/bin  directory. 

Incremental  Changes  to  Source  Code 

Changes  to  a  source  file  can  be  incorporated  into  RSAS  runs  by 
compiling  it  and  loading  the  resulting  output  with  the  existing  compiled 
modules.  See  the  instructions  above  for  determining  which  configuration 
file  to  touch3  in  ordor  to  compile  a  sot  of  .A  files. 

In  ordor  to  build  a  new  executable  RSAS  file,  use  the  makefile  in 
the  cop-lavol  Rsas  directory.  By  typing  "make"  in  chat  directory,  all 
source  code  will  be  chocked  for  modifications  (the  updated  files  will  be 
recompiled)  and  loaded  into  a  now  "run. new"  executable  »ile  in  the 
Rsas/bin  directory.  Renaming  that  file  to  "run. sun"  will  cause  it  to  be 
used  in  subsequent  RSAS  runs. 

Full  Data  Dictionary  Remake 

When  changes  are  made  to  Data  Dictionary  declarations  (o.g.,  by 
adding  a  new  variable  or  enumeration  type),  it  is  noccssary  to  remake 
all  RAND-ABEL  source  files.  This  can  be  dono  by  "couching"  the 
dictionary. D  file  in  Rsns/Init  directory  and  starting  the  RSAS  "make" 
from  the  top-level  Rsas  directory  as  shown  below  (assuming  the  current 
working  directory  is  Rsas) : 

cd  Init 

touch  dictionary. D 

cd  . . 

make 


2 


Touch  is  a  UNIX  command. 


-  86  - 


A  "full"  Data  Dictionary  rcmako  will  also  produce  a  new  Vorld 
Situation  Data  Sot  (WSDS)  filo  called  "wsds.ncw"  in  Rsas/Run/Wsds 
directory  that  should  bo  subsequently  renamed  to  "wsds"  to  use  it  in  an 
RSAS  run.  In  addition,  a  "scdb.now"  filo  is  produced  in  Rsos/Run  that 
should  be  renamed  "scdb.S"  for  using  the  Source  Code  Data  Base  (also 
known  ns  the  Cross  Reference  Tool). 


87 


Appandix  B 

QUICK  REFERENCE  GUIDE  TO  THE  RAND-ABEL  LANGUAGE 

KEYWORDS 

The  following  is  a  list  of  RAND-ABEL  keywords.  Words  that  always 
occur  in  saquanca  as  phrases  ara  shown  together;  words  are  shown 
separately  that  are  optional  or  are  one  of  several  possible  choices 
within  a  phrase. 


-  88  - 


and 

For 

are 

Format 

are  not 

from 

as 

Function 

Attribute 

Author 

Global 

Begin  Declarations 

If. .  .Than 

Break 

If. ..Than. ..Elsa 

by 

Ignore 

Clone 

in 

Include 

Comments 

Increase.. .by 

Concatenated  with 

Initialize 

Constant 

is 

Continue 

is  at  least 

Date 

Is  at  most 
is  greater  than 

Declare 

is  lass  than 

Declare... by  example 

is  not 

Decrease  by 

Default 

Let. .  .be 

Define 

Log 

#define 

Definition 

Macro 

Divide. .  .by 

Make 

Divided  by 

Method 

End 

minus 

modulo 

End  Declarations 

Multiply. .  .by 

Erasable 

Erase 

negative 

Evaluate 

No 

Everyone 

Not 

Exit 

of 

or 

Owner 

In  addition,  the  following  special  symbols  also  act 
having  special  meaning: 


e 

(...) 

(...) 

[».]  , 

♦ 

* 

/ 

X 

=  ~= 

>= 

<= 

>  < 

In  the  above  lists, 

ellipses 

(...)  are 

used  to  represent 

Parent 

Perform 

plus 

Pointar  to 

Print 

Prompt 

Ranga 

Raad 

Racord 

Rafarancas 

Raport  from 

Raporting 

Saif 

Sami-erasable 

Status 

String 

Table 
Thera  is 
times 
Trace 

Unorasable 

Unspecified 

Untrace 

Use 

using 

Validation 
Value  of 

While 

with 

Write 

Yes 


as  keywords 


intervening 


-  89  - 


words  in  a  standard  phrase.  (Noto:  Elsewhere  in  this  manual,  ellipses 
are  used  to  represent  certain  syntactic  options;  soc  item  //A,  below.) 

BNF  DESCRIPTION  OF  RAND-ABEL 

To  describe  the  RAND-AB».L  language  in  a  concise  format  for  easier 
scanning,  the  Backus-Naur  Form  (BNF)  of  RAND-ABEL  is  shown  below.  The 
following  notacional  conventions  are  used  in  this  BNF.  Nonterminals  in 
the  language  arc  denoccd  by  names  with  a  capitalized  first  letter  (e.g., 
Abel),  while  terminal  symbols  arc  all  uppercase  (e.g.,  ENUMERATION). 

Note  that  the  nonterminals  that  represent  keywords  are  shown  hero  in  all 
uppercase,  whereas  in  a  RAND-ABEL  program  only  the  first  character  may 
be  capitalized.  A  few  special  symbols,  namely 

|  anynamo*  <cir.pty> 

arc  part  of  the  notation,  NOT  part  of  the  RAND-ABEL  programming 
language.  Star  ' '*"  immediately  follows  any  quantity,  represented  by 
''anynnmc"  above,  chat  can  be  repeated  zero  or  more  times.  Tho  "|M 
separates  alternative  selections  that  ore  valid  in  the  same  construct. 
<cmpcy>  indicates  that  an  option  may  be  omitted  entirely. 


Abel 

Component 


Declaration 


:=  Component* 

:=  Declaration 
Definition 
OWNER  :  NAME 
OWNER  :  GLOBAL 

Trace_rcquest  IF  Opt_file_clouse  . 
Tracc_rcquest  FUNCTION  Opt_filc_clause  . 
Trace_rcqucst  NAME  TABLE  Opt_filc_clause  . 
Trace_rcquest  LET  Opt_file_clause  . 

TRACE  TO  FILE  STRING  . 

Dictionary 

:=  DECLARE  NAME  :  Assignment  . 

DECLARE  NAME  :  Call  . 

DEFINE  ENUMERATION  :  Member_list  . 


FOR  NAME  :  Statement 

FOR  NAME  Expr  :  Statement 

FOR  NAME  PREPOSITION  Expr  :  Statement 

FOR  NAME  NOT  PREPOSITION  Expr  :  Statement 

BREAK  . 

CONTINUE  . 

EXIT  . 

EXIT  REPORTING  Expr  . 

Trace_request  IF  Opt_file_clause  . 
Trace_request  FUNCTION  Opt_£ile_clause  . 
Trace_request  NAME  TABLE  Opt_file_clause  . 
Trace_request  LET  Opt_file_clause  . 

TABLE  Element  .  Opt_newlines  Rows  . 

TABLE  Block  .  Opt_newlines  Rows  . 

NAME  TABLE  .  Opt_newlines  Rows  . 

:=  {  Opt_declarations  Statements  } 

:=  LET  Expr  BE  Expr 


Block 

Assignment 


-  91  - 


Call  ::=  PERFORM  Element  Opt_uso_clauso 

Io_call  ::=  Io_primitivc  Expr_iist 

|  Io.primitivc  WITH  Expr  Expr_list 

|  Io_primitivo  NAME  WITH  Expr  Expr_list 

Io_primicivc  : :=  PRINT 
|  LOG 

|  EXPLAIN 

Conditional  ::=  IF  Expr  THEN 

Tracc_rcqucst  : :=  TRACE 

|  UNTRACE 

Opt_£ilc_clausc  ::=  <cmpty>  |  TO  FFILE  STRING 
Expr_list  : :=  Expr* 

Row  : :=  Expr_list  NEWLINE  Opt_ncwlinos 

Rows  : : =  Row* 

Expr  : :=  Logexpr 

|  Eval_clauso  Expr_list 

Eval.clause  : :=  EVALUATE 

|  EVALUATE  WITH  Factor 

Logexpr  : :=  Logterm 

|  Logexpr  OR  Logterm 

Logterm  : :=  Logfactor 

|  Logterm  AND  Logfactor 

Logfactor  : :=  Subexpr 

|  Logfactor  EQUAL  Subexpr 

|  Logfactor  N0T_EQUAL  Subexpr 

|  Logfactor  LESS_THAN  Subexpr 

|  Logfactor  GREATER_THAN  Subexpr 

|  Logfactor  LESS_0R_EQUAL  Subexpr 

|  Logfactor  GREATER_OR_EQUAL  Subexpr 

Subexpr  : :=  Term 

|  Subexpr  +  Term 

|  Subexpr  -  Term 

|  Subexpr  DOLLAR  Term 

Term  : :=  Factor 


-  92  - 


Factor 


Domlist 


Paramoxpr 
Pa ram list 


As_for 

Element 


Term  '*•  Factor 
Term  /  Factor 
Term  MODULO  Factor 
:=  Element 

Element  IS  IN'  Element 
REPORT  FROM  Element 
REPORT  FROM  Element  Paramoxpr 
Element  PREPOSITION  Domlist 
-Element 
NOT  Element 
=Elcmont 
~aE lament 
<F.  lament 
>Element 
<=Elomont 
>=E lament 
MAX*  Element 
MIN  Element 
:=  Factor 

Factor  COMMA  AND  Domlist 
Factor  COMMA  Domlist 
:=  USING  Expr  As_Cor  NAME  Parnmlist 
<empty> 

COMMA  Expr  As_£or  NAME  Paramlist 
COMMA  AND  Expr  As_for  NAME  Paramlist 
:=  AS 
FOR 

:=  VALUE  OF  Element 
POINTER  TO  Element 
FUNCTION  Element 
(  Expr  ) 

{  NAME  SUCH  THAT  Expr  ) 

{  ) 

{  Member.. list  } 


-  93  - 


Me,mbor_list 


Poss_clauso 

Qpt.ncwlincs 

Dictionary 

Dict_cntrics 

Dict_ontry 


Description 

Descriptor 


|  STRING 
|  FLOAT 
|  INTEGER 
|  BOOLEAN 
|  UNSPECIFIED 
i  UNIVERSE 
|  NAME 

|  Poss_elausc  NAME 
: :=  NAME 

|  NAME  Hcmbcr_lise 

|  NAME  COMMA  Member.. list 

: :=  POSSESSIVE 
|  Poss_clnuso  POSSESSIVE 
::=  NEWLINE* 

::=  BEGIN  DECLARATIONS  .  Dict_cntrios  END  DECLARATIONS 
: :=  Dict_ontry 
|  Dict_entrics  Dict_cntry 
::=  DEFAULT  Descriptor 
|  Declaration  Description 
|  Nodofault_dccl 
: :=  Description* 

: :=  Ownership 
|  Access_method 
|  Macro_mcthod 
|  Func_method 
|  Usage 
|  Init_struct 
|  Acccss^type 
|  Prompt_func 
|  Prompt_string 
|  Val_func 
j  Val_range 
|  Format 
I  Author 


-  94  - 


Ownership 


Acccss.mcthod 


Macro„mcthod 

Func.mothod 

Usage 

Usc_typo 


Inic_struct 

Accoss_typo 


Group_list 


Group 

Piompt_func 

Prompt..string 

Val_func 


Dace 

lnformative_dof 

References 

Comments 

Status 

:=  OWNER  :  NAME  . 

OWNER  :  Poss_ciausc  NAME  . 

OWNER  :  GLOBAL  . 

OWNER  :  EVERYONE  . 

:=  METHOD  :  DIRECT  .  . 

METHOD  :  MACRO  . 

METHOD  :  FUNCTION  . 

:=  MACRO  :  STRING  . 

:=  FUNCTION  :  NAME  . 

FUNCTION  :  Poss_clause  NAME  . 

:=  USE  :  Usc_typo  . 

:=  CLONE 
NOCI.ONE 
CONSTANT 
:=  INITIALIZE  . 

NO  INITIALIZE  . 

:=  READ  :  Group_list  . 

NOREAD  :  Group_Iist  . 

WRITE  :  Group_Iist  . 

NOWRITE  :  Group_Iist  . 

:=  EVERYONE 
Group 

Group_list  COMMA  Group 
::=  NAME 

|  Poss_clauso  NAME 

::=  PROMPT  FUNCTION  :  NAME  . 

|  PROMPT  FUNCTION  :  Poss_clause  NAME 
::=  PROMPT  STRING  :  STRING  . 

::=  VALIDATION  FUNCTION  :  NAME  . 


-  95  - 


Val_rangc  : 

Number  : 

Formic  : 

Author  : 

Date  : 

InfQrmntiva_dof  : 
References  : 

Comments  : 

Stneus  : 

Nodafnult_dccl  : 


I 


I 


Comment 


VALIDATION  FUNCTION  :  Poss_clausc  NAME  . 
=  VALIDATION  RANGE  :  Number  TO  Number  . 

-  INTEGER 
FLOAT 

;=  READ  FORMAT  :  STRING  . 

WRITE  FORMAT  :  STRING  . 

=  AUTHOR  :  [  STRING  )  . 

*  DATE  :  [  STRING  )  . 

=  DEFINITION  :  (  STRING  )  . 

=  REFERENCES  :  (  STRING  )  . 
a  COMMENTS  :  (  STRING  )  . 

=  STATUS  :  (  STRING  )  . 

=  NO  DEFAULT  METHOD  . 

NO  DEFAULT  USE  . 

NO  DEFAULT  INITIALIZE  . 

NO  DEFAULT  READ  . 

NO  DEFAULT  WRITE  . 

NO  DEFAULT  PROMPT  FUNCTION  . 

NO  DEFAULT  PROMPT  STRING  . 

NO  DEFAULT  VALIDATION  FUNCTION  . 

NO  DEFAULT  VALIDATION  RANGE  . 

NO  DEFAULT  OWNER  . 

NO  DEFAULT  READ  FORMAT  . 

NO  DEFAULT  WRITE  FORMAT  . 

NO  DEFAULT  AUTHOR  . 

NO  DEFAULT  DATE  . 

NO  DEFAULT  DEFINITION  . 

NO  DEFAULT  REFERENCES  . 

NO  DEFAULT  COMMENTS  . 

NO  DEFAULT  STATUS  . 


:=  [  STRING  ] 


-  96  - 


SUMMARY  OF  RAND-ABEL  SYNTAX  CATEGORIES 

The  following  pages  contain  a  summary  of  the  RAND-A8KL  syntax 
chores  contained  within  this  document. 


•^-expression - - - - «— - + 

j  Report  from  in  net  Jon  -  in  vocation  j 

I  I 

|  Evaluate  unitparan  .  .  .  unieparaa  | 

|  Evaluate  with  forsat-spec  unit par am  .  .  .  unitparao  j 

I  ! 

|  unary-operator  expression  | 

j  expression  binary-operator  expression  j 

I  I 

|  sinpio-expr  | 

I  I 


-  97  - 


■i-sinple-expr - + 

i  i 

I  Function  funetion-n/isc  | 

!  I 

j  ^-unitparaa . . . . . +  | 


Yes 

No 

enucarated-value 
nuceric- literal 
quoted-string 
variable-nasa 
Unspecified 

Mt 

(  expression  ) 


,  ■  --  - T  | 

I  +- lvalue - - — - - -f  | 


I  |  variable- nane 

I  I 

|  j  Occupant  of  variabla-naao 

j  j  Occupant  of  array-access 

I  I 

|  |  Pointer  to  variable-naae 

j  j  Pointer  to  Attribute  array-naae 

i  i 

!  i  +-array-accoss - - (■ 

ill  I 

{  |  |  arrny-nam  of  sitaplo-expr  ,  ...  | 

ill  in  ,  and  | 

III  by  ,  and  j 


,  siaple-cxpr 
,  and 


-  98  - 


+ -declaration — - - - - - — 

I 

|  Declare  variable-name: 

j  Declare  variable-name  by  example: 

I 

|  Let  variable-name  be  expression . 

j  Let  variable-name  be  id on ci Hoc  constant. 

|  Let  variable-name  be  enumerated  variable 

I 

j  Declare  array 'name: 

j  Declare  array-name  by  example: 

I 

1  Let  array-name  of  simple-oxpr  ,  .  .  , 

j  Let  array-name  In  simplo-expr  ,  and  .  .  . 

j  Let  array-name  by  simplo-expr  ,  and  .  .  . 

I 

|  .  .  .  ,  simplo-expr 

j  .  .  .  ,  and  simplo-expr 

I 

|  be  expression . 

I 

|  Declare  func-namo  : 

j  Declare  func-namo  by  example: 

I 

|  Let  expression  be  Report  from  named-function-call . 

Perform  named- function-call . 


-  99  - 

“"a  i/flut  10U~QGk  lUJ.LJ.Ou  -------- 

1 

|  Define  namcd-function-call 

:  declaration  .  .  . 

I 

% 

1 

declaration 

1 

statement  .  .  . 

1 

1 

statement 

|  End. 

1 

+-naaed- function-call - 

I 

|  func-namo 

I 

|  func-u/aa  using  expression  as  param-name  ,  .  .  . 

|  for  ,  and 

I 

!  .  .  .  ,  expression  as  param-naao 

j  ,  and  for 


*- fence  ion- invocation - 

I 

|  named- function-call 

I 

|  i f unc- per 

I 

|  func-ptr  using  expression  as  param-namo  ,  .  . 

I  for  ,  and 

I 

I  .  .  .  ,  expression  as  param-naao 

j  ,  and  for 


-  100  - 


•^-statement - + 

I  I 

|  Let  lvalue  be  expression.  \ 

j  Let  pointer  be  expression.  j 


Increase  J value  by  expression. 

Decrease  Ivaluo  by  expression. 

Multiply  lvalue  by  expression. 

Divide  lvalue  by  expression. 

If  Boolean-expression  Then  statement 

If  Boolean-expression  Then  statement  Else  statement 

For  variable  :  statement 

While  Boolean-expression  :  statement 

Continue. 

Break. 

Table  (unc-nnno 
Table  compound-statement 
Decision  Table 

table-header. 

table-body. 

Pe  r  f  or  m  f unc t ion  - invoca t ion . 

Exit. 

Exit  Reporting  sinplo-expr. 

Print  unitparan  .  .  .  unit  par  am. 

Print  with  format-spec  unit  pa  ram  .  .  .  unitparan. 

Print  straannand  unit  pa  ram  .  .  .  unitparam. 

Print  streannane  with  format-spec  unitparam  .  .  .  unitparan. 

Log  unitparan  .  .  .  unitparan. 

Log  with  fornat-spec  unitparan  .  .  .  unitparan. 

Log  streamnamo  unitparan  .  .  .  unitparam. 

Log  streanname  with  format-spue  unitparan  .  .  .  nit  par  am. 

{  declaration  .  .  .  declaration 


statement  .  .  .  statement  } 


-  101  - 


{} 

Trace  If. 

Trace  Function. 


Untrace  If. 
Untrace  Function. 


-  102  - 


+-data  dictionary  specification  block 

I 

|  Begin  Declarations, 
j  [No)  Default  DDdcclaration  ... 

i 

|  declaration 

I 

|  DDdcclaration  .  .  . 

I 

I  DDdcclaration 

i 

|  declaration 

I 

|  DDdcclaration  .  .  . 

I 

|  DDdcclaration 


End  Declarations. 


+ -DDdccla ra tion - 

I 

|  Method:  Direct. 

1  Method:  Function. 

|  Method:  Macro. 

I 

1  Function:  func-namo. 

I 

j  Macro:  string-litoral . 

I 

|  Use:  Clone, 

j  Use:  No  Clone, 

j  Use:  Constant. 


Owner: 

owner-name . 

Owner: 

Global. 

Read 

Read 

Read 

Everyone. 
owner-name  .  . 

owner-name  ,  . 

.  owner-name . 

.  .  ,  owner-name. 

Noread 

Noread 

Noread 

Everyone. 
owner-name  .  . 

owner-name  ,  . 

.  owner-name. 

.  .  ,  owner-name. 

Write 

Write 

Everyone. 
owner-name  .  . 

.  owner-name . 

-  103  - 


Write  ounor-nnna  ,  ...  ,  ounar-mma.  \ 

I 

Nowrite  Everyone.  | 

Nowrite  owner-name  .  .  .  owner-nan o.  | 

Nowrite  owner-name  ,  .  .  .  ,  owner-name.  j 

I 

Read  Format:  string-literal .  | 

I 

Write  Format:  string-literal .  \ 

I 

Validation  Range:  numeral  to  nuciorfl  1 .  \ 

I 

Validation  Function:  func-namo.  | 

I 

Prompt  Function:  (unc-nana.  i 

Prompt  String:  string-litoral .  I 

I 

Initialize.  j 

I 

No  Initialize.  j 

I 

Author:  common t.  | 

i 

i 

Date:  coanont.  I 

I 

Definition:  comment.  | 

I 

References:  comment.  | 

Comments:  comment .  | 

I 

Status:  comment.  | 

I 

No  Default  Author.  | 

No  Default  Comments.  | 

No  Default  Date.  j 

No  Default  Definition.  | 

No  Default  Initialize.  j 

No  Default  Method.  j 

No  Default  Owner.  | 

No  Default  Prompt  Function.  j 

No  Default  Prompt  String.  | 

No  Default  Read  Format.  | 

No  Default  Write  Format.  j 

No  Default  References.  j 

No  Default  Status.  | 

No  Default  Use.  j 

No  Default  Validation  Function.  | 

No  Default  Validation  Range.  j 

I 

+ . . . + 


-  104  - 

+-r.QCa-scacezanc - 

I 

|  ^Define  nano  t  unquoccd-sfiring  ) . 

1  Include  " filename". 

I 

.t _ _ 


-  105  - 

INDEX 


\  (backslash)  codas,  used  in  format-spec  for  I/O  56 

.  .  .  nocation,  meaning  of  6 

(...)  used  co  delimit  compound  statement  59 

|  logical  or  operator  25 

-=  operator  22 

-  logical  not  operator  25 

--  (synonym  for  Unspecified)  14 
#define  meta-statement  62 
$  string  concatenation  operator  26 
5  codes,  used  for  I/O  formatting  55 
t  logical  and  operator  25 

*  (Hulciplication  operator)  21 

*  (Addition  operator)  21 
,  and  19 

-  (Subtraction  operator)  21 

-  (Unary  negation  sign)  21 
/  (Division  operator)  21 
<~  operator  23 

<  operator  23 

=  operator  22 

operator  23 
>  operator  23 

.A  RAND-ABEL  program  files  at  RAND  61 
.A.c  file,  produced  by  RAND-ABEL  Translator  82 

.A. I  file,  produced  by  RAND-ABEL  Translator  82 

.eshre  file,  inclusion  of  an  alias  within  82 
.D  data  dictionary  files  at  RAND  61 

Addition  operator  (*)  21 

Address  of  phrase  20 

Alias  for  RAND-ABEL  Translator  access  path,  how  to  create 
Aliases,  creation  of  using  ^define  meta-statement  62 
and  (fc)  logical  operator  25 
and  19 

are  not  operator  22 

Array  declaration,  prefix  form  of  29 

Array  Declarations  29 

Array,  basic  data  type  12 

array-access  16 

array-access ,  definition  of  19 

ASCII  characters,  production  of  in  output  56 

Assignment  statement  37 

as  34  „  35 

Author  data  dictionary  declaration  72 


82 


Backslash  (\)  codes,  used  in  format-spec  for  I/O  56 
Backus -Naur  Form  of  RAND-ABEL  89 


-  106  - 


Basic  RAND-ABEL  data  types  11 
Begin  Declarations  66 
binary-operator  17 
3NF  description  89 
Boldface,  meaning  of  5 

Boolean  data  type,  default  output  format  for  54 

Boolean  values,  result  of  logical  operators  25 

Boolean,  basic  data  type  12 

Break  statement  42 

Buffers  in  RAND-ABEL  I/O  58 

Built-in  RAND-ABEL  data  types  11 

by  19 

C  programming  language  1,  2 

Case  shifts,  distinguishing  global  from  local  variables  7 

Case  shifts,  in  RAND-ABEL  keywords  5 

Changing  RAND-ABEL  rules  in  the  RSAS  environment  83 

Character  string,  basic  data  type  12 

Clone  option  in  Use  declaration  68 

Close-stream  function  57 

Comments,  notation  for  9 

Comments  data  dictionary  declaration  73 

Comparison  of  two  enumerated  values  24 

Comparison  of  two  strings  23 

Comparison  Operators  22 

Compiling  and  loading  source  code  85 

Compound  statement  59 

concatenated  with  string  operator  26 

CortHtional  execution  39 

Constant  option  in  Use  declaration  68 

Continue  statement  42 

Coprocesscs  76 

Coprocessos,  rules  for  the  use  of  77 

Coroutines  (sec  coprocesses)  76 

Creating  a  coprocess  using  Startup-plan  function  76 

Creating  a  data  value  of  type  process  76 

Data  dictionary  declaration  section,  complete  example  75 

Data  dictionary  files  at  RAND  81 

data  dictionary  specification  block  66 

Data  Dictionary  65 

Data  Editor,  in  RSAS  71 

Data  types  11 

Date  data  dictionary  declaration  72 

Debug. out  file  64 

Debugging,  statements  useful  for  64 

Decision  table,  example  45 

Declaration  of  functions  30 

Declarations  28 

Declare  ignore  statement  80 

Declare... by  example  array  declaration  29 


-  107  - 


Declare... by  example  declaration  28 

Declare  array  declaration  29 

Declare  declaration  28 

Decrease. . .by  statement  38 

Default  declarations,  creating  and  removing  73 

Default  output  formats  54 

Default  data  dictionary  declaration  73 

Define  statement  for  function  definition  33 

Defining  declarations  within  a  data  dictionary  declaration 

Definition  data  dictionary  declaration  72 

Directory  structure  diagram,  RSAS  84 

direct  option  in  method  declaration  67 

Divide. .  .by  statement  38 

divided  by  operator  21 

Division  by  xoro  21 

Division  oporaeor  (/)  21 

Don't  care  19 

Ellipsis  (.  .  .),  meaning  of  6 
Else  39 

cnabcl,  program  name  of  RAND-ABEL  Translator  82 
End  Declarations  66 
End  33 

Enumerated  data  type  13 

Enumerated  data  typo,  default  output  format  for  55 
Enumerated,  basic  data  type  12 
Equality  cost  for  character  strings  22 

Equality  test  for  enumerated  values  23 

Equality  Tests  22 

Error  messages  produced  by  RAND-ABEL  Translator  82 

Error  scream  56 

Evaluate. .  .with  expression  17 

Evaluate  expression  17 

everyone  option  in  read  and  write  declarations  69 

Exit  reporting  33 

Exit  statement  51 

Exponential  notation  12 

expression ,  definition  of  17 

expression ,  moaning  of  16 

File  read/writc  access  data  dictionary  declarations  69 

Flush-scream  function  57 

format-spec  17 ,  53 

format-spec ,  definition  of  55 

Formats,  default  output  54 

For  statement  41 

Full  Data  Dictionary  remake  85 

Function  Definition  33 

function- invocation  35 

Functions,  declaration  of  30 

Functions,  invoking  and  exiting  50 


67 


-  108  - 


Function  expression  19 

function  option  in  method  declaration  67 

Global  data  dictionary  declaration  68 

How  to  change  RAND -ABEL  rules  without  recompiling 
Hyphen  (-)  and  underscore  (_),  in  identifiers  7 

Identifier  constant  13 

Identifier  constant,  default  output  format  for  55 
jtfencJ/ ier  7 

Identifying  declarations  72 

If. .  .Then. .  .Else  statement  39 

Include  meta-statement  63 

Increase. . .by  statement  38 

Incremental  changes  to  source  code  85 

Inequality  of  two  identifier  constants  24 

Inequality  of  two  strings  23 

Inequality  Tests  23 

Information  declarations  72 

Initialize  data  dictionary  declaration  71 

Input  stream  56 

Input/output  statements  52 

Integer  data  type,  default  output  format  for  54 

Integer,  basic  data  type  12 

Interpreter  directory  83 

Interpreter  83 

Interpreter,  preventing  execution  84 
Invoking  a  function  50 
in  19 

is  at  least  operator  23 
is  at  most  operator  23 
is  greater  than  operator  23 

is  less  than  operator  23 
is  not  operator  22 
is  operator  22 
Italics,  meaning  of  5 

Keywords ,  RAND -ABEL  5 

Keywords,  table  of  all  RAND-ABEL  88 

Let... be  statement  38 

Loading  compiled  source  code  85 

Local  support  environment  for  RAND-ABEL  81,  87 

Logical  data  type  12 

Logical  Operators  24 

Logical  operators,  meaning  of  25 

Log  statement  53 

lvalue  16 

lvalue,  definition  of  19 


83 


Macro  definitions,  using  #define  meta-statement  62 

macro  option  in  method  declaration  67 

Matrix,  represented  in  RAND-ABEL  30 

Meta-statements  62 

Method  data  dictionary  declaration  67 

minus  operator  21 

modulo  operator  21 

Multiple  rows  in  cablo-hofider  48 

Multiplication  operator  (*)  21 

Multiply. ,  .by  statement  38 

named- funecion-cal 1 ,  definition  of  34 

negative  operator  21 

No  clone  option  in  Use  declaration  68 

No  Default  data  dictionary  declaration  74 

No  Initialize  data  dictionary  declaration  71 

Noise  words,  abiliey  to  declare  and  use  80 

Noread  data  dictionary  declaration  69 

not  (~)  logical  operator  25 

Nowrite  data  dictionary  declaration  69 

No  12,  19 

Null  statement  60 

Numeric  Operators  21 

Occupant  of  phrase  20 
of  19 

Open-stream  function  57 
Operators  20 
Options,  notation  for  5 
or  (|)  logical  operator  25 

Output  formats,  default  54 

Output  stream  56 

Owner  data  dictionary  declaration  68 

Parenthesized  expression  19 

Parent  reserved  coprocoss  variable  77 

Parent  13 

Perform  statement  35,  50 
Period  (.),  in  identifiers  7 
plus  operator  21 

Pointer  data  type,  default  output  format  for  55 

Pointer  to  phrase  19 

Pointer,  basic  data  type  12 

Precedence  relations  for  RAND-ABEL  operators  27 

Prefix  form  of  array  declaration  29 

Print  statement  53 

Process,  basic  data  type  13 

Prompt  function/string  data  dictionary  declaration 
Quick-reference  guide  to  RAND-ABEL  syntax  87 


-  no  - 


RAND  Strategy  Assessment  Center  (RSAC)  1 
RAND  Serategy  Assessment  System  (RSAS)  1,  65,  81 
RAND-ABEL  Interpreter  S3 
RAND-A8EL  keywords  5 

RAND-ABEL  local  support  environment  81,  87 

RAND-ABEL  reserved  words  5 

RAND-ABEL  syntax,  quick-reference  guide  to  87 

RAND-ABEL  Translator  1,2 

RAND-ABEL  Translator,  access  to  at  RAND  82 

Read  format  data  dictionary  declaration  70 

Read  data  dictionary  declaration  69 

Real  data  typo,  default  output  format  for  54 

Real,  basic  data  type  12 

References  data  dictionary  declaration  75 

Remaking  the  full  Data  Dictionary  85 

Remove-plan  function  to  terminate  a  process  77 

Repetitive  execution  40 

Report  from  expression  17,  35 

Reporting  51 

Reserved  words,  RAND-ABEL  5 

Reserved  words,  coble  of  all  RAND-ABEL  88 

Returning  control  from  a  function  with  exit  statement  51 

ROSIE  programming  language  2 

RSAC  (RAND  Stratogy  Assessment  Center)  1 

RSAS  (RAND  Strategy  Assessment  System  1,  65,  71,  78,  81 

RSAS  directory  structure  diagram  84 

run. sun  05 

Self  reserved  coprocess  variable  77 

Self  13 

sJctplQ-Qxpr  16 

sJapla-expr ,  definition  of  19 

Sleep  function  for  coproccssos  76 

Special  characters  within  a  tablo-bcador  46 

Special  symbols,  cable  of  all  RAND-ABEL  88 

Standard  input  52 

Standard  output  52 

Startup-plan  function  76 

stacenant  37 

Status  data  dictionary  declaration  73 
stdacr  56 
sedin  56 

sedout  ns  standard  output  stream  53 
stdouc  56 

Stream,  basic  data  type  13 
streonnam  53 
Streams  (for  I/O)  56 

String  data  type,  default  output  format  for  54 
String  Operator  26 
String,  basic  data  type  12 

Strongly  typed  language  11 


-  Ill  - 


Subroutines,  seme  as  functions  in  RAND-ABBL  SO 

Subtraction  operator  (-)  21 

Support  environment  for  RAND-ABEL  81,  87 

Synonyms,  creation  of  using  ^define  meta-statement  62 

Syntactic  categories,  list  of  RAND-ABEL  96 

Syntax  chart,  explanation  S 

Syntax  of  RAND-ABEL,  quick-reference  guide  to  87 

cablo-bodys  rules  for  constructing  49 

cabJa-baader,  ru»es  for  constructing  46 

Table  statement  43 

Terminating  a  corrocess  77 

Text  island,  within  a  cabla-beador  46 

Then  39 

times  operator  21 

Top-level  RAND-ABEL  declarations,  definitions,  and  statements  79 
Trace  statement  64 

Truncation  of  result  in  integer  division  21 
unary-oparacor  17 

Underscore  (_)  and  hyphen  (-),  in  identifiers  7 
unicparan  16 

vnScparan,  definition  of  19 
UNIX  1 

Unspecified  14,  19 
Untrace  statement  64 

Use  Clone/No  Clone/Constant  data  dictionary  declaration  68 
using  34,  35 

Validation  range/function  data  dictionary  declaration  71 

Value  of  phrase  19 

Vector,  represented  in  RAND-ABEL  30 

While  statement  41 

White  space,  in  RAND-ABEL  statements  9 
World  Situation  Data  Set  (WSDS)  65 
Write  format  data  dictionary  declaration  70 
Write  data  dictionary  declaration  69 

Yes  12,  19 


-  113  - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bell  Laboratories,  UI1IX  Programmer' s  Manual. 

Davis,  Paul  K.,  Applying  Artificial  Intel  1 igencu  Techniques  to 
Strategic-Level  Coming  and  Simulation,  The  RAS'D  Corporation, 

N-2752-RC,  June  1988.  (Also  published  in  H.  Elzas,  T.  I.  Oren,  and  B. 
P.  Zeigier  (eds.),  Modelling  and  Simulation  Methodology  in  the 
Artificial  Intelligence  Era,  Elsevier  Science  Publishers,  8.  V. 

(North- Holland) ,  1986,  pp.  315-33S. 

Davis,  Paul  K. ,  Bruce  W.  Bennett,  and  William  Schwabe,  "Analytic  War 
Gaming  with  the  RAND  Strategy  Assessment  System  (RSAS),"  The  RAND 
Corporation,  P-7464,  July  1988. 

Davis,  Paul  K. ,  and  H.  Edward  Hall,  Overview  of  RSAS  System  Software , 
Tim  RAND  Corporation,  N-2755-NA,  forthcoming. 

Davis,  Paul  K.,  and  James  A.  V innate Id,  The  RAilD  Strategy  Assessment 
Center:  An  Overview  and  Interim  Conclusions  about  Utility  and 
Develops;, <nt  Options ,  The  RAND  Corporation,  R-2945-DNA,  March  1983 . 

Fain,  Jill,  D.  Gorlin,  F.  Hays-Roth,  S.  Roscnschcin,  H.  Sowizral,  and  D. 
Waterman,  The  ROSIE  Language  Reference  Manual,  Tho  RAND  Corporation, 
N-1647-ARPA,  December  1981. 

Kornigban,  Brian  V.,  and  Dennis  M.  Ricl*io,  Tho  C  Programming  Language 
Proncic-Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs,  New  Jersey,  1978. 

Schwabe,  William,  and  Lewis  M.  Jamison,  A  Rule- Based  Policy-Level  Model 
of  Ronsu per power  Behavior  in  Herat  epic  Conflicts ,  The  RAND 
Corporation,  R-2962-DNA,  December  1982. 

Shapiro,  Norman  Z.,  H.  Edward  Hall,  Robert  H.  Anderson,  and  Mark 

LaCosse,  The  RARD-ABEL  Programming  Language:  History,  Rationale,  and 
Design,  Tho  RAND  Corporation,  R-3274-NA,  August  1985. 


