AD-A102  513  UNIVERSITY  OF  SOUTHERN  CALIFORNIA  REDONDO  BEACH  8EHAV— ETC  F/6  9/2 

DESIGN  FOR  THE  MAINTAINER:  PROJECTING  MAINTENANCE  PERFORMANCE  F— £TC(U> 
JUL  81  D  M  TOWNEt  M  R  FEHLING#  N  A  BOND  NOOO14-0O-C-O493 

UNCLASSIFIED  TR-95  NL 


TO  FILE  COPY  ADA!  0251  3 


DESIGN  FOR  THE  MAINTAINER : 

PROJECTING  MAINTENANCE  PERFORMANCE  FROM  DESIGN  CHARACTERISTICS 


Douglas  M.  Towne 
Michael  R.  Fehling 
Nicholas  A.  Bond 

With  the  assistance  of 
Anthony  K.  Mason 
Mark  C.  Johnson 


July  1981 


B 


DTIC 

ELECTE 


AUG  5 


1981 


BEHAVIORAL  TECHNOLOGY  LABORATORIES 
Department  of  Psychology 
University  of  Southern  California 


f 


APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE:  DISTRIBUTION  UNLIMITED 

81  8  06  054 


DESIGN  FOR  THE  MAINTAINER: 


PROJECTING  MAINTENANCE  PERFORMANCE  FROM  DESIGN  CHARACTERISTICS 


Douglas  M.  Towne 
Michael  R.  Fehling 
Nicholas  A.  Bond 

With  the  Assistance  of 
Anthony  K.  Mason 
Mark  C.  Johnson 


July  1981 


Technical  Report  No.  95 
BEHAVIORAL  TECHNOLOGY  LABORATORIES 
Department  of  Psychology 
University  of  Southern  California 


A  multidisciplinary  program  jointly  sponsored  by 

The  Engineering  Psychology  Programs  and  The  Information  Systems  Programs 

Office  of  Naval  Research 

and 

The  Human  Factors  Engineering  Division 
Naval  Air  Development  Center 


Under  Contract  No.  N00014-80-C-0^93 
ONR  NR196-165  ' 


APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE:  DISTRIBUTION  UNLIMITED 


SECURlTv  Classification  of  This  page  rWhmn  Date  Entered) 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

READ  1NSTRL'  CTtONS 

BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

1  RE  PON  T  number  j;  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO 

Technical  Report  No.  1  / 

3  FEQP|Dj,r^ATA^O:  Number 

A  TJ.ILF  (m*  Subtil  tt-t  f'P~f 

RESIGN  FOR  THE  MAINTAINER:  PROJECTING  ' 

MAINTENANCE  PERFORMANCE  FROM  DESIGN  i 

CHARACTERISTICS  #  ^  , 

;i  „ T9Pr-ar~nvyn  a  m.tp  cohered 

^Technical  Reoear.t.y] 

June  15,  L~3<^/)u\y  1,  1981 

6  PERFORMING  ORG  REPORT  NUMBER 

Technical  Report  No.  95  u 

3-  M}**&*' »)  fly  j  . _ .. 

)  Douglas  M./Towne /Michael  R./Fehling^  Nicholas 
A.y/Bond^-.  L - -  - /  j ^ 

B  CONTRACT  OR  GR  An  t  number  aj 

/iOOOl  4 - 80- C- 0493j 

S  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  and  address 

Behavioral  Technology  Laboratories 

University  of  Southern  California 

1845  So.  Elena  Ave.,  Redondo  Beach,  CA  90277 

10  program  EuEmEn-  PROJECT  task 
AREA  E.OOR*  unit  vuybjav  I 

/-  /  ;  / 

'I  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Engineering  Psychology  Programs 

Office  of  Naval  Research  (Code  455) 

.  Arlington.  VA  22217 

12  REPORT  DATE  - ^  , 

July  198|  {•c22<7%J 

13  number  of  pages'.-^' - - - 

90  +  iv 

IA  MONITORING  AGENCY  name  A  ADORESSf'll  dlt/trmnl  trow  Control  1  Ing  Offleaj 

yp W  79  -2 1 

/ 

15  SECURITY  CLASS.  (0/  fhi*  report ; 

UNCLASSIFIED  j 

IS*  DECLASSIFICATION  DOWNGRADING 
SCHEDULE 

16  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (O I  thl «  Report j 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  A 

Approved  for  public  release; 
Distribution  Unlimited 


17  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  the  mbatrect  entered  In  Block  20.  It  dltlerent  from  Report) 

Approved  for  public  release:  Distribution  unlimited 


IB  supplementary  notes 

Also  sponsored  by  Information  Systems  Programs, 

Office  of  Naval  Research  and 

The  Human  Factors  Engineering  Division, 

Naval  Air  Development  Center 

19-  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  reveraa  aide  If  neceeemry  and  Identity  by  block  number) 

Maintainability  Fault  iso1ation 

Maintenance  performance  Diagnosis 

Troubleshooting  ~  " 


20.  ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  reveree  aide  It  neceaeery  and  Identity  by  block  number ) 


DO 


We  hypothesize  that  the  maintenance  activity  imposed  by  an  equipment 
may  be  effectively  projected  from  one  or  more  computed  reference  maintenance 
strategies.  These  include  multi-variable  strategies  (optimum  or  "expert" 
approaches),  single-variable  strategies  (time-dominant,  reliability-dominant, 
information-dominant,  component-dominant),  and  a  stochastic  strategy  in  which 
tests  are  selected  at  random.  The  optimum  performance  strategy  and  the 


*°*><  Ii73 

1  JAN  7)  WJ 


COITION  OF  I  NOV  «>  IS  OBSOLETE 
S/N  0102  LF  014-660 


><6Q1  -  .  Ajr.n 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  or  This  RASE  (When  Date  into 


r 

UNCLASSIFIED _ 

•  .PITY  CL  ASSlFlCATiON  OF  Tm»S  Dmtm  tntmrmd^ 


random  testing  strategy  provide  bounds  on  the  expected  maintenance  perform¬ 
ance.  The  single-variable  approaches  are  suspected  to  be  reasonable 
approximations  of  human  activity  under  various  conditions. 

The  constituents  of  maintenance  performances  generated  from  these 
strategies,  and  their  associated  performance  times,  are  shown  to  be  a 
direct  function  of  system  design.  Computed  manual  times  for  each  of  these 
approaches  are  presented  for  one  equipment.  These  preliminary  data  suggest 
that  maintenance  time  may  be  considerably  less  sensitive  to  fault  diagnosis 
strategy  than  expected. 

Our  work  leads  us  to  view  a  troubleshooter  as  a  strategically  flexible, 
data-driven,  and  opportunistic  problem  solver.  We  describe  some  recent 
artificial  intelligence  models  of  problem  solving  which  support  our  conception 
of  the  troubleshooter.  Such  models  provide  a  basis  from  which  the  computed 
strategies  described  elsewhere  could  arise. 

An  interactive,  computer-controlled,  video  system  will  present  main¬ 
tenance  problems  to  experimental  maintainers,  to  determine  if  reliable 
projections  of  maintenance  workload  can  be  made  from  computed  strategies. 

This  configuration  allows  subjects  to  direct  the  maintenance  procedure  in 
real  time,  observe  tests  being  performed,  abort  tests  in  progress,  and  to 
notice  conditions  not  explicitly  sought.  These  performance  conditions  are 
crucial  to  observation  of  realistic  maintenance  performance  in  an  experimental 
environment. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SUMMARY 


Design  for  the  Maintainer: 
Projecting  Maintenance  Performance 
from  Design  Characteristics 


We  hypothesize  that  the  maintenance  activity  imposed  by  an  equipment 
may  be  effectively  projected  from  one  or  more  computed  reference  main¬ 
tenance  strategies.  These  include  multi-variable  strategies  (optimum  or 
'‘expert*  approaches),  single-variable  strategies  (time-dominant,  reliability- 
dominant,  information-dominant,  component-dominant) ,  and  a  stochastic 
strategy  in  which  tests  are  selected  at  random.  The  optimum  performance 
strategy  and  the  random  testing  strategy  provide  bounds  on  the  expected 
maintenance  performance.  The  single-variable  approaches  are  suspected 
to  be  reasonable  approximations  of  human  activity  under  various  conditions. 

The  constituents  of  maintenance  performances  generated  from  these 
strategies,  and  their  associated  performance  times,  are  shown  to  be  a 
direct  function  of  system  design.  Computed  manual  times  for  each  of  these 
approaches  are  presented  for  one  equipment.  These  preliminary  data  suggest 
that  maintenance  time  may  be  considerably  less  sensitive  to  fault  diagnosis 
strategy  than  expected. 

'Our  work  leads  us  to  view  a  troubleshooter  as  a  strategically  flexible, 
data-driven,  and  opportunistic  problem  solver.  We  describe  some  recent 
artificial  intelligence  models  of  problem  solving  which  support  our  con¬ 
ception  of  the  troubleshooter.  Such  models  provide  a  basis  from  which 
the  computed  strategies  described  elsewhere  could  arise.  — ' 

An  interactive,  computer-controlled,  video  system  will  present  main¬ 
tenance  problems  to  experimental  maintainers,  to  determine  if  reliable 
projections  of  maintenance  workload  can  be  made  from  computed  strategies. 

This  configuration  allows  subjects  to  direct  the  maintenance  procedure 
in  real  time,  observe  the  tests  being  performed,  abort  tests  in  progress, 
and  to  notice  conditions  not  explicitly  sought.  These  performance  con¬ 
ditions  are  considered  crucial  to  observation  of  realistic  maintenance 
performance  in  an  experimental  environment. 


-l- 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The  research  described  in  this  report  was  sponsored  by  Dr.  Martin 
Tolcott  and  Mr.  Gerald  S.  Malecki,  Engineering  Psychology  Programs, 
Office  of  Naval  Research,  by  Mr.  Martin  Denicoff,  Information  Systems 
Programs,  Office  of  Naval  Research,  and  by  Dr.  P.  N.  Curran,  (CDR,  MSC, 
USN)  and  Dr.  D.  K.  McBride  {LT,  MSC,  USN),  Human  Factors  Engineering 
Division,  Naval  Air  Development  Center.  Their  support  and  encouragement 
are  gratefully  acknowledged. 


-ii- 


CONTENTS 


I.  Introduction  .  1 

PART  ONE:  PREVIOUS  RESEARCH 

II.  Techniques  for  Analyzing  Maintenance  Workload . ? 

Background . 3 

The  Prediction  Methods . 3 

Empirical  extrapolation . 4 

Checklist  methods . 6 

Time  synthesis  simulation  methods . 7 

Counting  methods  .  . . 8 

Cognitive  methods . 9 

Complexity  Measures  .  10 

III.  Cognitive  Aspects  of  Maintenance  .  14 

Cognitive  Processes  .  14 

Pattern  recognition . 14 

Attention . 16 

Memory . 1 8 

Inference . 20 

Planning  . . 2 3 

Human  Error . 24 

IV.  Models  of  Troubleshooting . 26 

Normative  Models . 26 

A- 1  Models . 27 

Psychological  Assessment  of  the  A-I  Models . 33 


PART  TWO:  CURRENT  RESEARCH 

V.  An  Analytic  Approach  to  Projecting  Maintenance  Workload.  ...  37 


System  Representation  .  38 

Task  Representation . 40 

Status  identification . 40 

Restoration.  .  . . 44 

Predicting  and  Quantifying  Performance . 45 

Fixed  sequences.  . . 45 

Variable  sequences  .  47 

VI.  Experimentation  in  Maintainability  Research . 61 

Problem  Fidelity . 61 

Failure  uncertainty . 62 

Structural  uncertainty  .  63 

Symptom  uncertainty . 64 

Performance  Fidelity . 66 

Real  time  performance . 66 

Information  fidelity  .  67 

Error  fidelity . 68 

Environmental  Fidelity . 70 

Research  Plan . 71 

VII.  Summary  and  Conclusions . 75 

References . 81 


-iii 


LIST  OF  TABLES 


1.  Typical  Combinations  of  Maintenance  Activity  Types  .  46 

2.  Eight  Generic  Fault  Isolation  Strategies  .  .  53 


3.  Element  Isolation  Times  (Minutes)  for  Eight  Generic  Strategies  .  .  57 


LIST  OF  FIGURES 

1 .  Symptom-malfunction  Matrix  with  Test  Costs  and  Unit 

Reliabilities . 39 

2.  Assembly  Specification  .  41 

3.  Components  of  Active  Maintenance  Workload . 42 

4.  Micromotion  Analysis  -  Attach  Coax  Connector  to  Receptacle  ....  48 

5.  Simple  Fault  Isolation  Tree . 49 

6.  Microcomputer  Block  Diagram . . . 55 

7.  Representation  of  Microcomputer  System  .  56 

8.  Distribution  of  Fault  Isolation  Times  With  Random  Test 

Selection . 58 

9.  Test  Dependency  Network  for  Microcomputer  System  .  65 


iv- 


I.  Introduction 

Maintenance  activity  is  a  function  of  three  primary  factors: 
the  human  performer,  the  environment  in  which  the  activity  is 
performed,  and  the  system  being  restored  or  adjusted. 

The  maintainer's  capabilities  are  determined  by  his  innate 
abilities;  his  training;  the  type,  recency,  and  amount  of 
experience;  and  his  motivation.  The  ease  of  performing  the  task 
can  be  greatly  affected  by  the  environment  in  which  it  must  be 
performed.  The  time  constraints,  past  workload,  availability 
and  quality  of  test  equipment,  and  ambient  conditions,  such  as 
space,  temperature,  and  visibility,  are  just  a  few. 

The  characteristics  of  the  system  itself,  however,  dictate  the 
inherent  difficulty  of  the  maintenance  task.  The  design  of  the  man- 
machine  interface,  which  may  include  switches,  dials,  controls, 
and  test  points,  determines  the  ease  with  which  information  about 
the  system  can  be  obtained.  The  internal  design  (modularity, 
complexity,  accessibility,  and  so  on)  determines  the  ease  of 
identifying  and  resolving  the  failure. 

This  report  is  concerned  with  techniques  for  determining  the 
maintenance  requirements  imposed  by  a  system’s  design.  Part  One 
explores  previous  techniques  for  predicting  maintenance  workload, 
cognitive  aspects  of  maintenance,  and  a  summary  of  some  relevant 
models. 

Part  Two  presents  a  technique  for  projecting  maintenance 
performance  from  a  general  representation  of  the  system  design. 

This  technique  yields  a  set  of  fault  Isolation  action  sequences, 


-1- 


each  produced  according  to  one  of  eight  general  troubleshooting 
strategies.  The  approach  for  computing  the  associated  performance 
times  is  described,  as  is  the  experimental  technique  to  be  employed 
to  determine  the  functional  relationship  between  observed 
troubleshooting  performance  and  the  general  strategies. 


-2- 


PART  ONE:  PREVIOUS  RESEARCH 

II.  Techniques  for  Analyzing  Maintenance  Workload 

Bfrctarpupd 

Maintainability  emerged  as  a  true  engineering  and 
psychological  specialty  in  the  early  1960's.  By  that  time,  standard 
indices  of  maintainability  had  been  discovered  and  rediscovered. 

Most  often,  these  indices  were  based  on  the  distribution  of 
"downtimes"  in  the  mission  cycle.  Gradually  the  idea  was  accepted 
that,  when  a  new  system  idea  was  proposed,  an  important  part  of  the 
proposal  would  be  the  estimation  of  such  parameters  as  mean  time  to 
repair.  The  U.S.  Department  of  Defense  was  the  prime  mover  in  the 
early  work,  because  of  the  devastating  military  experience  with  new 
electronics  items.  Certainly  the  field  maintenance  problems  are 
continuing.  Here  is  a  recent  quote  from  a  leading  scientific  journal 
(Smith,  1981). 

The  Navy  has  equipped  each  of  its  most  advanced  ships 
with  a  sophisticated  radar  system  that  tracks  several 
targets  at  once  and  automatically  fires  the  ship’s 
weapons.  But  it  works  only  60  percent  of  the  time, 
because  of  random  failures  of  its  lJ0,000  parts.  The 
rest  of  the  time,  the  ships  are  virtually  defenseless. 

Xhfi.  £na<j^.£.tlgji  Methods 

The  techniques  which  have  emerged  to  date  are  moderately 
successful,  in  general,  in  producing  repair  time  estimates  which 
correlate  with  actual  repair  time  data.  Unfortunately,  the  existing 
techniques  tend  to  be  specific  to  particular  technologies  or 


-3- 


maintenance  settings,  they  tend  to  offer  little  insight  to  the 
designer,  and  most  tell  nothing  about  the  performance  required  of 
the  maintainer.  These  maintainability  prediction  methods  can  be 
classified  into  six  categories. 

Empirical  extrapolation.  For  a  new  radar  system,  one  might 
predict  that  maintainability  requirements  will  be  about  as  they 
were  on  an  old  radar  system  that  is  similar  to  the  new  one.  Of 
course,  it  may  be  hard  to  say  just  how  similar  the  new  item  is  to 
the  previous  model,  but  a  rough  similarity  rule  may  still  be 
practically  useful.  At  least  the  real-experience  data  should 
introduce  some  realism  into  expectations  for  the  new  system. 

As  analysts  of  maintenance  data  have  noticed,  there  are  a 
few  generalizations  that  can  be  made  from  a  casual  inspection  of 
time-to-repair  data.  For  one,  the  mean  or  median  active  repair 
time,  for  major  military  electronic  systems,  is  often  close  to  one 
hour.  (This  may  say  why  the  prediction  methods  have  had  any  success.) 
Using  more  recent  field  records,  Wohl  (1980)  often  found  modal 
times  at  about  the  one-hour  point,  with  long  "tails"  in  the  repair- 
time  distributions. 

A  second  possible  empirical  generalization  is  that  variance  in 
repair  times  among  military  equipments  is  largely  due  to  the 
maintenance  concept  employed.  Airborne  radars  and  radios  are 
serviced  via  module  replacement  policy,  whereas  ship  and  ground- 
based  items  may  require  troubleshooting  and  repair  down  to  the  piece- 
part  level.  Hence,  standard  deviations  for  airborne  equipment  are  on 
the  order  of  half  an  hour,  as  compared  to  about  one  and  a  half  hours  for 
large  ground  and  ship  systems. 


-4- 


A  third  extrapolation  rule  is  often  cited  by  field  users  of 
complex  equipment  items:  the  actual  time-to-repair  in  the  field 
is  several  times  higher  than  the  "demonstrated"  repair  times  during 
system  acceptance  tests.  In  fact,  a  Philco  study  showed  that  field 
times-to-repair  were  three  to  four  times  as  long  as  those  observed 
during  demonstrations.  These  results  are  corroborated  in  a  recent 
study  by  Wohl  (1980).  Cynics  would  suggest  that  neither  technicians 
nor  faults  involved  in  demonstrations  are  representative  of  field 
conditions.  As  discussed  later,  the  experimental  environment  itself, 
which  includes  definition  of  the  fault,  typically  filters  out  significant 
complexities  confronted  in  the  field. 

A  fourth  empirical  finding  is  that  the  distribution  of  repair 
times  is  skewed  by  a  small  number  of  very  long  times,  so  that  the 
mode  of  the  distribution  is  generally  far  less  than  the  mean.  Many 
early  studies  have  found  a  very  good  fit  of  repair  times  to  a  log¬ 
normal  function  (Horne,  1962;  Horvath,  1959;  Balogh,  Hennessy,  & 

Reynolds,  1 97 4 ) .  However,  recent  evidence  contradicts  this 
conclusion.  Wohl  (1980)  reports  a  group  of  thorough  analyses  of 
repair  time  distributions.  Using  large  samples  of  field  maintenance 
data  reports  from  Air  Force  sites,  he  found  that  active  repair  times 
often  were  not  log-normal,  and  when  plotted  on  Weibull  probability 
paper,  a  two-component  data  process  often  appeared.  For  one  typical 
system,  nearly  60t  of  the  faults  required  less  than  one  hour  to 
repair,  yet  the  remaining  repair  times  were  so  long  that  the  total 
mean  was  over  three  hours. 

Critique.  As  far  as  we  know,  procurement  offices  and 
contractors  do  not  systematically  apply  previous  maintenance 


-5- 


compilations  to  produce  active  repair  times  for  a  new  system.  This 
would  require  the  identification  of  the  several  factors  that  would 
affect  the  accuracy  of  predictions  from  one  system  to  another. 
Instead,  it  appears  that  many  informal  projections  are  made. 

Checklist  methods.  Many  factors  are  known  to  facilitate 
preventive  and  corrective  maintenance  tasks.  Clearly,  if  some 
key  test  points  are  inaccessible,  unlabeled,  or  otherwise  difficult 
to  use,  then  the  equipment  will  be  harder  to  service.  Lists  of 
good  design  and  support  features  have  been  assembled,  with  the  idea 
of  scoring  a  system  on  the  various  criteria.  The  famous  Munger- 
Willis  list  gave  241  design  features  which  had  potential 
significance  for  maintainability  (Hunger  &  Willis,  1959).  A  more 
manageable  scheme  derives  from  MIL-HDBK-472  (U.S.  Department  of 
Defense,  1966).  There  are  three  design  check  lists  in  the 
document.  List  A  is  concerned  with  physical  features  such  as 
access  to  and  display  of  information,  the  types  of  fault 
indicators,  safety  considerations,  and  so  forth.  List  B  treats  the 
need  for  external  facilities  (special  equipment,  etc.).  List  C 
evaluates  the  personnel  requirements  for  successful  maintenance, 
and  has  items  about  the  demands  for  logical  analysis,  alertness, 
concentration,  strength,  and  manual  dexterity.  According  to  some 
trials  at  RCA-Camden,  reasonable,  slightly  optimistic,  predictions 
do  emerge  from  the  analysis. 

Critique.  The  checklist  procedure  certainly  has  one  thing  to 
recommend  it:  the  process  of  scoring  the  design  and  support 
features  will  bring  out  serious  faults. 


-6- 


Three  objections  to  checklist  predictions,  however,  are  (1)  the 
weights,  though  statistically  derived  and  "objective"  for  the  system 
originally  studied,  are  seldom  cross-validated  on  other  equipments; 
(2)  the  design  features  scored  tend  to  be  observable  and  primarily 
independent;  complicated  internal  features  and  interactions  tend  to 
be  ignored;  and  (3)  the  reliability  of  the  predictions  made,  and  of 
the  predictors  themselves,  is  seldom  known.  For  such  reasons,  it 
may  be  well  to  regard  checklist  reviews  as  useful  for  the  internal 
design  staff,  rather  than  as  satisfactory  quantitative  prediction 
schemes. 

Time  synthesis  simulation  methods.  Psychologists  frequently 
break  down  whole  tasks  into  simpler  elements.  These  subtask 
elements  are  then  separately  studied  and  combined  in  various  ways. 

If  the  subtask  performance  parameters  are  defined  probabilistically, 
then  appropriate  distributions  of  overall  performance  values  can  be 
generated.  If  the  global  performance  parameters  agree  well  with 
those  observed  in  the  real  case,  then  the  model  is  said  to  be 
validated.  The  synthesis  can  be  further  validated,  if  expected 
changes  in  real  performance  come  from  experimentally  produced 
changes  in  the  micro-elements. 

Several  projects  have  employed  time  synthesis  simulation  with 
generally  positive  results  (Rigney,  Cremer,  Towne,  &  Mason,  1966; 
Siegel  &  Wolf,  1969;  Strieb  et  al,  1980). 

Critique.  The  concept  of  time-synthesis  simulation  is  a 
powerful  one.  Parameters  can  be  varied  easily,  and  hundreds  or 
thousands  of  simulated  task  runs  can  be  quickly  computed,  so  that 
the  (model)  effects  of  possible  change  can  be  tried  out. 


-7- 


There  are  challenging  technical  problems  in  all  parts  of  time- 
synthesis  simulation.  Many  problems  are  encountered  in  settling  the 
right  task  descriptive  level,  in  obtaining  suitable  performance 
figures  from  people,  and  in  managing  the  problems  of  task  correlation 
and  level  shifting.  Though  some  complex  behavioral  routines  have  a 
straightforward  sequence  of  subtasks,  it  is  often  difficult  to 
synthesize  a  troubleshooting  sequence  that  resembles  human  performance. 
The  technique  described  in  Part  Two  may  be  considered  in  terms 
of  the  time  synthesis  technique. 

Counting  methods.  At  the  extremes,  sheer  numbers  can  seem  to 

dominate  a  maintenance  situation.  An  equipment  that  has  50,000  parts 

should  be  a  difficult  thing  to  service.  So  one  indicator  of  fault- 

locating  difficulty  could  be  the  number  of  hardware  elements  that  the 

technician  has  to  consider.  Information  theory  can  express,  for 

example,  the  "amount  of  uncertainty"  in  a  fault-location  problem  as 

U  =  log  N,  where  N  is  the  product  of  defined  failure  modes  times 
m 

components,  and  m  is  the  number  of  possible  outcomes  of  a  test. 

Of  course,  much  depends  on  the  way  that  the  parts  are 
arranged,  and  on  the  possibilities  for  "block  elimination"  of  whole 
segments  of  the  equipment.  Several  projects  have  tried  to  combine 
some  notion  of  the  richness  of  test  indications  with  a  parts 
count.  Leuba  (1962),  for  instance,  proposed  a  measure  in  which 
maintainability  varied  directly  as  the  number  of  elements  in  the 
system,  and  the  number  of  symptoms  which  can  be  caused  by  several 
different  elements. 


-8- 


Critique.  Sophisticated  counting  techniques  may  yield 
quantitative  relationships  between  repair  time  and  the  counted 
elements  which  are  useful  in  projecting  the  likely  maintenance  load 
imposed  by  a  system.  It  must  be  realized,  however,  that  the  pure 
counting  measures  which  prove  to  be  correlated  with  repair  time  may, 
in  fact,  only  be  indirect  indications  of  system  size,  scope,  and 
complexity.  We  might  equally  expect  measures  such  as  system  weight 
or  system  volume  to  also  provide  significant  correlations.  Thus, 
most  attempts  to  derive  a  counting  measure  incorporate  features  of 
system  structure  beyond  sheer  number.  For  example,  Wohl's  approach 
cited  above  seeks  to  provide  a  measure  reflecting  the  intuitive 
notion  of  the  "complexity"  of  the  system  structure.  We  will  discuss 
this  "complexity  hypothesis"  below  in  more  detail. 

Cognitive  methods.  A  cognitive  approach  to  projecting 
maintenance  workload  postulates  specific  mental  processes  involved 
in  troubleshooting  and  seeks  to  identify  aspects  of  design  which 
bear  on  those  processes.  Such  processes  might  include  perceptual  or 
pattern  recognition  systems,  a  memory  component,  as  well  as 
processes  for  inference.  Additionally,  one  may  characterize 
various  strategies  for  troubleshooting  in  terms  of  these  component 
cognitive  skills,  how  they  are  interrelated,  and  when  they  are 
used.  Thus,  aspects  of  equipment  design  may  be  sought  which  impact 
these  cognitive  strategies  via  their  effect  on  underlying  cognitive 


Critique.  Complete  cognitive  models  which  arise  from 
considerations  of  the  mental  processes  involved  will  be  exceedingly 
difficult  to  develop  for  practical  use  in  the  foreseeable  future. 

Section  III  explores  cognitive  aspects  of  maintenance  more  fully  and 
considers  some  of  the  limitations  in  cognitive  processes  which  may 
be  significant. 

Complexity  Measures 

It  seems  quite  reasonable  to  look  for  some  way  of  describing 
the  "complexity"  of  the  target  system  and  then  demonstrating  the 
precise  relationship  between  system  complexity  and  various  aspects 
of  maintenance  task  performance  such  as  Mean  Time  To  Repair, 

(MTTR).  To  understand  how  the  construction  of  a  system  affects  the 
maintainer,  one  must  have  a  grasp  of  how  the  various  aspects  of  system 
design  are  reflected  in  the  task  structure  for  maintenance.  Furthermore 
to  assess  the  difficulty  imposed  by  this  task  structure  one  must  have  a 
notion  of  how  it  impacts  cognition. 

Let  us  first  consider  the  possibility  that  for  each  system 
design  there  exists  some  parameter  which  represents  the  complexity 
of  the  system  and/or  the  task  of  maintenance  on  that  system.  This 
parameter  is  normally  thought  to  be  expressible  as  a  functional 
combination  of  some  set  of  measurable  system  features  (e.g.  Rouse,  & 
Rouse,  1979;  Wohl,  1980).  This  parameter  could  then  be  used  as  a 
predictor  of  maintenance  task  difficulty,  task  completion  time,  or 
some  other  representative  measure  of  maintenance  performance.  The 


existence  of  such  a  parameter  would  certainly  simplify  things. 
Under  the  right  conditions  the  designer  would  be  able  to  take 


appropriate  measurements  of  a  system  and  provide  a  useful  predictor 
of  the  complexity  of  the  task  faced  by  a  maintainer  of  that  system. 
For  purposes  of  the  present  discussion  we  will  call  this  set  of 
ideas  the  "complexity  hypothesis". 

The  research  of  Wohl  (1980)  is  representative  of  attempts  to 
use  the  complexity  hypothesis  just  described.  Wohl  develops  a  model 
which  rests  upon  the  notion  that  troubleshooting  involves  an 
enumerative  process  of  searching  and  testing  all  components  within  a 
suspect  set.  Since  such  a  search  process  is  dependent  upon  the 
complexity  of  the  interrelations  among  those  components,  Wohl 
proposes  a  measure  based  upon  the  product  of  the  average  number  of 
component  interconnections  and  average  number  of  electrical  junction 
interconnections.  A  model  is  then  constructed  in  which  this  measure 
is  combined  with  parameters  which  estimate  the  basic  diagnostic  time 
factor,  and  the  effect  of  environment.  This  model  assumes  a 
specific  (modified  Poisson)  distribution  of  test  times  at  each 
step.  With  this  model,  Wohl  is  able  to  achieve  a  very  good  fit  to 
data  for  mean  active  repair  times.  Unfortunately,  the  high 
correlation  (0.97)  reported  by  Wohl  between  predicted  and  observed 
repair  times  is  confounded  due  to  the  statistical  interdependence  of 
the  predicted  and  observed  data  points.  And  since  the  parameters  of 
Wohl's  model,  including  those  supposedly  reflecting  equipment 
complexity,  are  all  set  to  their  values  by  a  "best  visual  fit"  of 
the  model  to  the  repair  time  data,  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  about 
the  true  relationship  of  complexity  to  repair  time.  In  fact,  values 
for  the  complexity  parameters  of  Wohl's  model  seem  to  vary 
significantly  less  than  do  values  for  the  other  parameters  from  one 


r 


case  to  the  next.  Therefore,  variations  in  predicted  repair  times 
are  primarily  determined  by  variations  in  factors  (such  as  average 
time  to  complete  an  action)  more  than  they  are  by  complexity 
indices. 

Rouse  and  Rouse  (1979)  have  also  looked  at  the  complexity 
hypothesis,  although  they  have  done  so  from  a  different  perspective 
than  that  of  Wohl.  In  their  research,  the  issue  of  complexity  is 
considered  from  a  somewhat  more  psychological  point  of  view.  The 
authors  review  the  issue  of  complexity  in  terms  of  the  literature  on 
perceptual  complexity  and  problem  solving  complexity.  A  number  of 
specific  indices  are  then  developed  by  Rouse  and  Rouse  including  one 
based  upon  an  information  theoretic  measure  of  search  complexity  and 
another  based  upon  the  absolute  number  of  relevant  relations  among 
the  suspect  components.  These  two  indices,  in  particular,  provide 
reasonably  accurate  predictions  of  human  fault  diagnosis 
performance. 

Nauta  and  Bragg  (1980)  have  taken  a  quite  different  approach  to 
the  issue  of  complexity  of  design  for  maintainance.  In  this  study, 
the  authors  develop  the  view  that  complexity  is  a  multivariate 
function  of  system  design  properties,  test  attributes,  psychological 
abilities  of  the  repair  technician,  and  the  effects  of  the 
technician's  training  and  experience.  An  extensive  catalog  of 
variables  in  each  of  the  above  categories  is  considered,  motivating 
arguments  are  developed  for  them,  and  plausible  hypotheses  about 
their  effects  on  the  maintenance  task  are  suggested.  The  approach 


also  avoids  any  attempt  to  force  the  multidimensional  issue  of 
complexity  into  a  single  variable.  However,  the  approach  taken  by 


1 


these  investigators  is  really  a  descriptive  rather  than  a  predictive 
one,  since  many  of  the  measures  suggested  require  observation  of  a 
fully  operational  system,  a  seemingly  insurmountable  problem  for  a 
design  engineer  interested  in  a  good  a.  priori  predictor  of 
maintenance  workload.  Furthermore,  the  large  number  of  variables 
considered  by  these  authors  are  analyzed  individually  so  that  one  is 
left  with  the  difficult  task  of  specifying  how  such  measures  are  to 
be  used  for  quantitative  prediction. 

The  idea  that  one  might  obtain  a  simple  index  of  system 
maintenance  complexity  is  an  attractive  one.  It  is  made  plausible 
by  the  common  sense  attitude  that  there  exists  some  single  locus  for 
the  difficulty  one  will  have  in  performing  the  maintenance  task  on  a 
given  system,  and  that  this  effect  will  be  different  from  one  system 
to  the  next.  However,  even  if  there  is  indeed  a  single  resultant 
effect  which  is  reflected  in  measures  such  as  repair  times,  it  does 
not  follow  that  the  causal  locus  of  this  effect  may  be  found  in  some 
unitary  aspect  of  the  physical  system.  Rather,  it  is  possible  that 
a  number  of  independent  factors  in  a  design  contribute  to  the  task 
difficulty,  which  is  consolidated  into  a  single  effect  only  as  a 
result  of  the  action  of  specific  psychological  processes. 


-13- 


III.  Cognitive  Aspects  of  Maintenance 


The  notion  that  there  exist  performance  limitations  for  the 
component  cognitive  processes  implies  the  potential  for  error,  or, 
at  the  least,  inefficiencies  in  the  conduct  of  a  maintainer  using 
these  cognitive  skills.  These  cognitive  skill  limitations  and  the 
potential  for  error  force  us  to  reconsider  what  it  is  that  constitutes 
rational  performance.  For  example,  the  performance  of  some  apparently 
redundant  diagnostic  test  might  make  sense  as  a  means  of  cross  checking 
previous  results.  The  maintainer  may  or  may  not  be  aware  of  this.  In 
any  case,  the  potential  for  error  alters  the  demands  of  any  problem 
solving  task  such  as  may  be  presented  to  a  maintainer. 

Cognitive  Processes 

Pattern  recognition.  Pattern  recognition  processes  are  clearly 
important  to  performance  of  many  components  of  the  maintenance 
task.  For  example,  the  maintainer  is  required  to  interpret  specific 
perceptual  data  as  indicative  of  correct  system  operation  or  system 
failure,  to  recognize  pattern  data  during  performance  of  diagnostic 
tests,  and  to  recognize  the  complex  patterns  which  determine  various 
states  of  system  and  subsystem  configuration  during  visual 
inspection  procedures.  Moreover,  it  is  well  established  that 
important  aspects  of  the  diagnostic  procedures  involved  in 
troubleshooting  can  be  characterized  as  a  type  of  pattern 
recognition  process.  The  well  known  research  of  deGroot  (1966)  has 
looked  at  human  chess  experts  engaged  in  a  paradigm  example  of  "high 
level"  problem  solving  activity  which  apparently  depends  upon 
processes  such  as  strategy  formation  and  search  among  a  number  of 


-14- 


alternative  steps  toward  problem  solution.  However,  deGroot 


concludes  that  much  of  what  appears  to  be  "higher  level"  problem 
solving  activity  is  largely  a  function  of  processes  which  respond  to 
the  identification  of  complex  patterns  in  the  problem  data.  Pau 
(1981)  specifically  demonstrates  how  various  techniques  from  the 
pattern  recognition  literature  can  be  applied  to  aspects  of 
troubleshooting.  Giascu  (1977)  presents  a  model  which  derives  an 
optimal  strategy  for  diagnosis  using  techniques  taken  from 
information  theory. 

The  human  factors  research  reveals  a  number  of  ways  in  which 
the  maintainer  could  be  potentially  affected  by  specific  design 
features  which  impact  perceptual  and  pattern  recognition  processes. 
Much  research  has  been  done  recently  to  investigate  the  conditions 
which  affect  the  human  operator  engaged  in  the  task  of  system 
monitoring  (cf.,  Rasmussen  &  Rouse,  1 98 1 ) .  Perhaps  one  moral  of  the 
story  told  by  this  research  is  that  the  maintainer  benefits  most 
from  receiving  neither  too  little  nor  too  much  data.  If  system 
monitoring  must  be  continued  for  long  periods  of  time,  to  enhance 
the  probability  of  fault  detection,  then  it  is  well  established  from 
signal  detection  research  that  factors  such  as  attentional  loss  will 
detract  from  performance.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally 
problematic  for  the  operator  to  receive  an  overabundance  of  signals 
on  system  performance,  especially  if  action  must  be  taken  in 
response  to  these  signals  (Boecek  &  Veitengruber ,  1976;  Cooper, 
1977).  Note  that  this  point  about  a  potential  surplus  of  input  is 
relevant  to  the  conditions  which  prevail  during  the  diagnostic  phase 
of  maintenance,  as  well  as  during  the  monitoring  phase.  For 


example,  perhaps  fault  diagnosis  performance  will  be  more  efficient 
if  symptoms  are  predominantly  normal  or  predominantly  abnormal.  A 
number  of  other  perceptual  factors  are  known  to  be  important.  For 
example,  the  difficulty  human  perceivers  have  in  detecting  rare  or 
otherwise  unexpected  events  may  perhaps  be  due  to  the  use  of 
analysis  by  synthesis  (Neisser,  1967)  processes  in  pattern 
recognition  according  to  which  the  identity  of  perceptual  input  is 
determined  from  a  relatively  small  initial  sample  of  its  input 
features  which  are  then  used  to  "synthesize"  (i.e.,  infer)  the 
nature  of  the  remaining  larger  proportion  of  its  identifying 
features.  Further  examples  include  the  discriminability  of  fault 
signals  from  the  background  (correct  state  information)  and  the 
stability  or  instability  of  patterns  over  time  which  are  indicators 
of  system  states.  One  very  important  point  to  make  is  in  regard  to 
the  effect  of  redundancy.  The  perceptual  literature  and  the  recent 
research  on  reading  both  indicate  that  an  optimal  amount  of 
perceptual  redundancy  is  an  aid  to  the  efficiency  of  the  perceptual 
process  (cf.,  Haber,  1978).  Finally,  we  note  that  the  dominant  view 
of  human  perceptual  process  has  for  some  time  proposed  that  pattern 
recognition  processes  are  based  upon  a  complex  feature  detection 
system  (DeValois  &  DeValois,  1 980 ) . 

Attention.  An  enormous  amount  of  research  has  been  devoted  to 
the  topic  of  attention.  For  the  most  part,  the  prevailing  view  of 
attentional  processes  begins  with  the  concept  of  selective  attention 
(Moray,  1970;  Norman,  1976).  The  main  theoretical  question  of 
interest  has  been  to  determine  the  nature  and  locus  of  the  selector 
process.  A  recent  and  popular  view  is  the  thesis  that  negative 


-16- 


attentional  effects  are  a  result  of  task  demands  exceeding  the 
processing  resources  available  to  the  subject  (Norman  &  Bobrow, 
1975).  These  processing  resources  include  resource  driven  (top 
down)  processes  which  direct  attention  on  the  basis  of  knowledge  the 
subject  already  has  about  the  current  task  conditions,  and  data 
driven  (bottom  up)  processes  which  are  responsive  to  new  information 
gained  from  the  array  of  input.  Moray  (1981)  has  provided  one  of 
the  few  discussions  of  attention  addressed  to  the  topic  of 
maintenance  activities.  He  notes  that,  unfortunately,  most  of  the 
research  on  attention  is  of  little  use  for  one  interested  in  its 
relationship  to  subjects  working  with  large  scale,  real  world 
systems  due  to  the  complex,  (continuous)  multivariate,  non-linear, 
and  highly  structured  nature  of  these  systems  compared  to  laboratory 
paradigms.  Nevertheless,  Moray  is  able  to  draw  some  tentative 
conclusions  about  attention  in  the  maintenance  task  from  the 
literature  and  his  own  research.  For  example,  he  mentions  the 
number  and  complexity  of  sources  (e.g.,  displays)  from  which  the 
operator  must  obtain  facts  as  critical  to  operator  performance. 

Moray  also  discusses  the  importance  of  "predictor  displays"  by  which 
he  means  the  display  by  the  system  of  variables  which  will  indicate 
that  some  system  component  will  remain  in  a  certain  state  for  a 
significant  period  of  time,  thus  allowing  attention  to  be  shifted 
temporarily  to  another  system  component. 

Moray  also  points  out  the  importance  of  attention  for 
diagnostic  processes.  For  example,  he  notes  that  "following  an 
abnormal  abaer.vatipn,  highly  agrr.elat.ed  .aaurcas  should  hs.  sampled". 


By  this  he  refers  to  the  fact  that  in  a  complex  equipment  the 


observation  of  evidence  that  the  system  is  in  a  failed  state  will 


usually  come  from  some  subsystem  such  that  the  maintainer  should 
probably  restrict  subsequent  observations  to  that  subsystem.  This 
of  course,  may  not  always  lead  directly  to  the  fault,  since  the 
evidence  of  failure  might  be  displayed  in  a  module  which  is 
performing  correctly  but  is  responding  to  erroneous  input  received 
from  a  different  subsystem.  An  obvious  example  is  the  detection  of 
an  erroneous  display  of  data  on  a  computer  system’s  video  display 
terminal.  This  evidence  of  failure  could,  in  fact,  be  a  result 
of  a  defect  in  some  distinct  subsystem  such  as  a  disk  storage  system, 
the  failure  of  which  could  be  propagated  to  the  contents  of  the 
terminal.  It  might  be  that  Moray's  dictum  is  not  applicable  in  many 
practical  cases  such  as  this.  In  fact,  the  challenge  to  the  maintainer 
could  well  be  the  reverse— to  not  let  attentional  resources  become  too 
focused  at  the  wrong  point  in  a  diagnostic  procedure.  In  any  case, 
it  is  clear  that  attentional  factors  can  clearly  affect  the 
performance  of  the  maintenance  task. 

Memory .  Despite  a  huge  amount  of  research  devoted  to  memory,  the 
psychological  community  is  still  somewhat  divided  on  the  basic 
question  of  how  many  distinguishable  memory  stores  exist.  Extant 
research  establishes  a  short-term  memory  or  span  of  attention  effect 
which  Is  distinguishable  from  effects  due  to  use  of  general  and  more 
permanent  types  of  knowledge,  regardless  of  whether  this  effect  is 
best  explained  in  process  or  storage  terms.  Thus,  in  what  follows 
we  will  allow  the  distinction  between  short-term  or  "working*  (post- 
perceptual)  memory  phenomena  and  phenomena  involving  relatively 
permanent  knowledge  representation  structures  and  processes.  For  a 

-18- 


1 


task  such  as  that  performed  by  a  maintainer,  both  working  memory  and 
permanent  memory  processes  may  be  impacted.  For  example,  fact 
retrieval  abilities  are  required  representing  knowledge  of  the 
possible  actions  which  may  be  taken,  the  procedural  knowledge  of 
these  actions,  constraints  on  these  actions  imposed  by  the  current 
situation  (including  the  history  of  actions  already  taken  and  the 
results  obtained),  the  knowledge  of  the  target  system's  structure 
and  function,  and  recall  of  the  facts  thus  far  obtained  during  the 
task.  From  the  research  literature  one  can  expect  that  these 
processes  of  fact  retrieval  will  be  affected  by  such  things  as  the 
extent  of  hierarchical  organization  of  knowledge  about  the  task  and 
the  system,  and  how  well  the  various  events  which  can  occur  will 
provide  good  cues  to  retrieval  of  all  and  only  the  information 
needed  in  a  particular  context.  Second,  the  capacity  limitations  of 
working  memory  have  long  been  well  established  (Miller,  1956).  The 
existence  of  such  limitations  restrict  the  maintainer 's  ability  to 
keep  track  of  all  the  needed  facts  at  one  time.  For  example,  if  an 
extensive  amount  of  procedural  information  were  needed  to  perform 
some  subtask,  other  facts,  such  as  where  the  maintainer  is  in  a 
previously  constructed  plan,  could  be  lost.  As  is  true  for 
attention,  the  memorial  resources  are  limited,  and  this  predicts 
difficulty  for  a  maintenance  task  in  which  procedures  to  be 
performed  are  unduly  complex.  Similarly,  the  necessity  to  process 
extraneous  data  or  engage  in  necessary,  but  irrelevant,  tasks  (e.g. 
moving  things  out  of  the  way)  while  performing  some  action  could, 


-19- 


r 


for  example,  divert  a  maintainer  from  one  course  of  action  to 
another  which  is  less  reasonable  or  even  innappropriate  in  light  of 
the  current  context.  Another  useful  point  is  to  distinguish  between 
recall  of  knowledge  held  prior  to  initiation  of  the  current 
maintenance  task  and  knowledge  obtained  during  performance  of  the 
task.  We  have  observed  that  technicians  often  have  difficulty 
recalling  exactly  what  symptoms  have  been  observed,  and  under  what 
conditions,  as  a  task  proceeds.  This  problem  occasionally  is  so 
severe  that  the  testing  must  be  virtually  reinitiated.  Thus, 
recalling  what  is  known  about  system  structure  and  procedural 
sequences  may  be  less  critical  for  continued  task  performance  than 
recalling  what  has  and  has  not  been  done.  If  this  is  true,  then 
short  term  memory  factors  might  play  a  most  critical  role  in 
maintenance  task  performance. 

Inference .  It  is  clear  that  inferential  processes  such  as 
inductive  and  deductive  reasoning  are  essential  to  many  performance 
aspects  of  maintenance.  This  is  particularly  true  during 
troubleshooting.  The  maintainer  must  be  able  to  reason  deductively, 
when  required,  to  determine  whether  a  set  of  test  outcomes  is 
sufficient  to  uniquely  isolate  a  failure.  Inductive  reasoning  is 
required,  for  example,  when  the  maintainer  must  select  the  next  test 
to  perform,  based  upon  available  data  regarding  individual 
probabilities  of  component  failure  in  combination  with  what  is  known 
so  far  about  symptoms. 

The  research  on  human  inference  and  reasoning  processes,  and  on 


problem  solving  is  quite  typically  restricted  to  laboratory 
paradigms  which  bear  little,  if  any,  direct  relation  to  the  concrete 


reasoning  required  of  a  maintainer.  However,  there  are  some  general 
patterns  of  results  which  are  quite  useful  in  consideration  of  the 
maintenance  task.  First,  the  excellent  analysis  by  Amarel  (1968) 
demonstrates  the  importance  of  how  a  problem  is  represented.  This  is 
related  to  the  older  result  of  "functional  fixedness"  (Duncker, 

1 945 ;  Maier,  1931)  in  which  the  problem  solver  has  difficulty 
achieving  a  solution  to  a  problem  because  he  is  unable  to  see  that 
some  object  may  be  used  in  a  novel  way  to  help  construct  a  solution. 
Representational  effects  are  a  possible  source  of  maintenance  task 
difficulty  in  terms  of  the  extent  to  which  a  system  design  hides 
important  clues  to  the  nature  of  a  system  failure.  As  an  example,  a 
failure  in  a  component  may  be  quite  difficult  to  isolate  if  the 
manifestation  of  that  failure  appears  most  prominently  in  a 
physically  distinct  component. 

Given  some  form  of  problem  representation,  what  reasoning 
processes  are  available  to  the  problem  solver?  First,  there  is  an 
ongoing  debate  among  those  who  claim  evidence  that  humans  reason 
illogically,  citing  the  frequency  with  which  human  reasoners  embrace 
Invalid  argument  forms  (e.g.,  Chapman  &  Chapman,  1959;  Pezolli  & 
Frase,  1968),  and  those  who  claim  that  humans  are,  in  fact,  quite 
logical  in  their  argument  structures  but  err  in  the  way  they  encode 
the  information  to  be  used  in  these  structures  (e.g.,  Henle,  1962; 
Revlis,  1975a,  1975b;  Mayer  &  Revlin,  1978).  Unfortunately,  the 
fundamental  issue  is  not  yet  decided. 

Complementing  this  research  is  the  work  on  diagnostic 
judgement.  This  latter  research  investigates  the  diagnostic 
conclusions  of  both  novices  and  experts  as  a  function  of  the 


-21- 


* 


features  of  the  evidence  provided  from  which  to  make  the  diagnosis. 
The  most  notable  results  here  are  to  be  found  in  the  work  of 
Kahneman  and  Tversky  (Tversky  &  Kahneman,  197M;  Kahneman  &  Tversky, 
1979).  They  have  observed  some  general  principles  to  which  human 
decision  makers  tend  to  adhere.  The  first  of  these  is  the 
"representativeness  heuristic".  According  to  this  principle,  the 
question,  "will  event  A  be  generated  by  process  B?",  will  be  decided 
affirmatively  to  the  extent  that  the  event  A  resembles  process  B. 
According  to  this  principle,  if  failure  in  a  computer  disk  drive  is 
manifest  at  the  video  display  terminal,  the  troubleshooter  is  more 
likely  to  generate  hypotheses  of  failure  in  the  display  than  in  the 
disk  storage  system.  Another  principle  proposed  by  Kahneman  and 
Tversky  holds  that  there  is  an  "anchoring  effect"  in  that  evidence 
obtained  early  by  a  diagnostician  will  create  a  starting  point  from 
which  subsequent  evidence  will  move  the  diagnostician  only  with 
great  difficulty.  In  terms  of  the  maintenance  task,  this  principle 
claims  that  initial  front  panel  evidence  that  is  misleading  (perhaps 
due  to  the  representativeness  heuristic)  will  have  negative 
consequences  for  the  likelihood  of  rapid  fault  isolation.  Finally, 
Kynatt,  Doherty,  and  Tweney  (1977)  produce  evidence  that  human 
troubleshooters  perform  according  to  a  bias  to  confirm  a  suspicion 
rather  than  test  and  eliminate  hypotheses.  All  of  this  leads  to  a 
rather  interesting  question:  Is  it  advantageous  in  any  way  for  human 
problem  solvers  and  reasoners  to  use  these  hit  and  miss  methods  of 
reasoning?  It  is  possible  that  the  logically  deficient  methods  are 


-22- 


in  fact  quite  productive  in  the  context  of  real  world  task  demands 


v. 


In  the  case  of  maintenance  it  would  be  interesting  to  analyze  the 
efficiency  of  such  strategies  from  this  perspective. 

Planning.  The  planning  processes  in  maintenance  are  not  well 
understood.  Unlike  problems  in  which  all  the  required  information 
is  presented  at  the  onset,  troubleshooting  proceeds  from  a  small 
fraction  of  the  data  required  tc  ultimately  isolate  the  fault. 
Generally,  little  benefit  is  derived  from  formulating  extensive 
contingency  plans  prior  to  performing  a  test,  since  much  of  that 
planning  concerns  results  not  subsequently  obtained.  Thus 
troubleshooting  may  be  a  process  in  which  actions  are  selected  based 
upon  factors  such  as  ease  of  performance,  rather  than  upon  the 
extent  to  which  they  meet  other  technical  criteria.  At  a  higher 
level,  the  maintainer  somehow  allocates  his  time,  weighs  competing 
influences,  and  decides  when  to  shift  to  a  more  promising  attack  on 
the  problem. 

Until  recently,  there  was  very  little  research  directly 
investigating  how  it  is  that  people  construct  and  use  plans  to  guide 
their  activities.  The  field  of  research  which  has  given  the  most 
explicit  attention  to  planning  is  perhaps  Artificial  Intelligence 
(A-I) .  This  is,  no  doubt,  a  result  of  the  need  to  devise  powerful 
control  processes  for  the  various  machine  systems  intended  to 
perform  complex  tasks.  Unfortunately,  this  A-I  research  on  planning 
processes  was  unmatched  by  similar  efforts  in  psychology  to 
determine  the  nature  of  human  planning  and  control  processes.  Hayes- 
Roth  (1980;  Hayes-Roth  &  Thorndyke,  1980)  has  recently  produced 
some  excellent  data  (as  well  as  a  model  to  be  discussed  below)  on 


-23- 


human  planning  and  control  processes.  The  results  of  this  work 
demonstrate  a  number  of  interesting  features  of  human  planning 
processes.  First,  the  human  planner  appears  to  be  data  driven  and 
opportunistic.  Interim  plans  are  formed  and  altered  during  conduct 
of  the  task  on  the  basis  of  new  information  obtained  during 
execution  of  earlier  versions  of  the  plan.  Planning  seems  to 
involve  problem  solving  at  a  number  of  levels  of  abstraction,  and 
the  planner  will  make  decisions  regarding  planning  at  all  these 
levels.  Finally,  the  planner  will  typically  underestimate  the 
amount  of  time  which  will  be  required  to  carry  out  the  various 
components  of  a  planned  task.  Hayes-Roth  contrasts  this  view  of 
planning  with  that  developed  in  a  typical  A- 1  model. 

Human  Error 

A  further  implication  of  the  existence  of  such  cognitive 
constraints  as  are  being  discussed  here  has  to  do  with  the  potential 
for  error.  It  seems  clear  that  humans  are  prone  to  error  in 
performance  of  even  basic  skills.  (It  is  currently  popular  among 
cognitive  scientists  to  view  even  underlying  cognitive  processes  as 
skills.)  There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  maintainers,  even 
expert  ones,  are  quite  error  prone.  Recently,  Norman  (1979,  1980) 
has  investigated  errors  in  human  performance  of  a  variety  of  tasks. 
Much  of  Norman's  data  is  anecdotal  or  based  on  uncontrolled  field 
observations;  however,  this  research  strongly  demonstrates  the  clear 
tendency  to  err  during  performance  of  even  well  practiced  tasks. 
Norman  distinguishes  between  two  types  of  error  in  performance: 
errors  in  the  formation  of  an  intention  are  termed  "mistakes"; 
errors  in  the  execution  of  an  intention  are  "slips".  Norman  is 


-24- 


careful  to  point  out  the  fact  that  mistakes  and  slips  can  occur 
"even  when  the  person  has  full  information  of  the  state  of  the 
situation". 

Norman’s  distinction  between  mistakes  and  slips  points  to  the 
potential  of  error  at  all  phases  of  a  task,  including  the  problem 
solving  and  planning  activities  which  underlie  action.  Third,  the 
ubiquity  of  error  suggests  that  human  problem  solvers  will  operate 
with  some  knowledge  of  its  possibility.  For  a  task  such  as 
maintenance,  this  implies  that  certain  actions  which  appear  to  be  non¬ 
productive  may  in  fact  be  quite  productive. 


-25- 


IV.  Models  of  Troubleshooting 

We  turn  now  to  a  discussion  of  some  representative  models  of 
troubleshooting,  in  order  to  reveal  assumptions  typically  made  about 
the  nature  of  the  task  of  troubleshooting,  the  cognitive  skills 
which  underlie  the  task,  and  the  way  these  skills  are  used.  Let  us 
first  briefly  mention  normative  models  of  troubleshooting. 

Normative  Models 

In  a  typical  normative  model,  the  sequences  of  diagnostic  tests 
and  component  replacements  are  constructed  by  use  of  a  choice 
function  which  calculates  each  step  in  a  sequence  from  some  measure 
of  the  relative  values  of  the  choices  available.  The  choice  function 
may  be  based  upon  such  factors  as  information  yielded  by  the 
alternative  tests,  costs  of  performing  tests,  and  reliabilities  of 
system  elements.  In  a  model  based  on  a  pattern  recognition 
criterion  (Giascu,  1977),  the  next  step  in  a  diagnostic  procedure 
(test  or  replacement)  is  determined  by  calculating  which  next  step 
will  return  the  most  information  given  a  particular  set  of 
procedures  and  results  produced  up  to  that  step.  This  function  can 
be  calculated  from  the  reliabilities  of  the  components,  and  the 
relationship  between  tests  and  malfunctions  such  as  may  be  obtained 
from  a  symptom-malfunction  matrix.  Similarly,  the  BETS  model 
(Rigney,  Cremer,  &  Towne,  1966)  chooses  the  next  best  test  by  using 
a  choice  function  derived  from  Bayes  theorem  in  probability  theory 
applied  to  the  component  reliabilities. 

Optimal  strategies  produced  by  normative  models  serve  to 
specify  potential  lower  bounds  for  maintenance  time.  Such  models 


-26- 


I 


provide  idealized  task  sequences  to  be  performed  by  a  maintainer. 
While  such  models  say  nothing  directly  about  conditions 
which  invariably  lead  to  departure  from  optimality,  they  can  be 
regarded  as  a  baseline  by  which  designs  might  be  compared.  A  set  of 
eight  such  normative  models,  including  the  optimum  strategy,  form 
the  basis  of  a  technique  described  in  Part  Two. 

A- I  Models 

The  proportion  of  A-I  research  directly  investigating 
troubleshooting  is  very  small  compared  to  the  vast  amount  of 
research  done  on  other  forms  of  problem  solving.  So  it  is  no 
surprise  that  those  efforts  to  model  troubleshooting  have  been 
applications  of  the  techniques  used  to  model  other  forms  of  problem 
solving. 

The  following  basic  conception  of  a  problem  solving  system 
typifies  the  view  held  in  an  A-I  model.  The  problem  solver  has  some 
representation  of  the  current  state  of  affairs  (which  we  call  the 
INITIAL  STATE)  and  also  a  representation  of  some  desired  situation 
(called  the  GOAL  STATE).  The  problem  solver  also  is  capable  of 
enacting  any  members  of  a  set  of  procedures  (we  will  call  these 
TRANSFORMING  PROCEDURES)  which  may  be  used  to  transform  one  state  of 
affairs  into  another.  The  problem  solver  is  then  required  to 
specify  and  enact  a  sequence  of  these  procedures  (we  will  call  this 
a  SOLUTION  SEQUENCE)  such  that  the  initial  state  is  changed  into  the 
goal  state.  This  characterization  is  a  reasonable,  though  very 
general,  approximation  to  most  problem  solving  systems  in  A-I. 

From  it  we  see  that  the  performance  of  the  problem  solving  system  is 
determined  by  the  way  states  of  affairs  are  represented,  the  nature 


-27- 


of  the  possible  procedures  for  transforming  states  of  affairs,  and 
the  techniques  available  for  selecting  a  solution  sequence  from  the 
set  of  transforms.  The  bulk  of  A-I  research  on  problem  solving  has 
focused  upon  methods  for  finding  solution  sequences.  It  is  this 
work  which  we  now  discuss,  following  the  general  outline  of  Nilsson 
(1979).  In  some  of  the  early  problem  solving  systems  (Raphael, 

1971)  the  transforming  procedures  were  enacted  upon  occurrence  of  a 
specific  condition  in  the  current  state  of  affairs.  So,  in  such  a 
system  the  initial  state  will  contain  some  condition  which  causes 
some  procedure  to  be  enacted.  This  procedure  will  produce  changes, 
creating  a  new  state  of  affairs  which  differs  in  some  details  from 
the  previous  one.  One  can  expect  a  goal  state  to  be  reached  in  such 
a  system  only  because  the  transforming  procedures  are  designed  so 
that,  on  the  average,  a  state  of  affairs  following  enactment  of  a 
procedure  will  be  "closer"  to  the  goal  state  than  that  upon  which 
the  procedure  operated.  This  type  of  problem  solver  Is  relatively 
flexible  in  that  an  appropriate  procedure  can  be  enacted  any  time 
the  right  conditions  prevail.  However,  the  system  can  get  into 
serious  problems,  such  as  infinite  loops,  if  the  condition  and 
procedure  relationships  are  not  properly  specified.  This  is  an 
Intentionally  oversimplified  description,  and  actual  systems  using 
this  technique  have  added  special  features  to  help  alleviate  some  of 
the  inherent  difficulties.  Nevertheless,  it  is  clear  that  this 
approach  places  all  the  "intelligence"  in  the  prearranged  condition- 
action  relations  given  by  specification  of  the  transforming 
procedures.  The  selection  of  a  solution  sequence  in  such  a  system 
is  a  fortuitous  result  of  clever  arrangement  of  these  condition- 


action  relations. 


A  more  sophisticated  approach  to  the  selection  of  a  solution 
sequence  is  found  in  those  problem  solving  systems  which,  a)  provide 
for  planning  whole  sequences  of  action  before  their  execution,  and 
b)  engage  in  a  kind  of  backward  reasoning.  The  idea  behind  planning 
is  that  the  problem  solver  has  stored  a  representation  of  the 
effects  of  each  potential  action  on  any  state  of  affairs.  Having 
this  capability  the  system  can  "simulate"  enactment  of  a  procedure 
and  store  a  copy  of  the  state  of  affairs  which  would  result  from  its 
enactment.  Using  this  ability  to  simulate  the  results  of  actions, 
the  backward  reasoning  procedure  of  goal  reduction  operates  as 
follows.  The  goal  condition  is  noted,  and  the  system  selects  a 
procedure  which,  if  enacted,  would  result  in  the  existence  of  the 
goal  condition.  This  procedure  will  be  enacted,  of  course,  only  if 
certain  preceding  conditions  exist.  These  presupposed  conditions 
are  then  each  listed  as  goals  to  be  achieved  and  the  whole  process 
is  repeated.  This  backward  process  continues  until  the 
preconditions  noted  in  the  stored  plan  structure  contain  the 
conditions  which  exist  in  the  initial  state.  By  then  executing  the 
plan  structure  forward  from  the  initial  conditions  to  the  goal 
condition,  a  solution  sequence  of  procedures  is  enacted.  Since  a 
condition  might  be  realized  by  enactment  of  more  than  one  procedure, 
a  tree  structure  of  possible  paths  to  a  solution  sequence  may  be 
created.  If  the  problem  is  complex,  this  planning  tree  will  become 
huge  and  the  problem  solving  process  will  not  operate  fast  enough 
for  any  practical  application.  The  solution  usually  attempted  for 
this  "combinatorial  explosion"  has  been  to  search  the  tree  in  a 


-29- 


depth- first  manner,  using  some  heuristic  choice  function  to  select 
the  most  productive  branch  to  follow  at  each  point,  but  this  is  a 
partial  solution  of  the  combinatorial  problem.  Nevertheless,  the  use 
of  goal  reduction  and  planning  is  a  distinct  improvement  over  the 
previously  discussed  approach.  Approaches  like  this  notion  of  goal 
reduction  have  been  used  in  some  important  problem  solving  models 
(cf.,  Newell  &  Simon,  1963,  1972;  Fikes  &  Nilsson,  1971). 

A  recent  A-I  development  employs  "successive  refinement"  to 
reduce  the  need  to  search  a  very  large  apace  of  possible  solution 
sequences.  This  system  is  able  to  represent  and  make  plans  about 
higher  level  specifications  of  procedure  sequences  by  temporarily 
omitting  the  specification  of  actions  to  achieve  a  selected 
subgoal.  The  system  simply  assumes  that  such  a  sequence  can  be 
found  later.  This  amounts  to  producing  a  plan  for  achieving  the 
goal  which  can  be  filled  out  later  by  going  back  and  determining  the 
precise  nature  of  the  assumed  action  sequences  (perhaps  in  various 
parts  of  the  plan).  This  technique  can,  of  course,  be  repeated  for 
any  number  of  hierarchical  levels,  and  by  its  use  the  problem  of 
having  to  search  among  an  enormous  number  of  possibilities  can  be 
somewhat  alleviated.  If  the  assumption  that  a  condition  can  be 
later  supported  by  an  action  sequence  proves  wrong,  then  the  system 
is  forced  to  fail  or  else  to  employ  some  special  technique  such  as 
backtracking  in  order  to  recover. 

Some  interesting  A-I  models  have  been  developed,  using  the 
techniques  sketched  above,  which  are  specifically  applied  to  tasks 
performed  by  a  maintainer.  Brown  (1977)  has  proposed  a  model, 
called  Watson,  which  troubleshoots  defective  radio  circuits.  Watson 


-30- 


takes  as  input  a  plan  structure  for  tracing  a  target  system's 
functions  which  actually  represents  the  functional  design  of  the 
target  system.  It  resembles  a  plan  structure  created  by  successive 
refinement  techniques  in  that  it  is  a  hierarchical,  nested  structure 
of  levels  of  design  description  (which  Brown  calls  "plan 
fragments").  This  design  description  is  input  to  a  recursive  fault 
localization  process  which  starts  at  the  top  level  of  a  plan  and 
isolates  a  fault  to  one  of  its  substructures.  This  process  is 
recursively  repeated  on  substructures  until  the  fault  is  isolated  to 
a  circuit  component  and  the  hypothesis  of  that  component's  failure 
is  verified.  If,  at  any  time,  Watson  finds  that  its  hypothesis 
producing  mechanism  has  isolated  to  a  non  failed  part,  it  mus£ 
backtrack  to  a  higher  planning  level  and  try  another  path.  The 
rules  Watson  uses  to  isolate  a  fault  include  one*which  uses  facts 
about  the  qualitative,  cause  and  ^ffect  relationships  between 

4ir 

components  to  trace  backward  along  paths  representing  the 
propagation  of  effects  in  the  target  system's  operation.  The  system 
representation  is  tightly  hierarchical  and  so  Watson's  processing  is 
organized  in  a  top-down  manner  from  the  upper,  abstract  levels  of 
system  design  through  successive  refinements  of  system  specification 
to  the  lowest  level  of  individual  components. 

Perhaps  the  most  well  known  example  of  this  sort  of  problem 
solving  system  is  NOAH,  (Sacerdoti,  1975)  which  controls  its 
activity  by  the  use  of  a  planning  system  called  procedural  nets. 

NOAH  is  meant  to  be  capable  of  tasks  such  as  disassembling  and 
assembling  an  air  compressor,  although  its  methods  are  considered  to 
be  applicable  to  a  wide  range  of  problem  situations  including 


-31- 


natural  language  understanding.  NOAH  formulates  its  problems  in 
terms  of  high  level  goals  and  decomposes  these  goals  into  lower 
level  ones.  Each  goal  specifies  sequences  of  actions.  When  the 
problem  reduction  is  complete  NOAH  has  produced  a  correct  plan 
represented  as  a  partial  ordering  of  elementary  actions.  The 
discussion  of  the  successive  refinemment  technique  given  above  was 
really  a  simplified  version  of  how  a  system  like  NOAH  operates  (cf . , 
Nilsson,  1979).  NOAH  is  an  excellent  plan  generator  and  performs 
impressively  on  the  demonstration  problems  it  is  given.  However, 
such  a  system  makes  some  very  serious  assumptions  about  the  nature 
of  an  effective  problem  solving  system.  For  example,  a  system  such 
as  this  generates  more  or  less  complete  plans  before  execution,  thus 
requiring  availability  of  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  target  system 
to  simulate  its  essential  functions.  NOAH  has  no  explicit  knowledge 
of  its  plan  generating  contingencies,  therefore,  the  problem  context 
will  affect  the  planning  process  in  a  manner  that  is  predetermined 
by  the  implicit  features  of  the  planning  rules.  Such  a  system 
cannot,  for  example,  tie  together  two  plans  with  parallel 
contingencies.  Although  it  seems  easy  to  add,  there  is  no  provision 
in  NOAH  for  backtracking.  Finally,  NOAH  can  easily  miss  the 
possibility  of  an  interaction  between  two  separate  actions  at  some 
depth  in  a  plan,  since  the  representation  for  these  actions  are  not 
compared  interpretively  or  in  terms  of  effect. 

Goldstein  (1971*)  developed  a  system  called  MYCROFT  which 
automatically  debugs  a  class  of  programs  in  the  high  level 
programming  language  LOGO.  Goldstein's  system  accomplishes  its  task 
essentially  by  compaf ing  output  of  a  program  with  a  model  of  its 


-32- 


intended  effect,  and  uses  knowledge  about  potential  problems  in 
linking  together  certain  program  components.  Brown  claims  that  this 
system  is  inferior  to  Watson  because  it  can  functionally  represent 
its  target  system  only  by  "running"  (simulating  completely)  that 
system;  however,  the  comparison  of  models  to  debug  computer  programs 
and  models  to  repair  faulty  physical  systems  is  one  that  deserves 
further  consideration  (cf.,  Wescourt  &  Hemphill,  1978).  A  more 
recent  project  by  deKleer  (1979)  has  extended  and  refined  research 
such  as  Brown's.  DeKleer* s  system  can  construct  a  mechanism  graph 
for  the  functional  topology  of  a  circuit  from  a  description  of  its 
physical  topology  and  identification  of  its  components.  It 
accomplishes  its  task  by  analyzing  the  qualitative  nature  of  local 
relations  among  components.  The  system  successively  refines  a 
functional  representation  and  chooses  among  candidate 
interpretations  by  selecting  that  interpretation  which  determines  a 
purpose  (similar  to  Watson)  for  all  components.  DeKleer  uses  the 
term  "envisionment"  to  refer  to  the  process  of  qualitatively 
simulating  the  high  level  functional  relations  among  elements  of  a 
system. 

Paychplogi-cal  Aasgs.sne.oi  sL  ite.  A =1  Motels 

Although  neither  Watson,  nor  NOAH,  nor  any  of  the  other  work 
mentioned  is  explicitly  intended  to  be  a  psychological  model  of  the 
relevant  problem  solving  processes,  such  work  provides  a  source  of 
ideas  for  proposing,  say,  a  model  of  the  human  troubleshooter. 
However,  from  our  earlier  review  of  psychological  issues  certain 
basic  assumptions  of  these  models  are  suspect.  First,  we  have  noted 
that  even  experienced  human  troubleshooters  frequently  lack 


-33- 


extensive  and  detailed  understanding  of  the  functioning  of  the 
target  systems.  Thus,  to  the  extent  that  the  above  models 
invariably  require  a  detailed  functional  representation  of  the 
target  system,  they  are  inaccurate  as  models  of  the  human 
troubleshooter.  At  least  the  provision  should  be  available  for  the 
model  to  upgrade  its  representation  as  it  gains  exposure  to  the 
target  system.  Second,  the  method  of  planning  by  successive 
refinement,  although  a  powerful  one  for  these  applications,  is  just 
not  what  people  seem  to  use.  We  have  discussed  the  results  of  Hayes- 
Roth  (1980)  which  reveal  human  planners  to  be  far  more  opportunistic 
and  flexible  in  their  approach  to  planning  than  the  above  systems. 

And  perhaps  this  is  also  a  much  more  powerful  approach  in  general. 

Finally,  these  models  do  not  consider  their  internal 
computation  time  in  weighing  alternative  solution  sequences.  Human 
performers  seem  to  consider,  or  at  least  avoid,  effort  and  time 
expenditure  in  both  selecting  and  performing  actions.  For  example, 
few  technicians  would  invest  more  than  a  few  minutes  in  deciding 
which  of  two  tests  to  perform  if  the  two  alternatives  could  be 
performed  in  just  a  few  seconds. 

One  approach  to  problem  solving  which  is  responsive  to  some  of 
these  criticisms  is  the  Hearsay-II  speech  understanding  system 
(Erman  et  al.,  1 980 ) .  Hearsay  has  been  used  in  a  successful  model 

of  human  planning  (Hayes-Roth  &  Hayes-Roth,  1979).  In  a  Hearsay 

* 

model,  the  problem  solving  system  is  composed  of  numerous, 
independent  "specialists",  each  of  which  is  a  procedure  created  to 
do  some  quite  specific  part  of  the  overall  task.  Though  these 
processes  are  independent,  they  may  interact  with  each  other  via  a 


device  called  a  "blackboard"  by  writing  information  to  that 
blackboard  which  may  be  used  by  other  specialists.  More 
precisely,  a  specialist  is  enacted  as  a  response  to  the  presence 
of  specific  information  on  the  blackboard.  If  an  appropriate 
pattern  is  present  on  the  blackboard,  a  specialist  will  be  enabled 
and  may  then  be  executed  in  response  to  a  set  of  control  procedures 
which  handle  prioritizing  and  scheduling  of  execution  for  enabled 
specialists.  When  executed,  a  specialist  may  alter  some  patterns  of 
information  on  the  blackboard  in  addition  to  performing  other  types 
of  operations.  This  newly  created  data  on  the  blackboard  will 
enable  the  operation  of  new  specialists,  which  may  further  alter  the 
blackboard  contents,  thus  enabling  further  specialists,  and  so  on. 

In  addition  to  those  specialists  devoted  to  operating  on  problem 
domain  data,  other  specialists  may  be  devoted  to  performance  of 
control  tasks  such  as  scheduling  when  other  specialists  will  be 
enacted.  In  this  way,  the  control  structure,  the  representation 
structure,  as  well  as  procedures  which  apply  to  the  problem  domain 
are  all  equally  visible  to  the  problem  solving  process.  In  a 
Hearsay  model  procedures  at  all  task  levels  from  the  lowest  level  to 
the  most  abstract  can  be  allowed  to  Influence  each  other  if  this  is 
appropriate  to  efficient  task  completion.  A  model  of  this  type  can 
perform  a  task  opportunistically  in  the  sense  that  it  need  not 
devise  a  complete  plan  before  acting,  and  it  may  alter  its  course  of 
action  radically  in  response  to  new  data.  It  appears  then  that  a 
Hearsay  type  of  control  structure  could  be  used  as  a  basis  of  a 
model  of  a  troubleshooter  with  the  psychologically  appropriate 
characteristics  of  flexibility,  opportunism,  and  lack  of  dependence 


-35- 


on  an  elaborate  Initial  knowledge  of  the  target  system.  Such  a  model 
would  provide  a  rich  source  of  hypotheses  about  such  issues  as  the 
effect  of  system  design  characteristics  on  the  maintainer's 
performance. 


-36- 


PART  TWO:  CORREKT  RESEARCH 


V.  An  Analytic  Approach  to  Projecting  Maintenance  Workload 

In  developing  a  technique  for  assessing  the  impact  of  a  design 
upon  the  maintainer,  we  are  primarily  concerned  with  projecting  what 
work  must  be  performed  to  meet  the  maintenance  requirements.  Subsequent 
analyses  of  these  characterizations,  to  evaluate  performance  time 
cr  difficulty,  for  example,  are  manageable  problems  once  the 
consituents  (of  the  performance)  are  specified. 

An  ideal  technique  would  project  maintenance  performance  across 
a  wide  range  of  proficiency  and  environmental  levels,  allowing 
designers  and  planners  to  evaluate  the  sensitivity  of  the  design  to 
those  variations.  Such  a  technique  would  reflect  the  variations  in 
maintenance  efficiency  as  well  as  the  possibly  more  significant 
variations  in  error  commission,  error  severity,  and  error  detection. 

A  more  attainable  approach,  pursued  here,  compares  and 
evaluates  designs  based  on  projections  of  error-free  performance  in  a 
nominal  environment.  Such  a  capability  may  provide  the  basis  for 
extrapolating  to  fallible  performance  at  a  later  time.  The  need  to 
ultimately  confront  human  error  is  clear.  Maintenance  performance  is 
affected  not  only  by  the  actual  commission  of  errors,  but  also  by  the 
possibility  of  their  commission.  Furthermore,  alternate  designs  may 
present  quite  different  error  exposures,  which  would  go  unrecognized 
by  an  analysis  which  excludes  error. 

The  variations  of  possible  error-free  performance  are,  of 
course,  immense.  At  one  extreme  is  optimal  performance;  the 


strategy  employed  minimizes  the  time  expected  to  find  and  resolve  a 
failure.  At  the  other  extreme  is  a  strategy  in  which  tests  are 
selected  at  random;  no  consideration  of  efficiency  is  made.  In 
the  field  a  vast  array  of  non-optimal  maintenance  task  sequences 
are  performed  which  reflect  variations  in  individual  skills,  training, 
and  abilities.  We  have  formulated  eight  generic  troubleshooting 
strategies  in  this  domain,  which,  when  applied  to  a  specific 
representation  of  a  system  design,  generate  troubleshooting  action 
sequences.  Times  to  perform  these  sequences  are  then  computed  by 
retrieving  and  accumulating  predetermined ,  standardized  motion  times 
for  the  actions  involved.  Each  performance  sequence  and  time, 
therefore,  reflects  the  total  impact  of  the  system  design  upon  the 
maintainer,  if  he  were  to  follow  the  particular  strategy. 

Subsequent  experimentation  will  be  conducted  to  establish  the 
relationship  between  observed  maintenance  performance  and  the 
performance  generated  by  the  generic  approaches.  We  hypothesize  a 
reliable  relationship  between  one  or  more  of  the  generic  approaches 
and  observed  performance. 

System  Representation 

To  represent  a  system  design,  we  require  (1)  a  characterization 
of  the  symptom  Information  regarding  the  state  of  the  system,  which 
can  be  accessed  by  the  technician,  (2)  data  expressing  the  "cost"  of 
acquiring  that  information,  (3)  reliability  data,  and  (4)  a 
representation  of  the  physical  structure  of  the  system. 

The  first  three  of  these  can  be  organized  as  a  matrix  as  shown 
in  Figure  1.  The  columns  in  the  body  of  the  matrix  represent 
replaceable  units  (RU's)  while  rows  represent  tests.  Each  cell 


Figure  1.  Symptom-malfunction  Matrix  with  Test 
Costs  and  Unit  Reliabilities 


-39- 


entry,  S • ■  ,  expresses  the  consequence  upon  test  i  of  a  failure  in 

'  J 

RU  •  .An  entry  of  zero  indicates  no  effect,  i.e.,  test  i  is 

si 

unaffected  by  RU-  .  A  non-zero  entry  indicates  an  abnormal 

si 

symptom.  Costs  of  performing  each  test  are  entered  in  the  column 
tab  at  the  right  of  the  array  and  RU  reliabilities  are  entered  into 
the  lower  row  tab.  We  will  use  time  as  the  measure  of  test  cost, 
but  we  recognize  that  the  maintainer  may  continually  weigh  time 
cost,  dollar  cost,  personal  effort,  personal  safety  and  other  factors 
in  selecting  tests. 

The  physical  structure  of  the  system  will  be  represented  as  an 
assembly  specification  as  shown  in  Figure  2.  All  system  elements 
appearing  in  the  first  (leftmost)  column  are  accessible  to  the 
maintainer;  the  time  to  remove  and  replace  each  is  entered  in 
the  last  column.  An  element  appearing  in  the  second  column  is 
accessible  only  by  first  removing  the  element  which  appears  above  it 
in  the  first  column,  and  so  on.  Tests  are  included  in  this 
structural  representation  to  indicate  what  disassembly  must  be 
accomplished  to  initiate  each.  The  test  times  shown  in  Figure  1 
are  therefore  the  inherent  times  which  are  independent  of  preceding 
work. 

Task  Representation 

To  effectively  relate  design  characteristics  to  their  impact  on 
maintenance  activity,  a  generic  structure  of  activity  elements  was 
formulated  (Figure  3).  The  elements  in  this  decomposition  relate 
rather  directly  to  identifiable  design  issues. 

Status  Identification  (SI).  All  activity  performed  to 
determine  what  fault,  if  any,  exists  in  a  system  or  equipment  is 


-40- 


-41- 


gure  3.  Components  of  Active  Maintenance  Workload 


termed  "status  identification"  (SI).  This  activity  is  further 
decomposed  into  "prescribed  activities"  and  "generated  activities". 
Typically,  troubleshooting  begins  with  the  performance  of  a  fault 
verification/localization  procedure  which  is  prescribed  in  the 
technical  documentation.  This  may  involve  executing  BIT  routines, 
performing  manual  front  panel  tests,  and/or  other  well  defined 
procedures. 

Sometimes  the  prescribed  SI  activity  terminates  with  a 
successful  identification  of  the  fault.  In  other  cases,  either  the 
prescribed  process  fails  to  identify  a  single  possible  cause,  or 
upon  making  the  indicated  repair  or  replacement,  the  technician 
finds  that  the  problem  persists. 

Generated  activity  commences  when  the  technician  begins 
deciding  what  action  will  be  taken  to  locate  the  fault  and/or 
verify  system  operation.  This  is  decomposed  into  two  major  types, 
"information  acquisition"  and  "information  utilization". 

Information  acquisition  elements  are  all  of  the  generated 
activities  performed  to  obtain  information  about  the  status  of  the 
equipment.  These  include  visual  inspections,  performing  front  panel 
tests,  attaching  and  using  peripheral  test  equipment,  and  altering 
the  system  configuration  in  order  to  test  or  exclude  various 
functions.  These  manual/perceptual  elements  are  directly  affected 
by  the  design  of  the  man-machine  interface,  the  ease  of 
reconfiguring  the  system,  and  the  design  of  peripheral  test 
equipment. 

Information  utilization  elements  include  all  the  cognitive 
activities  associated  with  generated  SI.  These  include  evaluating 


-43- 


symptoms,  studying  technical  documentation,  deciding  what  test  to 
perform  next,  as  well  as  planning  and  managing  resources.  These 
elements  are  directly  affected  by  such  factors  as  the  relationships 
between  the  available  test  and  the  internal  structure,  and  the  quality 
of  the  technical  documentation. 

Typically,  generated  SI  consists  of  a  sequence  of  alternations 
between  information  acquisition  and  information  utilization.  The 
transitions  are  not  necessarily  instantaneous  or  complete.  For  our 
purposes,  however,  we  will  regard  information  acquisition  as 
entirely  manual/perceptual,  except  for  the  simultaneous  cognitive 
attention  required  to  direct  the  work;  and  information  utilization  as 
entirely  cognitive,  except  for  the  incidental  manual/perceptual 
work  associated  with  studying  technical  documentation. 

Restoration.  All  activity  performed  to  correct  the  actual 
fault  is  termed  "restoration".  This  may  include  (1)  disassembly, 

(2)  replacement,  adjustment,  or  repair  of  the  faulty  element,  and 

(3)  reassembly. 

Two  types  of  activity  resist  simple  classification: 

(1)  any  disassembly/reassembly,  which  occurs  as  part  of  SI,  and 

(2)  any  replacements  and  adjustments  made  as  part  of  SI.  Some 
disassembly  and  reassembly  is  often  performed  during  SI.  This  may 
be  done  to  gain  access  to  additional  test  points,  to  facilitate 
visual  inspection,  or  to  accomplish  replacements  or  adjustments 
performed  to  isolate  the  fault  (e.g.  swapping  a  cable  or  trying  an 
adjustment).  To  assign  all  such  effort  to  either  SI  or  restoration 
could  seriously  distort  the  analysis  of  a  design.  A  reasonable 


procedure  is  to  assign  to  SI  all  disassembly,  adjustment,  and 


reassembly  effort  not  required  to  correct  the  true  fault.  Thus  SI 
time  reflects  all  activities  performed  to  identify  the  fault,  and 
restoration  time  is  unaffected  by  the  manner  in  which  the  fault  is 
Identified. 

The  foregoing  characterization  of  maintenance  activity  places 
no  constraints  on  the  order  in  which  various  activity  types  may 
occur,  nor  on  the  number  of  different  occasions,  within  a  problem, 
that  any  particular  type  may  be  performed.  Table  1  indicates  some 
possible  combinations  of  maintenance  activity  types. 

Predicting  and  Quantifying  Performance 

Fixed  sequences.  The  actions  required  to  accomplish  Prescribed 
Status  Identification  and  Restoration  are  predictable  from  the 
technical  documentation  plus  the  specification  of  Figure  2.  While 
individual  technicians  may  differ  in  work  pace  and  efficiency  of 
performing,  the  technical  documentation  and  system  design  constrain 
the  actions  which  can  correctly  be  performed. 

The  time  data  for  performing  tests  and  asserobly/disassembly 
actions  may  be  based  upon  estimates,  micromotion  analysis,  or  a  mixture 
of  these.  Estimates  would  be  used  when  design  specifications  are  not 
detailed,  or  when  highly  precise  results  are  not  required  or  justified. 

Micromotion  analysis  is  the  synthesis  of  a  defined  task  from 
small,  pre-analyzed  motions  (Karger  and  Bayha,  1966).  While  this 
approach  yields  accurate  results  and  detailed  motion  documentation, 
it  requires  considerable  training  and  application  effort.  An 
example  of  a  micromotion  analysis  of  connecting  a  coax  connector  to 


-45- 


RESOLUTION  OF  MAINTENANCE  REQUIREMENT 


Typical  Combinations  of  Maintenance  Activity  Types 


a  receptacle  is  shown  in  Figure  4 .  Fortunately,  a  wide  variety  of 
testing,  assembly/disassembly,  and  repair  operations  have  been 
analyzed  and  documented  in  task  time  data  banks.  Consequently,  a 
time  value  for  a  task  may  be  retrieved  from  such  a  catalog,  rather 
than  being  built  up  from  detailed  motion  analysis.  An  automated 
technique,  similar  to  one  now  used  in  industry  (Towne,  1968,  I960), 
will  be  developed  as  part  of  this  research  to  further  facilitate 
this  data  retrieval  process. 

Variable  sequences.  A  family  of  eight  primitive 
troubleshooting  strategies  has  been  formulated  to  represent 
variations  in  troubleshooting  approach.  When  applied  to  a 
representation  of  a  system,  these  strategies  produce  fault  trees 
whose  structure  and  performance  time  cost  are  a  direct  result  of  the 
system  design  (as  well  as  the  underlying  strategy  which  produced 
them) . 

For  each  strategy,  the  selection  rule  is  applied  to  select  the 
first  test.  The  symptom-malfunction  matrix  then  indicates  what 
system  failures  would  give  a  normal  indication  and  which  would  cause 
an  abnormal  indication  for  that  test.  The  selection  rule  is  again 
applied  to  each  resulting  subset,  and  so  on,  until  a  complete  fault 
tree  is  developed  (Figure  5).  The  time  cost  of  isolating  each  element 
is  then  computed  as  the  sum  of  the  times  of  all  tests  which  appear  in 
the  branch  terminating  at  the  element.  The  measure  of  effectiveness 
of  a  fault  tree  is  Expected  isolation  time,  computed  as 


-47- 


DESCRIPTION 

MOTION 

SYMBOL 

1.  Reach  to  Coax  Connector 

R14B 

8.6 

2.  Grasp  Connector 

G1A 

1.2 

3.  Move  Connector  to  Receptacle 

M14C 

10.1 

Move  Connector  onto  Receptacle 

4.  (edqe  hits  pin) 

P2SSE 

11.8 

Turn  Connector  to  Engage  Pin 

5.  in  Slot 

P2S3 

9.7 

6.  Release  Connector 

RL1 

1.2 

' 

TOTAL: 

42.6 

( .0426  minutes) 

Figure  4.  Micromotion  Analysis  -  Attach  Coax 
Connector  to  Receptacle 


-48- 


Abnormal 


Normal 


Abnormal 


© 
(4  min. 


Norm 


(14  min. ) 


( 14  min. ) 


d 


(8  mi  n .  1 


RELATIVE 

RELIABILITIES 

TEST  TIMES 
(MINUTES) 

A 

.3 

1 

6.0 

B 

.1 

2 

3.0 

C 

.2 

3 

10.0 

D 

.1 

4 

1.0 

E  .3 

1.0 

5 

7.0 

RA  TA  +  RB  TB  +  RC  TC  +  RD  TD  +  rE  te 
=  .3(4)  +  .1(8)  +  .2(14)  +  .1(14)  +  .3(8) 

=  8.6  minutes,  expected  fault  isolation  time 


Figure  5.  Simple  Fault  Isolation  Tree 


E 


I  Ri 


where  E  is  Expected  fault  isolation  time 

Ri  is  the  Reliability  of  element  i 
tj  is  the  time  to  isolate  element  i,  that  is, 
the  sum  of  all  test  times  in  the  branch 
terminating  at  element  i. 


Thus,  in  Figure  5,  the  expected  isolation  time  is  8.6  minutes. 

The  three  variables,  considered  in  various  combinations  by  the 
strategies,  are  test  power,  test  performance  time,  and  element 
reliability.  One  strategy  considers  all  three  of  these,  and 
produces  a  fault  isolation  procedure  (tree)  which  is  optimal,  i.e., 
the  expected  fault  isolation  time  is  minimal. 

This  strategy  is  determined  by  computing,  at  each  stage  in  the 
troubleshooting  process,  that  test  which  provides  the  maximum 
information  per  unit  time.  Information  is  computed  according  to 
Bayes  theorem  as  the  reduction  in  the  total  system  uncertainty,  i.e. 


AU  = 

Z  Pi  log,  Pi 

-  Z  Pj  log. 

9 

Pi 

where 

AU 

=  uncertainty  reduction 

Pi 

=  probability  of 

i  th  malfunction 

prior  to  test 

9 

pi 

=  probability  of 

ith  malfunction 

after  test 

In  general,  this  algorithm  may  not  yield  a  true  minimum,  as  the 
stepwise  process  does  not  consider  the  characteristics  of  the  fault 
areas  discriminated  at  each  stage.  A  dynamic  programming 
formulation  was  implemented  to  compute  a  true  minimum.  This  process 


-50- 


essentially  "looks  ahead",  down  each  branch  of  the  fault  isolation 
tree,  and  is  able  to  generate  a  slightly  more  efficient  strategy. 

In  one  application  of  the  Bayesian  process  the  expected 
troubleshooting  time  for  a  system  was  11.702  minutes,  whereas  the 
dynamic  programming  process  yielded  11.568  minutes.  If  this  close 
correspondence  between  results  holds  up  for  other  systems,  we  will 
employ  the  Bayesian  processor  to  estimate  the  optimum,  as  it  is.  a 
rapid  computation  compared  to  the  heavy  computation  load  of  dynamic 
programming. 

It  must  be  emphasized  that  the  compute  load  to  generate  the 
optimum  used  here  was  not  considered  by  the  processor  itself,  i.e., 
the  definition  of  optimality  does  not  embrace  time  invested  in 
producing  the  result.  Human  performers,  on  the  other  hand,  seem  to 
be  quite  sensitive  to  the  time  costs  associated  with  planning  their 
performance.  Field  troubleshooters  have  at  times  been  criticized 
for  performing  tests  when  more  planning  and  analysis  seemed  more 
productive.  Whether  or  not  maintainers  tend  to  "under-plan",  it  is 
important  to  distinguish  between  machine  computed  solutions,  and 
those  developed  in  real  time  by  human  maintainers  who  forego  manual 
performance  to  conduct  cognitive  tasks. 

At  the  opposite  extreme  is  a  strategy  in  which  tests  are 
selected  at  random  from  the  set  of  all  tests  which  can  offer  any 
information  about  the  status  of  the  system.  The  random  strategy 
which  selects  only  productive  tests  provides  an  upper  limit  on 
rational  troubleshooting  time.  Strategies  can  be  formulated  which 
are  even  less  effective  than  random  selection.  The  mean  of  the 
distribution  of  expected  isolation  times  produced  by  random  test 


-51- 


selection,  however,  represents  the  time  expected  when  no  information 
is  utilized  for  test  selection  except  the  results  of  previous  tests. 

Between  the  optimal  strategy  and  the  random  strategy  (on  the 
dimension  of  effectiveness)  lie  six  rational,  suboptimal  approaches, 
each  of  which  considers  one  or  two  of  the  three  variables  used  by 
the  optimum  strategy.  A  brief  summary  of  all  eight  strategies 
follows  (also  see  Table  2). 

1.  Optimum  test  selection.  Tests  are  selected  to  minimize  total 
expected  isolation  time.  This  strategy  considers  the  time  costs 

of  the  tests,  the  power  of  the  tests,  and  the  relative  reliabilities 
of  the  system  elements. 

2.  Element  half-splitting,  per  unit  time.  Tests  are  selected  to  best 
split  the  suspected  elements  into  two  subsets  of  equal  size,  per 
unit  time.  This  is  strategy  1  with  initial  element  reliabilities 
ignored . 

3.  Briefest  test  selection.  The  briefest  test  which  can  provide  any 
information  is  selected  at  each  stage.  Only  time  cost  is 
considered  in  the  selection. 

i».  Half-splitting  bv  reliability.  Tests  are  selected  to  best  split  the 
suspected  elements  into  two  subsets  of  equal  failure  probability. 
This  is  strategy  t  with  test  time  cost  ignored. 

5.  Half-3Plitting  bv  element.  Tests  are  selected  to  best  split  the 
suspected  elements  into  two  subsets  of  equal  size.  This  is 
equivalent  to  strategy  2  with  test  time  cost  ignored. 

6.  Check  least  reliable  element,  per  unit  time.  Tests  are  selected 
to  monitor  the  greatest  probability  of  failure  per  unit  time. 

Test  time  cost  and  element  reliability  are  considered. 


-52- 


VARIABLE  CONSIDERED 


NO. 

STRATEGY 

IBM 

lilB 

— 

RELIA-  ! 
BILITY 

■ 

Optimum  Test  Selection 

YES 

YES 

YES 

2 

Element  Half-Splitting,  Per  Unit  Time 
(iqnore  element  reliabilities) 

YES 

YES 

NO 

3 

Briefest  Productive  Test  Selection 

YES 

NO 

NO 

■ 

NO 

YES 

YES 

5 

NO 

YES 

NO 

6 

Check  Least  Reliable  Element,  Per  Unit 
Time  (iqnore  test  power) 

YES 

NO 

m 

■ 

Check  Least  Reliable  Element 

NO 

NO 

YES 

8 

Random  Test  Selection 

NO 

NO 

NO 

Table  2.  Eight  Generic  Fault  Isolation  Strategies 


-53- 


7.  Check  least  reliable  element.  Teats  are  selected  to  check  the 
least  reliable  elements  first.  Only  reliability  is  considered 
in  the  selections. 

8.  Random  test  selection.  Tests  are  selected  at  random  (no 
repeating)  without  regard  to  test  time  cost,  test  power,  or 
reliabilities. 

These  eight  strategies  were  applied  to  a  microcomputer  system 
consisting  of  mainframe,  video  terminal,  hardcopy  printer,  and  disk 
drive  unit  (Figure  6).  The  representation  of  the  system  is  shown  in 
Figure  7.  The  results  of  the  analysis,  summarized  in  Table  3,  will 
ultimately  be  evaluated  in  terms  of  experimentally  observed 
maintenance  performance  on  the  system. 

The  relationships  among  the  various  fault  isolation  methods, 
however  are  interesting  in  their  own  right.  The  simple  strategy  of 
performing  the  briefest  productive  test  (strategy  3)  yielded  an 
expected  isolation  time  of  13.5  minutes,  surprisingly  close  to  the 
11.7  minute  optimum.  Strategy  2,  which  uses  test  power  and  test 
cost,  yielded  13.2  minutes  expected  isolation  time,  indicating  that 
initial  reliability  data  contributed  little  to  the  solution.  The 
classical  half-splitting  strategy  (perform  a  test  to  split  the 
system  in  two)  yields  21.3  minutes,  whereas  half-splitting  into  two 
equally  reliable  subsets  (strategy  4)  requires  less  time  at  16.8 
minutes. 

The  two  strategies  which  emphasize  checking  unreliable  elements 
perform  poorly,  at  over  forty  minutes.  These  results  are 
surprisingly  close  to  random  test  selection  (Figure  8),  which 
yields  a  mean  expected  repair  time  of  49.7  minutes  (N  =  800). 


-54- 


HARDCOPY  SUBSYSTEM 


TYPEWRITER 

LINKAGES 

A 

SOLONOIDS 

B 


ESCON 

CABLE 

C 


ESCON 

INTERFACE 

D 


VIDEO  TERMINAL 


SUBSYSTEM 


VIDEO 

TERMINAL 

L 


VIDEO  TERMINAL  CABLE 
K 


I/O  PORT  TO 
ESCON  INTERFACE 


MAINFRAME 


POWER 

SUPPLY 

H 


INPUT/OUTPUT 

BOARD 

F 


CPU 

G 


MEMORY 

BOARDS 

I 


DISK 

CONTROLLER 
BOARD  J 


M 


DISK  DRIVE  RIBBON  CABLE 


FLOPPY  DISK  SUBSYSTEM 


READ/WRITE 
HEAD  ASS' Y 

HEAD  POS'N 

LAMP 

N 

0 

Figure  6.  Microcomputer  Block  Diagram 


- 

- 

RELATIVE 

FA  I 

LUR 

E  PROBABII 

lit: 

IES 

-  ■ 

-  - 

- 

vO 

LO 

, 

ro 

CO 

r-- 

ro 

px* 

vO 

o 

o 

ro 

O 

l n 

co 

r-^ 

co 

O 

C\J 

o 

«— 1 

C\J 

tH 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

• 

r*—t 

Figure  7.  Representation  of  Microcomputer  System 


-56- 


STRATEGY  1 

ELEMENTS2 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

00 

A 

13.5 

2Q. 5  . 

20.5 

8.5 

23.2 

7.5 

7.5 

B 

18.0 

18.0 

18.0 

20.5 

27.0 

28.5 

19.5 

....  C 

29.5 

29.5 

29.5 

35.5 

23.2 

71.5 

125.5 

j 

D 

18.0 

18.0 

18.0 

25.5 

27.0 

66.5 

COMPUTED 

F 

20.5 

13.0 

13.0 

42.5 

19.0 

78.5 

116.5 

F 

12.0 

12.0 

12.0 

31.5 

22.0 

62.5 

102.5 

G 

9.0 

9.0 

9.0 

8.0 

8.0 

54.0 

105.0 

H 

5.5 

5.5 

3.5 

32.5 

54.0 

105.0 

- - 

_  I 

2.0 

2.0 

2.0 

32.5 

32.5 

114.5 

92.5 

J 

9.0 

9.0 

9.0 

8.0 

8.0 

11.0 

37.5 

K 

27.0 

27.0 

27.0 

46.5 

37.0 

159.5 

124.0 

o 

L 

27.0 

27.0 

27.0 

46.5 

msa 

159.5 

124.0 

zr 

M 

29.5 

29.5 

29.5 

42.5 

19.0 

89.5 

125.5 

i 

N 

7.5 

7.5 

9.0 

10.3 

16.0 

51.5 

32.5 

0 

7.5 

7.5 

9.0 

10.3 

16.0 

16.5 

34.5 

EXPECTED 

TIME 

11.7 

13.2 

13.5 

16.8 

21.3 

43.1 

46.9 

49.7 

1  See  Table  2 

2  See  Figure  6 


Table  3.  Element  Isolation  Times  (Minutes) 
for  Eight  Generic  Strategies 


-57- 


ctfMMrtfitfiHi 


800  trials,  mean  cost=  49.68  variances  525.604  std=  22.926 

mininum  costs  15.27  max  costs  129.88 
ONLY  PRODUCTIVE  TESTS  USED. 


Figure  8.  Distribution  of  Fault  Isolation  Times  With 
Random  Test  Selection  (2  fault  trees  per  *  ) 


r 


Examination  of  Table  3  reveals  that  the  rank-order  of  fault 
isolation  times  for  individual  faults  are  relatively  consistent 
across  strategies.  Those  approaches  which  ignore  test  time  cause 
the  greatest  departures  from  this  tendency,  since  they  may  call  for 
performing  lengthy  tests  to  check  just  a  few  unreliable  elements. 

The  results  of  this  one  analysis  certainly  do  not  constitute  a 
basis  for  generalization.  Since  the  optimum  strategy  provides  a 
true  baseline  of  expert  performance,  it  may  prove  to  correlate  best 
with  observed  maintenance  activity,  across  different  systems.  If 
maintainers  are  generally  parsimonious  with  time  but  not 
particularly  prone  to  consider  test  power,  then  we  may  find  actual 
maintenance  performance  resembles  that  of  strategy  3.  If,  instead, 
maintainers  focus  their  attention  on  unreliable  elements,  then  we 
might  expect  performance  more  like  strategy  7.  And,  if  maintainers 
switch  among  time-dominant,  reliability-dominant,  and  test  power- 
dominant  strategies,  we  might  expect  some  function  of  strategies  3, 

5  and  7  to  provide  a  projection  of  maintenance  workload.  For 
example,  if  there  is  a  tendency  to  select  quick  and  easy  tests  early 
in  a  problem,  and  later  shift  to  an  enumerative  search  process  as 
the  possible  faults  emerge,  we  may  employ  strategies  3  and  7  to 
project  the  performance.  Experimentation  is  needed  to  determine  if 
such  shifting  strategy  techniques  are  used  by  maintainers,  and  if 
so,  to  determine  when  and  under  what  conditions  in  a  fault  isolation 
task  such  shifts  will  occur. 

The  most  intriguing  result  of  this  one  application  is  that  the 


fault  isolation  performances  and  times  were  relatively  constant 
across  the  time-dominant  strategies  and  relatively  constant  at  a 


higher  level  across  the  two  reliability-dominant  strategies.  This 
suggests  the  interesting  and  very  tentative  hypothesis  that  the  work 
required  to  isolate  a  particular  fault  may  be  highly  determined  by 
the  design  and  less  sensitive  to  individual  differences  of  isolation 
method.  Further  application  and  experimentation  are  needed  to  test 
these  early  impressions. 


-60- 


The  conditions  required  to  experimentally  observe  realistic 


maintenance  performance  are  numerous  and  not  readily  achieved. 

While  a  number  of  interesting  effects  may  be  studied  in  a  highly 
sanitized  setting,  the  major  problems  confronting  a  maintainer  may 
be  lost  in  the  process.  High  fidelity  of  field  maintenance 
conditions  is  extremely  difficult  to  attain  while  simultaneously 
capturing  desired  performance  data.  Today,  the  computer  offers  an 
attractive  mechanism  for  tirelessly  interacting  with  subjects  and 
recording  detailed  performance  data.  The  elegance  of  the  data 
collection  mechanism,  however,  must  not  require  that  the 
maintenance  task  be  converted  into  a  man-computer  interaction  task. 

Particular  experimental  requirements  will  affect  the  types  and 
extent  of  fidelity  required  or  justified.  The  considerations  may  be 
classified  into  three  categories:  problem  fidelity,  performance 
fidelity,  and  environmental  fidelity. 

Problem  Fidelity 

Experimentation  which  addresses  how  maintainers  generate  their 
performance  will  usually  be  concerned  with  preserving,  in  the 
laboratory,  the  same  problems  faced  by  the  maintainer  in  the  field. 
In  addition  to  the  problem  of  identifying  a  possible  fault,  the 
real  world  troubleshooter  faces  uncertainties  regarding  (1)  the 
current  existence  of  a  failure,  (2)  the  current  structure  of  the 
system,  and  (3)  the  accuracy  of  symptoms  obtained. 


Failure  uncertainty.  A  maintainer  who  is  assured  that  a  system 
contains  a  persisting,  catastrophic  fault  faces  a  different,  and 
considerably  simpler,  problem  than  one  operating  in  normal  field 
conditions.  The  field  maintainer  must  consider  that  no  fault  exists 
at  all,  or  that  the  fault  may  be  intermittent,  marginally 
observable,  or  observable  only  in  highly  constrained  configurations. 

Under  these  conditions,  if  a  test  yields  a  normal  result,  the 
system  elements  involved  in  producing  that  indication  may  be 
provisionally  considered  as  operational.  If  later  results  seem  to 
conflict  with  this  conclusion,  then  previous  conclusions  are 
suspect.  In  these  cases,  the  real  maintainer  faces  a  difficult 
memory  and  logical  problem  in  keeping  track  of  what  evidence  is  firm 
and  what  is  suspect.  When  the  possibilities  of  intermittent 
failures  are  considered  by  the  maintainer,  normal  test  results  may 
have  to  be  greatly  discounted  to  avoid  eliminating  the  true  fault 
from  suspicion. 

Unfortunately,  intermittant  faults  are  not  at  all  uncommon. 

In  addition,  numerous  situations  can  create  seeming  intermittency 
even  though  the  fault  may  be  stable.  The  maintainer  may  observe 
different  symptoms  for  a  repeated  performance  of  a  test,  yet  not  be 
able  to  ascertain  if  all  aspects  of  the  test  were  replicated.  This 
is  especially  common  when  multiple  sensors  or  external  signals  are 
used  in  the  test.  If  the  foregoing  difficulties  are  artificially 
avoided  in  an  experimental  setting,  normal  results  conclusively 
eliminate  from  suspicion  all  Involved  elements.  Fault 
identification  can  therefore  proceed  in  a  manner  which  is  not 
representative  of  field  conditions. 

-62- 


I 


Structural  uncertainty.  Most  troubleshooting  experimentation 
has  been  conducted  in  an  environment  of  certainty  regarding  the 
structure  of  the  system  to  be  diagnosed.  Typically,  subjects  are 
provided  diagrams  representing  the  structure  of  the  system. 
Frequently,  these  are  at  the  level  of  "signal  flow"  diagrams  which 
represent  simple  connectivity  of  elements. 

In  the  real  world  the  maintainer  confronts  a  somewhat  different 
problem.  First,  real  systems  may  be  configured,  via  cables  and 
switches,  into  a  vast  number  of  modes  of  operation.  Many  of  these 
may  depend  upon  conditions  at  remote  locations  which  cannot  be 
verified  with  ease  or  certainty.  Secondly,  the  malfunction  itself 
often  has  the  effect  of  altering  the  system  structure  radically. 

Open  or  shorted  leads  do  this,  as  well  as  some  types  of  degradation 
or  catastrophic  failure  of  components.  A  further  complication  is 
introduced  when  systems  normally  alter  their  structure  over  time. 
Many  computer-synchronized  systems  shift  functions  and  form  many 
times  per  second. 

Thus,  the  real  world  troubleshooter  often  faces  a  system  whose 
structure  is  unknown,  either  during  fault  diagnosis  or  during  the 
initial  appearance  of  the  malfunction.  Laboratory  experimentation 
will  embrace  this  dilemma  only  if  representations  of  the  target 
system  are  offered  as  nominal  characterizations  of  system  structure, 
and  not  as  guaranteed  system  connectivity. 


-63- 


The  impact  of  the  variable  becomes  evident  when  real  systems 
are  diagramed  in  "signal  flow"  form.  As  seen  in  Figure  9,  the 
connectivity  of  the  experimental  microcomputer  system  is  trivially 
simple,  and  troubleshooting  a  system  which  is  no  more  or  less  than 
that  diagram  is  also  trivial.  Yet  the  real  equipment  is  not  easy 
to  diagnose,  for  subtle  and  more  complex  cause-effect 
relationships,  not  captured  by  the  connectivity  diagram,  must  be 
considered  by  the  troubleshooter. 

Symptom  uncertainty.  Test  results  received  in  the  real  world 
are  sometimes  incorrect,  or  incorrectly  interpreted.  The  indicator 
or  test  equipment  may  be  faulty;  the  technical  documentation  may  be 
misleading,  incorrect,  or  incomplete;  or  a  correct  indication  may  be 
erroneously  interpreted.  Some  experienced  technicians  we  have 
observed  are  so  wary  of  these  possibilities  that  they  do  not  assess 
single  test  results.  Instead,  they  collect  several  readings  and 
then  consider  if  the  combination  of  results  is  meaningful  and 
consistent. 

As  with  failure  uncertainty,  the  consequence  which  emerges  from 
symptom  uncertainty  is  that  much  information  received  must  either 
be  provisionally  processed  or  simply  stored  for  later  assessment. 

In  either  case,  cognitive  effort  must  be  devoted  to  reassessing 
past  results  as  troubleshooting  progresses.  To  retain  this  aspect 
of  the  maintainer’s  problem  requires  that  subjects  be  advised  that 
test  results  provided  may  be  in  error,  and  that  technical 
documentation  provided  may  be  imperfect.  We  would  anticipate  that 
the  mere  presentation  of  these  warnings  would  significantly  degrade 
troubleshooting  performance.  To  actually  introduce  such  error  into 


-64- 


test  results  or  reference  standards  would  further  degrade 
performance. 

A  further  Interesting  effect  of  symptom  uncertainty  is  that 
abnormal  readings  must  often  be  somewhat  discounted,  whereas  normal 
readings  may  be  more  credible.  For  example,  if  a  voltage  of  16.5  is 
received  at  a  test  point  which  should  read  16.7,  the  maintainer  can 
feel  relatively  sure  that  the  test  equipment  is  operating  and  set  up 
correctly.  A  reading  of  zero,  however,  could  be  obtained  if  the 
test  equipment  is  not  functioning  or  not  set  up  properly. 

We  suspect  that  maintainers  over-react  to  symptom 
uncertainties  in  the  same  way  computer  programmers  often  over-react 
to  a  hardware  failure.  Once  a  computer  failure  is  encountered, 
programmers  have  considerable  difficulty  interpreting  subsequent 
program  bugs  as  such,  for  typically  they  have  just  invested  great 
time  and  energy  searching  for  a  program  bug  which  did  not  exist. 
Performance  Fidelity 

The  second  component  of  experimental  fidelity  is  related  to  the 
realism  of  performance  which  is  allowed  and  required.  Observed 
performance  will  be  most  representative  of  field  performance  if  the 
subject  operates  in  real  time,  receiving  realistic  sensory 
information,  and  is  free  to  commit  errors. 

Real  time  performance.  Actual  maintenance  is  conducted  in  real 
time.  Time  devoted  to  cognitive  activity  (information  utilization) 
is  time  which  could  be  devoted  to  manual  performance,  and  vice 
versa.  There  is  strong  evidence  that  maintainers  somehow  apply  their 
cognitive  time  investment  in  a  rational  manner,  v  would  rarely 
devote  ten  minutes  to  deciding  which  test  to  perf  .  m  if  they  know  of 


-66- 


one  or  more  tests  which  would  require  just  a  few  minutes. 

Conversely,  they  would  rarely  make  a  snap  judgement  to  initiate  a 
long  and  arduous  test  procedure.  Thus  maintainers  seem  to  be 
rationally  parsimonious  with  their  time  resources  by  allocating 
cognitive  time  in  relation  to  the  consequences  in  performance. 

Once  a  manual  operation  is  in  progress,  the  maintainer  might 
perform  a  variety  of  cognitive  processes  including  reviewing  past 
results,  planning  for  possible  contingencies,  and  considering  the 
possible  sources  of  trouble.  This  cognitive  activity,  or  possibly 
some  new  cues  or  information  encountered  during  the  operation,  may 
cause  the  maintainer  to  terminate  the  task  in  progress  and  embark 
on  a  new  course  of  action. 

An  experimental  procedure  which  removes  or  distorts  the  time 
dimension  can  alter  the  process  and  the  product  of  maintenance 
activity  in  unknown  and,  we  suspect,  profound  ways.  Typically, 
time  costs  of  the  possible  alternatives  are  given  to  the  subjects. 
These  affect  their  decisions  to  some  extent.  Our  pilot  research 
employing  this  technique  has  convinced  us,  however,  that  subjects 
cannot  accurately  project,  or  imagine,  the  artificial  time 
costs.  Instead,  they  tend  to  select  tests  which  minimize  their 
actual  time  investment  on  the  problem,  rather  than  a  computed, 
theoretical  time  score.  In  any  case,  subjects  lose  the  opportunity 
to  abort  a  test  in  progress  as  well  as  the  opportunity  to  absorb 
information  or  to  "think"  while  performing  longer  manual  tests. 

Information  fidelity.  It  is  possible  that  a  considerable  amount 
of  the  Information  used  by  a  maintainer  during  fault  isolation  is 
not  consciously  or  explicitly  sought.  Maintainers  may  depend  on  the 


-67- 


visual  appearance  of  the  equipment  to  remind  them  of  the  testing 
options,  the  equipment  functions,  and  system  structure.  They  may 
discover  clues,  valid  or  not,  while  engaged  in  one  activity,  which 
cause  them  to  initiate  another.  They  may  see,  hear,  smell,  or  feel 
aspects  of  the  equipment  which  are  unexpected.  They  may  also  take 
in  and  utilize  the  absence  of  symptoms  which  they  might  not  think  to 
explicitly  sample  in  an  experimental  setting. 

To  alter  this  environment  to  one  in  which  the  maintainer  senses 
only  what  he  requests,  is  to  create  a  substantially  different 
information  flow.  At  a  minimum,  the  visual  and  auditory  information 
should  be  realistic  and  complete. 

Error  fidelity.  Depending  upon  the  objectives  of  the  experiment, 
the  opportunities  to  commit  performance  errors  may  be  either  retained  or 
eliminated.  If  manual  performance  errors  are  to  be  allowed,  the  subject 
must  operate  upon  some  real  hardware.  If  errors  are  not  to  be 
considered,  the  subject  either  must  not  touch  real  hardware  or  else 
some  error  monitoring  scheme  must  be  employed. 

The  major  difficulties  which  arise  from  use  of  actual  hardware 
are  (1)  danger  to  subjects  must  be  eliminated,  (2)  means  for 
recognizing  and  recording  performance  elements  must  be  developed, 
and  (3)  hardware  must  be  periodically  refurbished,  both  to  maintain 
reliability  and  to  remove  visual  clues  to  subjects. 

For  experimentation  in  electronics  maintenance,  development  of 
custom  hardware  is  most  attractive.  Safe  and  adequately  complex 
systems  can  be  configured  from  economical  and  low-power  integrated 
circuits.  Use  of  sockets  and  wire-wrap  leads  avoids  soldering 
during  component  replacement,  thus  precluding  subject  injury  as  well 


as  facilitating  periodic  refurbishing  of  the  experimental  vehicle. 
This  approach  also  facilitates  study  of  design  alternatives,  whereas 
existing  operational  hardware  is  difficult  to  modify  for  this 
purpose. 

Instrumentation  for  sensing  and  recording  performance  data  may 
either  be  built  into  the  experimental  vehicle,  or  it  may  be  external 
to  it.  Built-in  sensors  could  reliably  detect  switch  changes  and 
test  point  usage.  Sensing  visual  monitoring  of  indicators  would 
require  installation  of  ancillary  push  buttons,  activated  by  the 
subject,  to  check  an  indicator.  While  the  sensors  for  switches  and 
indicators  could  be  somewhat  standardized,  very  special  techniques 
would  be  required  to  capture  disassembly,  adjustment,  replacement, 
and  reassembly  performance  data. 

An  economical  and  reliable  alternative  to  use  of  built-in 
sensors  is  to  employ  video  tape  to  record  performance  data.  While 
somewhat  inelegant  by  today’s  fully  automated  standards,  video  tape 
provides  a  verifiable,  low  cost  record  of  performance.  This 
approach  does  introduce  a  process  involving  reduction  of  taped 
content  to  digital  form  by  human  review.  This  can  be  facilitated  by 
viewing  the  tape  under  computer  control.  Upon  encountering  a 
subject  action,  the  analyst  can  press  a  key  (on  the  computer 
keyboard)  which  stops  the  tape  playback  and  automatically  notes  the 
frame  number  (30  or  60  frames  per  second,  depending  on  the  video 
equipment).  When  an  identification  code  is  entered  for  the  action, 
the  program  computes  the  real  time  of  the  event  and  records  the 
event  digitally  on  disk. 


-69- 


To  sense  visual  actions  by  external  means  would  involve  very 
expensive  instrumentation.  While  technology  has  been  developed  to 
do  this,  it  could  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  implement  and 
maintain.  It  seems  reasonable,  therefore,  to  utilize  built-in  push 
buttons,  as  described  above,  to  mark  each  visual  indicator  check. 

Generalizations  regarding  experimentation  are  more  difficult  in 
non-electronic  domains.  Existing  operational  equipment  may  be  so 
large  or  expensive  that  only  simulation  can  prompt  representative 
performance  in  the  laboratory.  In  other  cases,  generic  mock-up  may 
be  necessary.  In  any  case,  the  use  of  video  tape  for  recording 
observed  troubleshooting  performance  remains  a  viable  technique  which 
can  remain  relatively  independent  of  the  hardware  employed  in 
experimentation. 

Environmental  Fidelity 

Maintenance  in  the  services  is  often  performed  under 
challenging  environmental  conditions.  Extreme  temperature,  poor 
lighting,  confined  space,  high  noise  levels,  and  instability  are 
just  a  few  of  the  physical  difficulties  of  restoring  equipment  in 
the  field.  Moderate  environmental  conditions  can  slow  performance 
pace  considerably.  Extreme  conditions  can  affect  the  work  content 
itself. 

The  psychological  factors  in  the  field  are  significant  as 
well.  The  rewards,  penalties  and  fears  associated  with  field 
maintenance  may  have  considerable  impact  on  performance. 

The  manner  and  extent  to  which  maintenance  performance  is 
affected  by  these  factors  is  not  well  established.  Furthermore,  the 
interactions  between  design  and  environment  are  not  clear.  We 


-70- 


suspect  that  environment  affects  performance  significantly  and 
differentially  (over  designs),  but  that  measures  of  relative  merit 
of  designs  would  be  reasonably  reliable  under  moderate  conditions. 
Research  Plan 

The  initial  experimentation  planned  will  focus  on  the  content 
of  generated  status  identification  (diagnostic  test)  sequences.  Our 
objective  is  to  find  a  basis  for  predicting  performance  of 
maintainers  in  acquiring  new  facts  from  manual  and  perceptual 
actions,  and  for  predicting  how  these  maintainers  make  cognitive 
use  of  acquired  facts  to  direct  subsequent  activities.  Initially, 
effects  of  errors  in  performance,  manual  performane  rate,  and 
environment  will  be  excluded  from  consideration.  A  computer- 
controlled  video  tape  testbed  has  therefore  been  developed  which 
displays  correct  performance  of  tasks  chosen  by  the  subject. 

The  testbed  system  is  first  used  to  present  to  a  subject  a 
qualitative  description  of  the  operation  of  the  target  system  and 
the  functional  relationships  among  its  components.  This  is  done  by 
means  of  a  video-tape  presentation  of  the  system  along  with 
accompanying  text  displayed  on  the  computer  CRT.  In  a  similar 
manner,  the  subject  is  next  shown  each  of  the  diagnostic  test  and 
replacement  procedures  performed  in  real  time  with  an  accompanying 
explanation  of  their  diagnostic  function.  At  this  point,  a 
subject's  understanding  of  the  system  and  its  associated  tests  may 
be  examined  and/or  the  subject  could  be  allowed  to  review  any 
segments  of  the  preceding  presentation  which  are  not  clear. 

Following  completion  of  the  instructional  phase  of 
presentation,  the  subject  is  then  ready  to  tackle  some 


-71- 


troubleshooting  problems  on  the  target  system.  At  the  beginning  of 
each  problem,  the  subject  is  presented  with  some  very  limited  data 
about  failure  symptoms.  From  this  point  on  the  subject  is  free  to 
"perform"  any  test  or  replacement  that  is  deemed  useful  to  correctly 
diagnose  and  repair  the  defective  target  system. 

To  perform  a  test,  the  subject  presses  a  key  associated  with 
that  test.  The  computer  then  determines  what  outcome  the  simulated 
malfunction  would  produce,  positions  the  video  tape  unit  to  the 
segment  showing  that  outcome,  and  plays  the  taped  segment  showing  a 
technician  performing  the  test  and  receiving  a  result.  To 
disassemble,  replace  components,  or  reassemble,  the  subject  presses 
a  key  associated  with  the  action  desired.  Again,  he  views  a  taped 
segment  showing  that  work.  The  subject  may  decide  to  reconfigure 
the  system,  swap  cables,  use  test  equipment,  run  diagnostic 
programs,  and  perform  a  number  of  operational  tests,  some  of  which 
involve  partial  disassembly.  At  any  time,  the  subject  may  terminate 
work  in  progress  by  pressing  a  particular  key. 

Work  proceeds  in  this  way  until  the  simulated  equipment,  the 
microcomputer  system  of  Figures  6  and  7,  is  restored.  This 
experimental  technique  meets  most  of  the  requirements  of  real  time 
fidelity  and  information  fidelity,  and  purposely  precludes  the 
possibility  of  performance  errors.  The  subject  observes  rather 
than  performs  the  selected  actions,  but  retains  the  opportunity  to 
terminate  any  action  in  progress.  The  visual  and  auditory 
Information  received  is  highly  realistic,  preserving  the  opportunity 
to  pick  up  valuable  incidental  information  while  a  test  is  being 
performed.  For  example,  while  a  test  is  being  conducted,  an 


-72- 


observant  subject  might  notice  some  aspect  of  system  configuration 
that  could  suggest  a  particularly  fruitful  next  test  to  perform. 

This  testbed  system  appears  to  provide  a  useful  experimental 
tool  for  analyzing  aspects  of  maintenance  performance  while  avoiding 
the  requirement  for  manual  performance  skills,  with  an  attendant  high 
probability  of  error.  Using  this  experimental  tool,  we  intend  to 
look  at  aspects  of  maintenance  performance  such  as  the  following: 

1.  How  accurately  is  the  relationship  between  tests  and 
malfunctions  represented  by  the  maintainer?  This  can  be  assessed 
at  any  point  in  the  task,  beginning  with  completion  of  the 
instructional  phase  up  to  the  conclusion  of  the  troubleshooting 
problem. 

2.  How  do  specific  features  of  system  design,  such  as  modularity, 
affect  the  content  of  the  status  identification  sequences?  By 
altering  the  design  of  the  target  system  from  that  shown  in 
Figures  6  and  7,  we  can  manipulate  a  number  of  basic  features  of 
the  system's  construction.  By  comparing  subject  performance 
across  3uch  changes  in  system  construction  we  can  obtain  direct 
experimental  evidence  about  the  effect  of  such  design  features 
on  troubleshooting  performance. 

3.  To  what  extent  is  the  subject  sensitive  to  incidental  information 
which  is  available  (visually  or  auditorily)  during  performance  of 
actions  not  specifically  intended  to  obtain  that  information? 

Are  there  specific  system  design  features  which  impact  this 
ability  to  pick  up  incidental  information? 

J».  Is  diagnostic  efficiency  affected  more  by  design  parameters  than 
it  is  by  individual  differences  in  status  identification 


-73- 


sequences?  By  having  a  record  of  the  test  and  replacement  steps 
we  can  look  at  the  effect  of  strategy  variation  upon  overall 
diagnostic  efficiency. 

5.  What  is  the  depth  of  planning  which  typifies  a  subject’s 
performance?  Do  human  troubleshooters  tend  to  be  one  step 
planners  in  a  fault  diagnosis  task?  By  augmenting  our  testbed 
methodology  with  a  record  of  each  subject’s  "thinking  out  loud" 
protocol  we  may  obtain  data  bearing  upon  this  issue. 

6.  What  are  the  criteria  used  by  a  subject  in  deciding  to  perform 
some  action?  The  augmentation  to  our  testbed  just  mentioned 
could  allow  us  to  obtain  evidence  on  the  nature  of  the  decision 
criteria  used  by  our  subjects  for  test  selection. 


-74- 


VII*  Suaeanz  and  Conclusions 

The  tools  which  exist  today  for  assessing  the  maintenance 
workload  composed  by  a  system  design  are  not  sensitive  in  ways  which 
are  useful  during  the  design  phase,  nor  do  they  yield  a  profile  of 
the  performance  which  is  involved  in  the  maintenance  task. 

A  considerable  portion  of  maintenance  activity  is  predictable 
and  quantifiable,  using  traditional  work  measurement  techniques 
(micromotion  analysis).  These  include  fixed  diagnostic  procedures 
prescribed  in  technical  documentation,  and  restoration  (disassembly, 
repair/replace/adjust,  and  assembly)  tasks  which  are  highly 
constrained  by  the  physical  structure  of  the  system.  A  general 
representation  of  the  physical  structure  of  the  system  is 
sufficient  to  specify  what  actions  are  necessary.  A  catalog  of 
action  times  provides  the  basis  for  computing  performance  time. 

The  primary  obstacle  to  synthesizing  a  representative 
distribution  of  maintenance  action  sequences  lies  with  the 
variability  of  troubleshooting  performance.  A  number  of  models  have 
been  developed  which  address  troubleshooting  specifically  or  problem 
solving  in  general.  While  the  flexibility  and  intuitive 
reasonableness  of  these  models  are  progressing,  none  seem 
sufficiently  developed  to  be  of  practical  use  at  this  time  for  the 
purpose  of  generating  representative  fault  isolation  sequences. 

A-I  models  of  troubleshooting  are  applications  of  more  general 
research  in  A-I  which  has  focused  on  the  design  of  intelligent 
machine  problem  solving  systems.  Typically,  these  models  are 
developed  from  assumptions  that  the  problem  solver  has  (1)  a  rather 


-75- 


extensive  representation  of  the  problem  domain,  (b)  a  hierarchical 
approach  to  planning,  and  (3)  a  rigid  overall  control  structure. 
While  such  assumptions  may  be  quite  reasonable  ones  in  terms  of 
design  considerations  for  constructing  an  intelligent  machine 
problem  solving  system,  these  assumptions  appear  to  be  less 
reasonable  as  hypotheses  about  the  way  human  troubleshooters  perform 
their  task.  First,  the  human  troubleshooter  does  not  appear  to  be 
able  to  solve  a  problem  by  "running"  a  complex  mental  simulation  of 
the  target  system  (either  forward  or  backward).  Second,  the  human 
troubleshooter  does  not  appear  to  devise  elaborate,  hierarchical 
plans  for  projected  actions;  at  times,  the  decisions  for  projected 
actions  may  be  based  upon  a  consideration  of  only  the  next  step  in 
the  attempted  solution.  Third,  it  appears  that  the  troubleshooter 
has  available  a  range  of  decision  criteria  for  choosing  a  next  step, 
each  of  which  derives  from  distinct  features  of  the  underlying 
representation  or  from  special  features  of  newly  obtained  data. 
Consequently,  the  particular  choice  criterion  for  use  at  each  point 
in  the  fault  isolation  task  may  remain  constant  throughout  the  task, 
or  it  may  vary  as  a  result  of  new  information  being  obtained  or  a 
change  in  the  way  the  problem  is  being  represented.  A  good  model  of 
the  maintainer  should  reflect  this  variety  and  flexibility  of 
strategic  processes  in  troubleshooting. 

One  type  of  A-I  problem  solving  model  which  is  particularly 
appealing  in  light  of  these  comments  is  the  Hearsay-II  system  (Erman 
et  al.f  1980).  The  Hearsay  system  can  provide  a  framework  for 
building  a  problem  solving  model  which  may  be  quite  flexible, 
opportunistic,  and  data  driven  in  its  operation.  And,  since  the 

-76- 


system  is  really  a  general  control  structure  within  which  most  other 
problem  solving  models  may  be  instantiated,  it  can  be  used  to 
develop  and  compare  the  performance  of  a  number  of  distinct 
approaches  to  performing  a  specific  task.  This  powerful  feature 
provides  a  direct  and  controlled  method  for  performing  comparative 
evaluations  of  the  performance  of  different  troubleshooting  models. 
Another  dividend  of  this  feature  is  that  it  provides  a  framework 
within  which  to  develop  a  single  model  of  troubleshooting  which  is 
itself  a  combination  of  alternative  problem  solving  techniques,  with 
the  flexibility  to  switch  from  one  technique  to  the  next  as  a  task 
demands.  Future  research,  beyond  the  scope  of  our  current  project, 
should  be  devoted  to  the  development  of  a  troubleshooting  model 
using  techniques  taken  from  the  Hearsay-II  system,  which  more 
faithfully  reflect  the  kinds  of  decision  making  and  problem  solving 
engaged  in  by  real  maintainers. 

The  approach  described  in  this  report  is  based  upon  a  family  of 
primitive  troubleshooting  strategies,  each  of  which  recognizes 
none,  some,  or  all  of  the  following  variables:  test  time  cost,  test 
power,  and  reliability.  The  strategies  range  from  an  optimal 
approach  which  minimizes  fault  isolation  time,  to  an  approach  in 
which  tests  are  selected  at  random.  Each  of  these  eight  strategies 
generates  a  unique  fault  isolation  procedure  (fault  tree)  when 
applied  to  a  representation  of  the  design.  The  expected  time  to 
isolate  a  fault  according  to  any  of  the  resulting  trees  reflects  the 
ease  of  performing  the  required  tests  and  their  power  in  revealing 
the  internal  state  of  the  system. 


-77- 


Troubleshooting  sequences  performed  in  the  field  reflect  the 
impact  of  numerous  factors.  At  times,  the  environmental 
difficulties  may  override  all  other  technic  .1  considerations  in 
conducting  fault  isolation;  avoidance  of  danger,  pain,  and  serious 
errors  may  determine  the  nature  of  the  performance.  In  a  moderate 
environment,  however,  the  maintainer  is  affected  by  the  demands  the 
system  design  places  upon  his  abilities,  and  the  opportunities  the 
design  affords  him  in  locating  the  fault. 

At  some  times,  in  a  problem,  the  maintainer  may  be  primarily 
concerned  with  quickly  building  up  a  symptom  pattern  in  order  to 
either  identify  the  fault  or  to  direct  a  more  time  consuming  and 
focused  search.  At  other  times,  the  maintainer  may  be  primarily 
concerned  with  checking  a  suspected  element  or  function. 

This  research  is  based  upon  the  hypothesis  that  one  or  more  of 
the  eight  primitive  fault  isolation  algorithms  will  reflect  the 
impact  of  design  in  ways  similar  to  experimentally  observed 
performance.  Experimentation  will  be  conducted  in  which  subjects 
will  troubleshoot  faults  in  a  microcomputer  system.  A  computer- 
controlled  video  tape  system  will  respond  to  each  subject  decision, 
showing  a  real-time  enactment  of  each  test,  including  disassembly 
for  access  if  necessary,  and  an  enactment  of  each  replacement, 
repair  or  adjustment.  This  is  comparable  to  the  subject  directing 
another  technician  who  carries  out  the  decisions  of  the  subject. 

This  experimental  procedure  eliminates  the  possibility  of  a 
manual  performance  error,  yet  imposes  no  restrictions  on  the  fault 
isolation  process  employed  by  the  subject.  Furthermore,  it  retains 
the  real  time  nature  of  troubleshooting,  thus  allowing  subjects  to 


-78- 


abort  an  action  in  progress,  and  to  "think"  during  performance  of  an 
action.  Most  importantly,  time  expended  in  cognitive  activity 
accumulates  with  time  expended  performing  observable  work  as  it  does 
in  the  real  world. 

The  eight  primitive  fault  isolation  methods  have  been  applied 
to  the  microcomputer  system  to  be  restored  by  experimental 
maintainers.  For  this  system,  the  method  which  selects  tests  based 
on  performance  time  alone  produced  near-optimum  results.  The 
methods  which  based  test  selection  on  their  ability  to  check 
individual  suspected  (less  reliable)  elements,  produced  results 
nearly  as  poor  as  random  test  selection.  There  are  reasons  to 
believe  that  the  shortest-test-first  approach  may  be  very 
efficient  across  designs  in  general.  Furthermore,  this  is  an  easy 
and  natural  process  to  employ.  If  this  effectiveness  holds  up 
across  designs,  we  would  expect  it  to  be  an  effective  predictor  of 
human  performance,  at  least  for  the  early  stages  of  a 
troubleshooting  problem.  An  interesting  training  implication  also 
would  result,  i.e.,  troubleshooting  effectiveness  may  be  more 
sensitive  to  symptom  interpretation  skills  than  strategic  and 
planning  skills. 

There  are  some  important  issues  at  which  to  direct  future 
research  on  the  relationship  between  equipment  design  and 
maintenance  task  performance.  For  example,  little  research  has  been 
conducted  which  looks  directly  at  the  way  in  which  specific 
cognitive  skills  are  involved  in  maintenance  task  performance,  what 
the  performance  limits  are  for  these  skills  within  the  context  of 
this  task,  and  how  their  use  is  impacted  by  various  features  of  the 


-79- 


maintenance  task  and  the  equipment  design.  Such  issues  are  clearly 
essential  to  the  goal  of  gaining  a  more  detailed  understanding  of 
maintenance  and  troubleshooting  activities.  As  another  example,  the 
issue  of  manual  performance  error  needs  to  be  addressed.  This  may 
be  accomplished  by  expanding  the  present  research  approach  to  one 
using  real  equipment  in  a  controlled  setting.  We  need  to  know  how 
the  maintainer’s  level  of  ability  in  performing  the  manual  aspects 
of  the  maintenance  interacts  with  the  ability  to  efficiently  perform 
the  diagnostic  and  other  cognitive  aspects  of  the  task.  One 
possibility  is  that,  as  these  skills  become  well  learned  (i.e., 
automated),  concomitant  diagnostic  activity,  such  as  symptom 
interpretation,  becomes  more  efficient  (e.g. ,  more  accurate). 

Very  few  solid  facts  are  presently  established  which  help  to 
clearly  characterize  the  maintainer  and  how  performance  of  his  or 
her  task  can  be  related  to  properties  of  the  system  on  which  this 
craft  is  being  performed.  In  the  preceding  discussion,  we  have 
considered  this  topic  from  many  quite  diverse  perspectives.  Using 
methods  which  draw  upon  the  best  features  of  all  of  these 
viewpoints,  we  hope  to  answer  some  of  these  questions  and  add  some 
clarity  to  the  currently  rather  blurred  picture  of  the  maintainer. 


-80- 


References 


Amarel,  S.  On  representations  of  problems  of  reasoning  about  actions. 

In  D.  Michie  (Ed.),  Machine  Intelligence  3.  New  York:  American 
Elsevier,  1968. 

Balogh,  F.S.,  Hennessy,  J.F.,  4  Reynolds,  D.E.  A  comparison  of 

demonstrated  and  achieved  equipment  maintainability.  In  Annals 
of  Assurance  Sciences.  Proceedings  of  Annual  Reliability  and 
Maintainability  Symposium.  197^. 

Boecek,  G.P.  4  Veitengruber ,  J.E.  Human  factor  guidelines  for  caution 
and  warning  systems.  Document  No.  D6-44200,  Boeing  Commercial 
Aircraft  Company,  November  1976. 

Brown,  Allen.  Qualitative  knowledge,  causal  reasoning,  and  the 

localization  of  failures  (Technical  Report  AI-TR-362).  Cambridge, 
Massachusetts:  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  Artificial 
Intelligence  Laboratory,  March,  1977. 

Chapman,  L.J.  4  Chapman,  J.P.  Atmosphere  effect  re-examined.  Journal 
of  Experimental  Psychology.  1959,  220-226. 

Cooper,  G.E.  A  summary  of  the  status  of  and  philosophies  relating  to 
cockpit  warning  systems.  NASA  Contractor  Report  NAS2-9H7,  June, 
1977. 

deGroot,  A.D.  Perception  and  memory  versus  thinking.  In  B.  Kleinmutz 
(Ed.),  Problem  Solving.  New  York:  Wiley,  1966. 

de  Kleer ,  J.  Causal  and  teleological  reasoning  in  circuit  recognition 
(Technical  Report  AI-TR-589).  Cambridge,  Massachusetts: 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  Artificial  Intelligence 
Laboratory,  September,  1979. 

de  Valois,  R.L.  and  de  Valois,  K.K.  Spatial  Vision.  In  M.R.  Rosenberg 
and  L.W.  Porter  (Eds.)  Annual  Review  of  Psychology.  Vol.  31,  1980. 

Duncker,  K.  On  problem  solving.  Psychological  Monographs.  1945,  58. 

No.  270. 

Erman,  L.D.,  Hayes-Roth,  F.,  Leuer,  V.R.,  4  Reddy,  R.  The  Hearsay-II 
speech  understanding  system:  Integrating  knowledge  to  resolve 
uncertainty.  Computing  Surveys.  1980,  12,  213-253. 

Fikes,  R.E.  4  Nilsson,  N.J.  STRIPS:  A  new  approach  to  the  application 
of  theorem  proving  to  problem  solving.  Artificial  Intelligence. 
1971,  2.,  189-208. 

Goldstein,  I.P.  Understanding  simple  Picture  programs  (Technical  Report 
294).  Cambridge,  Massachusetts:  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology,  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory,  1974. 


-81- 


Guiascu,  S.  Information  Theory  with  Applications.  New  York,  McGraw-Hill 
International,  1 977  - 

Haber,  R.N.  Visual  perception.  In  M.R.  Resenzweig  and  L.W.  Porter  (Eds.) 
Annual  Review  of  Psychology.  Vol.  29,  1978. 

Hayes-Roth,  B.  Human  planning  processes.  Technical  Report  R-L670-ONR. 

Rand  Corporation,  Santa  Monica,  California,  December,  1980. 

Hayes-Roth,  B. ,  &  Hayes-Roth,  F.  A  cognitive  model  of  planning.  Cognitive 
Science.  1979,  3_LLL  275-310. 

Hayes-Roth,  B.  4  Thorndyke,  P.W.  pecision  making  during  the  planning 

process.  Rand  Technical  Report  N-1213-ONR,  Santa  Monica,  California, 
October,  1980. 

Henle,  M.  On  the  relationship  between  logic  and  thinking.  Psychological 
Review.  1962,  ££,  366-378. 

Horne,  R.C.  Investigation  of  the  Effects  of  Different  Maintenance 
Procedures  on  the  Reliability  and  Maintainability  of  the 
AN/ARC-27.  Washington,  D.C.:  ARINC  Corporation,  1962. 

Horvath,  W.J.,  Jr.  Applicability  of  the  Lognormal  Distribution  to 
Servicing  Times  in  Congestion  Problems.  Operations  Research 
Society,  Jan-Feb  1959  Meeting. 

Karger,  D.W.  fc  Bayha,  F.H.  Engineered  Work  Measurement. 

Industrial  Press,  Inc.,  New  York,  1966. 

4f 

Kahneman,  D.  &  Tversky,  A.  Prospect  Theory:  An  analysis  of  decision 
under  risk.  Econometrika.  1979,  il,  263-291. 

Leuba,  H.R.  The  Symptom  Matrix.  Washington  D.C.:  ARINC  Research 
Corporation,  1962.  (Publ.  No.  4607-1-294). 

Maier,  N.R.F.  Reasoning  in  humans  II.  The  solution  of  a  problem  and  its 
appearance  in  consciousnesss.  Journal  of  Comparative  Psychology, 

1931,  J£,  181-194. 

Mayer,  R.E.  &  Revlin,  R.  An  information  processing  framework  for  research 
on  human  reasoning.  In  R.  Revlin  and  R.E.  Mayer  (Eds.),  Human 
Reasoning.  New  York;  Wiley,  1978. 

Miller,  G.A.  The  magical  number  seven  plus  or  minus  two:  Some  limits 
on  our  capacity  for  processing  information.  Psychological  Review. 
1956,  £J,  81-97. 

Moray,  N.  Attention:  Selective  Processes  in  Vision  and  Hearing.  New 
York:  Academic  Press,  1970. 


-82- 


r' 


Moray,  N.  The  role  of  attention  in  the  detection  of  errors  and  the 
diagnosis  of  failures  in  man-machine  systems.  In  J.  Rasmussen  & 
W.B.  Rouse  (Eds.),  Human  Detection  and  Diagnosis  of  System 
Failures.  New  York:  Plenum  Press,  1981. 

Munger,  M.R.  &  Willis,  M.P.  Development  of  an  Index  of  Electronic 
Maintainability— A  Research  Report.  Fort  Monmouth,  New  Jersey, 

U.S.  Army  Signal  Support  Agency,  1959. 

Mynott,  C.R.,  Doherty,  M.E.,  &  Tweney,  R.D.  Confirmation  bias  in  a 
simulated  research  environment:  An  experimental  study  of 
scientific  inference.  Quarterly  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology 
21,  1977,  85-95. 

Nauta,  F.  &  Bragg,  L.  Army  electronic  equipment  support  options: 
Assessment  of  maintenance  complexity.  Working  Note  ML904-2, 
November  1980,  Logistics  Management  Institute,  Washington,  D.C. 

Neisser,  U.  Cognitive  Psychology.  New  York:  Appleton-Century-Crofts , 
1967. 

Newell,  A.  &  Simon,  H.A.  GPS,  a  program  that  simulates  human  thought. 

In  E.  Fergenbaum  &  J.  Feldman  (Cdr.)  Computer  and  Thought.  New 
York:  McGraw-Hill,  1963- 

Newell,  A.,  &  Simon,  H.A.  Human  Problem  Solving.  Englewood  Cliffs, 

New  Jersey:  Prentice-Hall,  1972. 

Nilsson,  N.J.  Some  examples  of  A-I  mechanisms  for  goal-seeking, 
planning,  and  reasoning.  In  F.  Klix  (Ed.),  Human  and 
Artificial  Intelligence.  New  York:  North-Holland ,  1979. 

Nilsson,  N.J.  Principles  of  Artificial  Intelligence.  Palo  Alto, 
California:  Troza,  1980. 

Norman,  D.A.  Memory  and  Attention.  (2nd  Ed.)  New  York:  Wiley,  1976. 

Norman,  d.a.  gijLp.s. .  pf  the.  Mad  and  an  pptjjjg_far.  a  .th-eary  of  as-Upp. 
Center  for  Human  Information  Processing,  Report  No.  7905, 

University  of  California  at  San  Diego,  November,  1979. 

Norman,  D.A.  Errors  in  human  performance.  Center  for  Human 

Information  Processing,  Report  No.  8004,  University  of  California 
at  San  Diego,  August,  1980. 


Norman,  D.A.  &  Bobrow,  D.G.  On  data-limited  and  recourse  limited 
processes.  .CflgnlUv.e  f-SychPlPia.,  1975,  1,  44-64. 


Pau,  L.F.  Application  of  pattern  recognition  to  failure  analysis  and 
diagnosis.  In  J.  Rasmussen  and  W.B.  Rouse,  (Eds.)  Human  Detection 
and  Diagnosis  of  System  Failures.  New  York:  Plenum  Press,  1981. 

Pezolli,  J.A.,  &  Frase,  L.T.  Mediated  facilitation  of  syllogistic 

reasoning.  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology.  1968,  22.,  228-232. 

Raphael,  B.  Research  and  applications  -  Artificial  Intelligence. 

Stanford  Research  Institute  Final  Report  on  Project  8973, 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency,  NASU-2164,  December,  1971. 

Rasmussen,  J.  &  Rouse  W.B.  (Eds.)  Human  Detection,  and  Diagnosis  of 
System  Failures.  New  York:  Plenum  Press,  1981. 

Revlis,  R.  Syllogistic  reasoning:  Logical  decisions  from  a  complex 
data  base.  In  R.  Falmagne  (Ed.)  Reasoning:  Representation  and 
Processes  in  Children  and  Adults.  Hillsdale,  New  Jersey:  Erlbaum, 
1975  (a). 

Revlis,  R.  TWo  models  of  syllogistic  reasoning:  Feature  selection 
and  conversion.  Journal  of  Verbal  Learning  and  Verbal  Behavior. 

1975,  ±4,  180-195,  (b). 

Rigney,  J.W.,  Cremer,  R.H. ,  Towne,  D.M.  A  Mason,  A.K.  A  computer 

program  for  generating  inherent  corrective  maintenance  workload 
times.  Behavioral  Technology  Laboratories,  Technical  Report 
No.  50,  November  1966,  University  of  Southern  California. 

Rigney,  J.W.,  Cremer,  H.H.,  &  Towne,  D.M.  Measurement  and  prediction 

of  cognitive  loadings  in  corrective  maintenance  tasks: _ L. — A 

baveslan  approach.  Behavioral  Technology  Laboratories,  Technical 
Report  No.  46,  February,  1 966,  University  of  Southern  California. 

Rouse,  W.B.  &  Rouse,  S.H.  Measures  of  the  complexity  of  fault  diagnosis 
tasks.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Systems  Man  and  Cybernetics.  1979,  (11)» 
720-727. 

Sacerdoti,  E.D.  A  structure  for  plans  and  behavior  (Technical  Note  109). 
Menlo  Park,  California:  Stanford  Research  Institute,  August,  1975. 

Siegel,  A. I.  &  Wolf,  J.J.  Man-machine  Simulation  Models.  New  York: 

John  Wiley,  1969- 

Smith,  R.J.  High-cost  Lemons  in  the  U.S.  Arsenal.  Science.  212, 

309-312,  1981. 

Strieb,  M.I.,  Glenn,  F.A.,  &  Wherry,  R.J.  The  Human  Operator  Simulator: 

An  Overview.  Presented  at  the  NATO  AGARD  Conference  on  Manned 
Systems  Design,  Freiburg,  West  Germany,  September,  1980. 


Towne,  D.M.  ARMAN  -  A  computer  system  for  applying  MTM,  Proceedings 
Conference  of  MTM  Applications.  Los  Angeles,  1968. 


r 


Towne,  D.M.  New  Software  Program  Aids  Work  Measurement  of  Clerical 
Operations,  Industrial  Engineering.  Vol.  12,  No.  8,  August  1980 . 

TVersky,  A.  &  Kahneman,  D.  Judgement  under  uncertainty:  Heuristics  and 
biases.  Science.  1974,  185.  1124-1131. 

Wescourt,  K.T.  and  Hemphill,  L.  Representing  and  teaching  knowledge 
for  troubleshooting/debugging  (Technical  Report  292).  Stanford, 
California:  Institute  for  Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social 
Sciences,  February,  1978. 

Wohl,  J.G.  Diagnostic  behavior,  system  complexity,  and  repair  time: 
a  predictive  theory  (Technical  Report  M80-0008).  Bedford, 
Massachusetts:  MITRE  Corporation,  April,  1980. 


DISTRIBUTION  LIST 


1  CDR  Paul  R.  Cha teller 

Office  of  the  Deputy  Under 
Secretary  of  Defense 
OUSDRE  (E&LS) 

Pentagon,  Room  3D129 
Washington,  D.C.  20301 

5  Director 

Engineering  Psychology  Programs 
Code  455 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  Director 

Manpower,  Personnel  and  Training 
Code  270 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  Director 

Information  Systems  Program 
Code  437 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  Special  Assistant  for  Marine 
Corps  Matters 
Code  100M 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  Commanding  Officer 

ONR  Western  Regional  Office 
ATTN:  Dr.  E.  Gloye 
1030  East  Green  Street 
Pasadena,  CA  91106 

1  Dr.  Robert  G.  Smith 

Office  of  the  Chief  of  Naval 
Operations,  OP  987H 
Personnel  Logistics  Plans 
Washington,  D.C.  20350 

1  Dr.  Jerry  C.  Lamb 

Combat  Control  Systems 

Naval  Underwater  Systems  Center 

Newport,  RI  02840 


1  Director 

Communication  &  Computer  Technology 
Code  240 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  Director 

Tactical  Development  &  Evaluation 
Support-  Code  230 
Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  Director 

Operations  Research  Programs 
Code  434 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  CDR.  K.  Hull 
Code  410 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 


1  Commanding  Officer 

ONR  Western  Regional  Office 
ATTN:  Mr.  R.  Lawson 
1030  East  Green  Street 
Pasadena,  CA  91106 


6  Director 

Naval  Research  Laboratory 
Technical  Information  Division 
Code  2627 

Washington,  D.C.  20375 

1  Dr.  W.  Mehuron 

Office  of  the  Chief  of  Naval 
Operations,  OP  987 
Washington,  D.C.  20350 


1  Naval  Training  Equipment  Center 
ATTN:  Technical  Library 
Orlando,  FL  32813 


1  Human  Factors  Department 
Code  N215 

Naval  Training  Equipment  Center 
Orlando,  FL  32813 


1  Dr.  Gary  Poock 

Operations  Research  Department 
Naval  Postgraduate  School 
Monterey,  CA  93940 

1  Mr.  Warren  Lewis 

Human  Engineering  Branch 
Code  8231 

Naval  Ocean  Systems  Center 
San  Diego,  CA  92152 

1  Mr.  Arnold  Rubinstein 
Naval  Material  Command 
NAVMAT  0722  -  Rm.  508 
800  North  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  VA  22217 

1  Commander 

Naval  Air  Systems  Command 
Crew  Station  Design 
NAVAIR  5313 

Washington,  D.C.  20361 
1  Commander 

Naval  Electronics  Systems  Command 
Human  Factors  Engineering  Branch 
Code  4701 

Washington,  D.C.  20360 


1  CDR  Robert  Biersner 

Naval  Medical  RAD  Command 
Code  44 

Naval  Medical  Center 
Bethesda,  MD  20014 

1  Dr.  George  Moeller 

Human  Factors  Engineering  Branch 
Submarine  Medical  Research  Lab 
Naval  Submarine  Base 
Groton,  CT  06340 

1  Dr.  James  McGrath,  Code  302 
Navy  Personnel  Research  and 
Development  Center 
San  Diego,  CA  92152 


1  Dr.  Alfred  F.  Smode 

Training  Analysis  and  Evaluation 
Group 

Naval  Training  Equipment  Center 
Code  N-00T 
Orlando,  FL  32813 

1  Mr.  H.  Talkington 

Ocean  Engineering  Department 
Naval  Ocean  Systems  Center 
San  Diego,  CA  92152 

1  Dr.  A.  L.  Slafkosky 
Scientific  Advisor 
Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps 
Code  RD-1 

Washington,  D.C.  20380 
1  Commander 

Naval  Air  Systems  Command 
Human  Factors  Programs 
NAVAIR  340F 

Washington,  D.C.  20361 

1  Mr.  Phillip  Andrews 

Naval  Air  Systems  Command 
NAVSEA  0341 

Washington,  D.C.  20362 


1  Mr.  Milon  Essoglou 

Naval  Facilities  Engineering 
Command 

RAD  Plans  and  Programs 
Code  03T 

Hoffman  Building  II 
Alexandria,  VA  22332 

1  Dr.  Arthur  Bachrach 

Behavioral  Sciences  Department 
Naval  Medical  Research  Institute 
Bethesda,  MD  20014 


1  Head 

Aerospace  Psychology  Department 
Code  L5 

Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Research  Lab 
Pensacola,  FL  32508 

1  Navy  Personnel  Research  and 
Development  Center 
Planning  A  Appraisal 
Code  04 

San  Diego,  CA  92152 


1  Navy  Personnel  Research  and 
Development  Center 
Performance  Measurement  & 
Enhancement 
Code  309 

San  Diego,  CA  92152 
1  Lt.  D.  McBride 

Human  Factors  Engineering  Division 
Naval  Air  Development  Center 
Warminster,  PA  18974 

1  h  ;man  Factors  Engineering  Branch 
Code  1226 

Pacific  Missile  Test  Center 
Point  Mugu,  CA  93042 


1  Human  Factor  Engineering  Branch 
Naval  Ship  Research  and  Development 
Center,  Annapolis  Division 
Annapolis,  MD  21402 

1  Mr.  Merlin  Malehorn 

Office  of  the  Chief  of  Naval 
Operations  (OP-115) 

Washington,  D.C.  20350 

1  Dr.  Joseph  Zeidner 
Technical  Director 
U.S.  Army  Research  Institute 
5001  Eisenhower  Avenue 
Alexandria,  VA  22333 

1  Technical  Director 

U.S.  Army  Human  Engineering  Labs 
Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  MD  21005 


1  Human  Engineering  Division 
USAF  AMRL/HES 

Wright-Patterson  AFB,  OH  45433 


1  Dr.  Kenneth  Gardner 
Applied  Psychology  Unit 
Admiralty  Marine  Technology 
Establishment 

Teddington,  Middlesex  TW11  0LN 
ENGLAND 


1  CDR  Norman  Lane 
Code  6021 

Naval  Air  Development  Center 
Warminster,  PA  18974 


1  Human  Factors  Branch 
Code  3152 

Naval  Weapons  Center 
China  Lake,  CA  93555 

1  Human  Factors  Section 
Systems  Engineering  Test 
Directorate 

U.S.  Naval  Air  Test  Center 
Patuxent  River,  MD  20670 

1  CDR  W.  Moroney 
Code  55MP 

Naval  Postgraduate  School 
Monterey,  CA  93940 

1  Mr.  J.  Barber 

HQS,  Department  of  the  Army 
DAPE-MBR 

Washington,  D.C.  20310 

1  Director,  Organizations  and 

Systems  Research  Laboratory 
U.S.  Army  Research  Institute 
5001  Eisenhower  Avenue 
Alexandria,  VA  22333 

1  U.S.  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific 
Research 

Life  Sciences  Directorate,  NL 
Bolling  Air  Force  Base 
Washington,  D.C.  20332 

1  Dr.  Earl  Alluisi 
Chief  Scientist 
AFHRL/CCN 

Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235 


1  Director,  Human  Factors  Wing 
Defence  A  Civil  Institute  of 
Environmental  Medicine 
Post  Office  Box  2000 
Downsview,  Ontario  M3M  3B9 
CANADA 


aft 


■■MMMaiaammiMi 


a 


12  Defense  Technical  Information 
Center 

Cameron  Station,  Bldg.  5 
Alexandria,  VA  22314 


Dr.  Lloyd  Hitchcock 

Federal  Aviation  Administration 

ACT  200 

Atlantic  City  Airport,  NJ  08405 


Dr.  Robert  R.  Maekie 
Human  Factors  Research,  Inc. 
5775  Dawson  Avenue 
Goleta,  CA  93017 


1  Dr.  Craig  Fields 

Director,  Cybernetics  Technology 
Office 

Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency 

1400  Wilson  Blvd 
Arlington,  VA  22209 

1  Dr.  M.  Montemerlo 

Human  Factors  &  Simulation 
Technology,  RTE-6 
NASA  HQS 

Washington,  D.C.  20546 

1  Dr.  Jesse  Orlansky 

Institute  for  Defense  Analysis 
400  Army-Navy  Drive 
Arlington,  VA  22202 


Dr.  T.  B.  Sheridan  1 
Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technolgy 
Cambridge,  MA  02139 


Dr.  Arthur  I.  Siegel 
Applied  Psycological  Services,  Inc. 
404  East  Lancaster  Street 
Wayne,  PA  19087 


Dr.  Harry  Snyder  1  Dr.  W.  S.  Vaughan 
Department  of  Industrial  Engineering  Oceanautics,  Inc. 
Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute  and  422  6th  Street 

State  University  Annapolis,  MD  21403 
Blacksburg,  VA  24061 


1  Dr.  Robert  T.  Hennessy 

NAS  -  National  Research  Council 
JH  # 819 

2101  Constitution  Ave.,  N.W. 
Washington,  D.C.  20418 

1  Dr.  Robert  Williges 

Human  Factors  Laboratory 
Virginia  Polytechnical  Institute 
and  State  University 
130  Whittemore  Hall 
Blacksburg,  VA  24061 

1  Dr.  Elizabeth  Rruesi 
General  Electric  Company 
Information  Systems  Programs 
1755  Jefferson  Davis  Highway 
Arlington,  VA  22202 

1  Dr.  James  H.  Howard,  Jr. 
Department  of  Psychology 
Catholic  University 
Washington,  D.C.  20064 


1  Dr.  M.  G.  Samet 
Perceptronics,  Inc. 

6271  Variel  Avenue 
Woodland  Hills,  CA  91364 


Dr.  Alphonse  Chapanis 
Department  of  Psychology 
The  Johns  Hopkins  University 
Charles  and  34th  Streets 
Baltimore,  MD  21218 


Dr.  Ward  Edwards 

Director,  Social  Science  Research 
Institute 

University  of  Southern  California 
Los  Angeles,  CA  90007 

Journal  Supplement  Abstract  Service 
American  Psychological  Association 
1200  17th  Street 
Washington,  D.C.  20036 


1  Dr.  Christopher  Wickens  1  Dr.  Edward  R.  Jones 

University  of  Illinois  Chief,  Hunan  Factors  Engineering 

Department  of  Psychology  McDonnell -Douglas  Astronautics 

Drbana,  IL  61801  Company 

St.  Louis  Division 
Box  516 

St.  Louis,  MO  63166 

1  Dr.  Babur  M.  Pulat  1  Dr.  Richard  W.  Pew 

Department  of  Industrial  Engineering  Information  Sciences  Division 
North  Carolina  AAT  State  University  Bolt  Beranek  &  Newman,  Inc. 


Greensboro,  NC  27^11 


1  Mr.  Tim  Gilbert 

The  MITRE  Corporation 
1820  Dolly  Madison  Blvd. 
McLean,  VA  22102 

1  Dr.  Lola  Lopes 

Department  of  Psychology 
University  of  Wisconsin 
Madison,  WI  53706 

1  Dr.  Stanley  N.  Roscoe 

New  Mexico  State  University 
Box  5095 

Las  Cruces,  NM  88003 

1  Dr.  Rex  Brown 

Decision  Science  Consortium 
Suite  721 

7700  Leesburg  Pike 
Falls  Church,  VA  220H3 


50  Moulton  Street 
Cambridge,  MA  02138 

1  Dr.  David  J.  Getty 

Bolt  Beranek  &  Newman,  Inc. 

50  Moulton  Steet 
Cambridge,  MA  02138 

1  Dr.  A.  K.  Bejczy 

Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory 
California  Institute  of  Technology 
Pasadena,  CA  91125 

1  Mr.  Joseph  G.  Wohl 
Alpha tech,  Inc. 

3  New  England  Executive  Park 
Burlington,  MA  01803 

1  Dr.  Wayne  Zachary 
Analytics,  Inc. 

2500  Maryland  Road 
Willow  Grove,  PA  19090 


