DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 328 222 



IR 014 818 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



Kieras, David E* 

The Computerized Comprehensibility System. 

Maintainer's Guide. Technical Report No. 33. 

Michigan Univ., Ann Arbor. Technical Information 

Design and Analysis Lab. 

Office of Naval Research, Arlington, Va. 

TR-90/ONR33 

12 Sep 90 

N00014-90-J-4110 

58p.; Some paragraphs will not reproduce well because 
of smcill type size and lack of density. 
Guides - Non^Classroom Use (055) — Reports - 
Descriptive (141) 



INSTITUTION 



SPONS AGPNCY 



REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
CONTRACT 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Artificial Intelligence; Cognitive Psychology; 
Computer Software; ^Expert Systems; *Progrcuaing; 
^Readability; Reading Comprehension; Research 
Reports; Structural Grammcu: 
^Natural Language Processing 



ABSTRACT 



This report is a guide for the maintainer or 



developer of the computerized comprehensibility system (CCS) , a 
system that uses techniques and results from artificial intelligence 
and cognitive psychology to critique the comprehansibility of a 
technical document. The purpose of this report is to allow the 
qualified programmer to rapidly understand the internal mechanisms of 
CCS in order to correct, modify, or extend the grammar and criticism 
rules in CCS. The following sections are included: (1) an overview of 
CCS; (2) a description of each of the components of the CCS system 
including the syntax for grammar specification, production rules, a 
description of lexicon entries, and information about the 
representations that CCS constructs; (3) a series of maintenance 
examples in which the parser and semantics module of the system are 
extended to handle new kinds of structures and new criticism rules 
added to CCS; and (4) a complete list of the criticisms and comments 
generated by the current version of CCS. (13 references) 
(Author/DB) 



AAAAAx^** **************** *************************** ******* 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



SECURITY ClASjlF'CATION OF THIS PA^f 



REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE 



form Approved 
0MB No 0704-0788 



1« REPORT SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 

Unclassified 



lb RESTRICTIVE MARKINGS 



2a SECURITY CLASSIFICATION AUTHORITY 



2b. DECLASSIFICATION / DOWNGRADING SCHEDULE 



3 DISTRIBUTION /AVAILABILITY OF REPORT 

Approved for public^release: 
distribution unlimited. 



4 PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUM8ER(S) 

TR-90 / ONR-33 



5 MONITORING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUM8tR(S) 



6« NAME OF PERFORMING ORGANIZATION 

University of Michigan 



6b OFFICE SYMBOL 
(If ^ppiicMt) 



7«. NAME OF MONITORJNG ORGANIZATION 

Cognitive Science 

Office of Naval Research (Code 1142CS) 



6c ADDRESS (Oty. StM. tnd ZIP Code) 

Technical Communication Program 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2108 



7b. ADDRESS (City. Sute. ^nd ZIP Code) 

800 N. Quincy Street 
Arlington, VA 22217 



8a. NAME OF FUNDING /SPONSORING 
ORGANIZATION 



8b. OFFICE SYMBOL 
(If ^ppiicMe) 



8c ADDRESS (O'ty. Sute.^ryd ZIP Code) 



9 PROCUREMENT INSTRUMENT IDENTIFICATION NUMBER 

N00014-90-J-4110 



10 SOURCE OF FUNDING NUMBERS 



PROGRAM 
ELEMENT NO 

61153N 



PROJECT 
NO 

RR04206 



TASK 
NO 



RR04206-0f ; 442f002 



WORK UNIT 
lACCESSiON NO 



1 1 TITLE (inciude Secunty Classification) 

The Computerized Comprehensibility System Maintainer's Guide 



12. PERSONAL AUTHOR(S) 

David E. Kieras 



13j. type of REPORT 

Technical 



Report 



13b TIME COVERED 

FROM 8-1-90 TO 9-12-90 



14 DATE OF REPORT {Ye^r. Month. O^y) |15 PAGE COUNT 

September 12, 1990 I S 



16 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTATION 



17 COSaTi codes 


18 SUBJECT TERMS {Cor^tmue on reverse if r^ecess^ry arid ide ratify by block r^umber) 

Natural Language Processing, Reading Comprehension, 
Readability, Expert Systems. 


FIELD 


GROUP 


SUB-GROUP 


05 


0^ 










19 ABSTRAa 


(Continue on 


reverse if necessary and ideniify by block number) 



The Computerized Comprehensibility System (CCS) generates a critique of the 
comprehensibility of a technical document, using techniques and results from AI and 
cognitive psychology. THis report is a guide for the maintainer or developer of CCS. 
It is not intended as a tutorial on the mechanisms used in CCS, but to allow the 
qualified programmer to rapidly understand the internal mechanisms of CCS in order to 
correct, modify, or extend the grammar and criticism rules in CCS. This report contains 
the following sections: An overview of CCS, a description of each of the components of 
the CCS system, including the syntax for the various representa* ions used in the system, 
a series of maintenance examples in which the parser and semantics module of the system 
are extended to handle new kinds of structures and new criticism rules are added to CCS, 
and a complete list ana explanation of the criticisms produced by the current version. 



ilSlRlBUTION/AVAILABlLITf OF ABSTRACT 
UNCLASSIFIED/UNLIMITED 



□ SAME AS RPT □ DTIC USERS 



21 ABSTRACT SECURITY CLASSIFICATION 



22a NAriE OF RESPONSIBLE INDIVIDUAL 

S' ' Chipman 



22b TELEPHONE (/nc/ude Area Code) 

696-4318 



(202) 



22c OFFICE SYMBOL 

CNR 1142CS 



OD Form 1473, JUN 86 



ERIC 



Previous editions are obsolete 
S/N 0102-LF-014-6603 



SECURITY CLASSlFlCAriON OF THIS PAGE 

Unclassified 



Abstract 



The Computerized Comprehensibility System (CCS) generates a critique of the comprehensibility of a technical 
document, using techniques and results from AI and cognitive psychology. This report is a guide for the maintainer 
or developer of CCS. it is not intended as a internal on the mechanisms used in CCS, but to allow the qualified 
programmer to rapidly understand the internal mechanisms of CCS in Ofdcr to correct, modify, or extend the grammar 
and criticism rules in CCS. This report contains the following sections: An overview of CCS, a description of 
each of the components of the CCS system, including the syntax for the various representations used in the system, 
a series of maintenance examples in which the parser and semantics module of the system are extended to handle 
new kinds of structures and new criticism rules are added to CCS, and a complete list and explanation of the 
criticisms produced by the cuirent version. 



ERLC 



4 

2 



L INTRODUCTION 



The Computerized Comprchensibility System (CCS) has been de&cribed in earlier reports (Kicras, 1985a, 1987, 
1989) in terms of the concepts and principles involved. This document is intended to be a guide for the maintainer 
or develq)er of CCS. It is assumed that the user of this document is a skilled artificial intelligence programmer, and 
has knowledge of, or access to, the standard literature in artiHcial intelligence describing natural language processing 
and {Auction systems. This document is not intended as a tutorial on the mechanisms used in CCS; its intent is 
to allow the qualiTied programmer to rapidly understand the internal mechanisms of CCS in order to correct, modify, 
or extend the grammar and criticism rules that it uses. 



lA General Properties of the LISP Code 

CCS is written in COMMON LISP, relying on facilities defined in Steele (1984). The LISP code in CCS is 
generally very heavily commented. For purposes of this document, it should suffice just to point out the top-level 
information, such as the "philosophy" of the Individual modules, and special things to look out for in maintaining 
or modifying the code. Thus this document will not present much information about the details of the algorithms 
involved. 

The code underwent extensive debugging, and many useful tracing facilities have been left in place. These are 
usually invoked by global variables that when set to non-NIL will cause the functions to print out useful traces. 
The examples provided L ' in this document will give some examples of these traces. 

Some of the major modules, in particular the parser and the iH-oduction system interpreter, have been defined 
using the package facility to keep their internal symbols separate from those in the rest of the system. However 
most of the system operates in the USER package. In particular, the lexicon, grammar network, and production 
rules use symbols defined in the USER package. 

L2 Overview of CCS 

The overall structure of CCS and the corresponding files are shown in Figure 1. An input document, stored in a 
text file, is first broken into individual sentences by a preprocessor, and each sentence is then analyzed by a syntactic 
parser, the Augmented Transition Networic Interpreter, ATN interpreter, which outputs a parse of the sentence. 
This parse u^ee is used by the semantics module to construct a semantics structure that follows a set of conventions 
based on Anderson's (1976) ACT semantic networic structure. This structure reixesents the basic propositional 
content of the sentence. It is processed by a reference resolution module which examines the content of the sentence 
to sec whether the objects referred to by the sentence have already been defined previously in the text, and updates the 
representations of the sentence propositions accordingly. The resulting information is then added to sentence 
memory (SM). A set of production rules, the criticism rules, examines the contents of SM and the contents of 
passage memory (PM), which contains the content of previously analyzed sentences. The semantics module, in 
addition to generating the propositional representation, also includes information about various syntactic features of 
the original sentence, such as whether it was written in the passive voice. The criticism rules can thus examine the 
semantic content of the sentence in conjunction with its syntactic form, and in relation to the previous contents of 
the passage. Thus for example, it can detect an appropriate use of the passive voice, in which the surface subject of 
the sentence is the same as the current topic of discussion. The criticism rules generate comments which are written 
into an output file along with a copy of the input sentences. After the criticism rules have been applied, another set 
of production rules, the integration rules, moves the content of sentence memory into passage memory, and sentence 
memory is then emptied. The preprocessor then finds the next sentence m the input text and the process continues. 
At the end of the input, the system prints out other information that it has accumulated along the way, such as the 
structure of topics and subtopics. 

Figure 1 also shows some additional components of CCS that are used to develop ti c system. The parser 
interpreter uses an Augmented Transition Network (ATN) which is generated by the HLG compiler from a High 



ERLC 



3 

5 



Level Grammar spec^cadon language (HLG). This makes it possible to specify and extend a large and complex 
granunar relatively easily. The production rules are inteq)rcted by a production rule interpreter, which operates on a 
rq)resentation constructed by a {Hoduction rule compilet The interpreter and compiler are both components of a 
subsystem known as the Parsimonious Production System (PPS). 



/input T«xl\ 



Prepcooktfsor 



I 



ATN Intefprater 


i 





HLG 
Compiidr 





Figure L Overall structure of the Computerized Comprehcnsibiliiy f'ystem, CCS. Rectangles are major program 
modules; ovals arc input files. Rounded rectangles are representatioris constructed by the program. The flow of 
information from the input text is shown with thick arrows. Thin arrows show other control and information flow. 
Filenames for the program modules and input filet are shown in italic*;. 



L3 Organization of this Document 

Section 2 of this document describes each of the components of the CCS system. The syntax for the HLG 
grammar specification, PPS production rules, end lexicon entries will be described* along with information about the 
various representations that CCS constructs. Sectiai 3 consists of a series of maintenance examples in which the 
parser and semantics module of the system are extended to handle new kinds of structures, and new criticism rules 
added to CCS. Section 4 is a descriptive list of the criticisms and comments currently generated by CCS. 



ERLC 



4 



2. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 



2.1 The Top Level 

The top level functions in CCS are contained in the file "ccs-funcs.lisp". There are two basic functions; 
PROCESS-FILE analyzes a text file, and PROCESS-SENTENCES prompts the user for individual sentences 
expressed in LISP fonn, analyzes the sentence, and displays the results. This function is intended for development 
and debugging, and the file-input function is for the normal mode of use. Each of these functions is called by 
another set of small top-level functions which allow one to exercise different parts of the system for development and 
dd>ugging. These functions are described in the maintenance examples below, but the normal usage function is 
intended to be CRITICIZE-FILE. 

Each of these top-level functions can take an optional list of output control options. These are symbols defined 
in the '^ccs-funcs.lisp" file, where they are heavily commented The intentf.on is to provide different levels of 
verbosity and detail in the output The normal output for a user is written into a file with the extension ".out", 
while more detailed information goes into a file with the extension ".detail"; finally a dribble-like facility is also 
available as well. The options control how much information is written into these files; for example one can request 
that no grammatical analyses be written into the '^.out" file, while full parse trees for failed parses can be written into 
the ''.detail" file. There is also a provision for displaying and outpLtting lists of wo^.ds whose grammatical 
categories were guessed. The intent is that this list would be written into a file, and then the CCS maintainer could 
add the listed words to the permanent lexicon. 

The file "ccs-funcs.lisp" also contains a family of functions that handle the comment and other output of the 
system. All system output goes through a single function, ROUTE-OUTPUT, which allows the output options to 
have their effect in one place. A family of specific functions arc defmcd, which call ROUTE-OUTPUT, and allow 
one to optionally specify the set of destinations possible for each piece of output The maintainer may want to 
modify where specific items of iaformation are displayed using these mechanisms. 

A higher-level set of output functions includes the mechanism for writing messages. Messages can be generated 
by the production rules using the basic function, WRITE-MESS AGE, and the pair of functions ACCUMULATE- 
MESSAGES and OUTPUT-MESSAGES. WRITE-MESSAGE is used in a criticism rule to directly output a 
message. The message will ^pear each time the rule fires. ACCUMULATE-MESS AGES is used when a rule 
might fire multiple times, such as situations where a sentence contains multiple unresolved references. Instead of 
having the same message appear several times on a single sentence, ACCUMULATE-MESSAGE is used to simply 
accumulate any variable information from each firing. Then a later production rule invokes OUTPUT-MESSAGES 
to put out a single message that contains a list containing the variable information. This makes possible a much 
more compact, but still detailed, output 

Both of the message functions are controlled by the terse/verbose output option. The logic is that in the 
verbose mode, a long and detailed message is printed with each firi'^g of a criticism rule. In tjie terse mode, the long 
form of the message is printed the first lime the rule is fured, and a terse form is printed for every firing thereafter: 
Thus these functions keep track of whether the rule has fired previously or not This record is cleared when a new 
passage criticism is begun. 

The **ccs-funcs.lisp" file also contains a function that outputs the topic structure of the passage, given that the 
criticism rules have built a structure in passage memory that shows the topics and subtopics. PPS is supplied with 
a pre-defined dummy topic structure in passage memory. If the criticism rules detect topic structure, they replace the 
corresponding portions of the dummy structure with acuial items in the text There is also a small set of functions 
that print out a condensed version of the parse tree by eliminating most of the embedded network names. The idea is 
to provide a much more concise description of how the sentence was parsed. Finally, this file contains a set of 
convenience functions which the developer will find useful in rapidly iterating through revisions to the grammar or 
criticism rules. These are mentioned in the maintenance examples below. 



22 The Preprocessor 



The prepixxessor has a stiaightforwr/d but tricky job. It scans the input text file and tries to isolate individual 
sentences which it then passes on to the r u of the system. The rest of the system processes a sentence as a LISP 
list. Thus the input sentence This is a sen. 'nee, in a text file gets turned into the LISP expression (THIS IS A 
SENTENCE \). Note that symbols that an* of significance to LISP, such as periods, ^strophes, and commas, 
have to be set rff with the COMMON LISP escape characters (backslash or vertical bars), so that these characters arc 
treated as the print names of symbols, rather than the special functions they have in COMMON LISP. Thus the 
preprocessor treats puncuiation specially. In addition, it recognizes text-formatting commands which are defined as 
having a period in position one of a line. All subsequent information on that line is ignored, but if the text- 
fomiatting command has a defined meaning to the preprocessor, the lexicon entry corresponding to that meaning is 
inserted as the first item in the sentence list 

The preprocessor is basically a simple parser organized around a CASE function that uses a static global vaiiable 
*STATE to maintain the state of the parse. Provision is made for supplying an initial state to the preproce^r, so 
that control can leave the preprocessor and return, but thus far this facility has not been used. The preprocessor reads 
the input file defined in the global *CCS .INPUT-FILE It uses a variety of internal streams to accumulate the 
characters for text-formatting commands, punctuation, and words, and assembles the result into a list which is then 
returned. 

Sentence termination. Something to watch out for is the logic for determining whether a sentence end has 
been reached; this is done at the state COLLECT- WORD and in the function COLLECT-WORD. If the final 
character of the word is a period, then it is possible that the period does not designate the end of a sentence, but rather 
is part of an abbreviation. The lexicon is checked for the word and if it is an abbreviation, then processing 
continues. Otherwise the period is taken to marie the end of a sentence. It is clear that there may be trouble if the 
last word in a sentence is a bonafide abbreviation. No instances of this have been encountered in the samples, but it 
may be a source of future problems. 

The colon character (:) is a nasty way to terminate a sentence. The current version of both the preprocessor and 
the grammar is probably not quite correct on the treatment of the colon. The colon normally terminates a sentence 
that is otherwise syntactically complete. However it can be followed by either a list of items, or another complete 
sentence. In response to one of »he samples, the colon was here defined as a partial sentence terminator, and the 
grammar might accept it as being a possible end; but the preprocessor does not Be on the lookout in the future for 
problems associated with colons. 

Text-formatting commands. Below is shown a special function the preprocessor that is likely to need 
modification depending on the materials to be processed. This is the COMMAND-TRANSLATION function. 

<DEFUN COtfiAND-TRANSLATION (COMMAND) 
(LET (TRANSLATED-COMMAND) 
/This Is the coitinand translation table. 
;Any not listed are given a value of NIL, 
(SETQ TRANSLATED-CCMMAND (GETF • ( 
\.TB >TITLE 

\.rO >0RGANI2ATIONAL-HEADING 
\.?1 >TOP I C- HEADING 
\.SP >PARAGRAPH 
\.BP NIL 
\.tt >TITLE 

X.mh >0RGANI2ATI0NAL-HEADING 
\.sh >TOPIC-HEADING 
\.pp >PARAGRAPH 
) CCMMAND)) 

(IF TRANSLATED-COMMAND TRANSIJVTED-COMHAND NIL) 

M 

This funcuon translates a text-formatting command encountered in the source file into a lexical entry that can be 
recognized by the rest of the system. There is a simple list in property list format in which the source text- 
formatting command is followed by a corresponding lexical entry. Note that more that one text-formatting command 



6 



can be assigned to the same lexical item; e.g., >TITLE is the interpretation of both .TB and .tt These assignments 
can be expanded or modified simply by modifying the list in this function. 

Other special word treatments. COLLECT-WORD also provides another function of determining 
whether the word appears in all capital letters, or has its Hrst letter c^italized. The current version makes no use of 
the Tirst-Ietter-capitalized features, but the alMetters-capitalized is taken to define an acronym, which the FIND- 
ACRONYM function in "Icx-funcs.Iisp" will use to define the word as being a noun if it is unknown. This feature 
was incorporated because acronyms are very frequent in Navy materials, and sometimes an acronym is used that 
corresponds to an existing v/otd that does not have an otherwise compatible grammatical definition (such as ODD 
used as a noun instead of an adjective). This acronym defining facility is sensitive to whether the entire sentence has 
appeared in capitals, in which case only an unknown word will be accepted as an acronym. Of course acronyms can 
be added to the lexicon as standing lexical items, but this facility was added to make it unnecessary to define each 
possible acronym. 

Another function of COLLECT-WORD is to take words that contain only numeric digits and put the special 
symbol of greater-than (>) at the beginning. This is to force the rest of the system to treat a number, such as 1972, 
as a symbol, not as an actual number. 



2.3 The Lexicon 

There are two lexicon files, "lexicon" and "supplementary-lexicon." The main lexicon file contains roughly 
1 1,000 entries, and thus can lake a substantial amount of time to load. The supplementary lexicon is much smaller, 
and thus new items or experimental items can be placed in this file, which can then be loaded into an image 
containing the main lexicon in a much shorter amount of time. 

Main lexicon. The lexicon cuirendy does not make use of any of the redundancy between different forms of 
words, such as nouns and their plurals, or different forms of verbs. Each different lexical form is represented with its 
own entry. Each word is represented as a LISP symbol, and is stored as LISP properties of the word. Notice that 
because LISP symbols are used to represent the words in the lexicon, distinctions between upper and lower case are 
not represented in the lexicon. The following is an excerpt from the lexicon file; this will help explain the format of 
the lexicon entries. 

(M PUNCTUATION) 

(( PUNCTUATION) 

(} PUNaUATION) 

OPOSS POSS-MARK PUNCTUATION) 

(A DET NDEFDET ROOT WORD) 

^ABANDON VERB (ABANDON) VERB- INF ROOT WORD) 
(ABANDONED VERB (ABANDON) VERB-PSP WORD) 
(ABANDONING VERB (ABANDON) VERB-PRP WORD) 
^ABANDONS VERB (ABANDON) VERB-3PS WORD) 
(ABBREVIATE VERB (ABBREVIATE) VERB- INF ROOT WORD) 
(ABBREVIATED VERB (ABBREVIATE) VERB-PSP WORD) 
(ABBREVIATES VERB (ABBREVIATE) VERB-3PS WORD) 
(ABBREVIATING VERB (ABBREVIATE) VERB-PRP WORD) 
(ABBREVIATION NOUN (ABBREVIATION) ROOT WORD) 
(ABBREVIATIONS PLUNOUN NOUN (ABBREVIATION) WORD) 
(ABILITIES PLUNOUN NOUN ABILITY) WORD) 

STOP 

Each lexicon entry is a single line in the lexicon file, and is enclosed in parentheses. Each entry is thus read as 
a single LISP object, a list The last item in the file must be u*ie atom STOP. The CAR of the list is the lexical 
item, and the remainder of the list is a condensed property list The format of the condensed property list is that if an 
atomic item, such as VERB, is followed by a list, such as (ABANDON) for the entry ABANDON, then the atomic 
item is the property name and the list item is the property value. Otherwise the atomic item is simply a property 
name whose value is to be T and the next item is simply another property name. A function in the file "lex- 
funcs.lisp" expands these condensed property lists into full properties which arc stored on the symbol for the lexical 
item itself. 



7 



9 



Referring to the example, the first four items define some items of punctuation. Notice how the comma in the 
first item must be enclosed in vertical bars, since it is used in COMMON LISP to define a symbol whose name is 
that single characict The fourth item, >POSS, is an example of special items generated by the prq)rocessor and 
other preliminary processing done on a sentence prior to parsing. The greater-than sign (>) has been used as the 
special character to designate an artificial lexical item. In this case, >POSS is used to indicate a possessive 
construction; the preliminary processing functions replace apostrophes and the accompanying s with this symbol to 
normalize the form of a possessive construction. 

The remaining entries in the example illustrate a few points. The property ROOT means that this is the root 
form of the wonL For example ABBREVIATION is marked as ROOT whereas ABBREVIATIONS is not Notice 
how the noun property for ABBREVIATIONS refers to the root form of the word CCS currcndy docs not use this 
fact to any great extent, but it is available in the lexicon for future use in more semantically-based processing. Also 
one can see how the different forms of the verb ABBREVIATE and ABANDON arc all explicidy shown. VERB-INF 
is the infinitive form of the verb, VERB-PSP is the past participle, and VERB-PRP is the present participle. 
VERB-3PS is the special form for the third person singular use of the verb as in He abandons the ship. Notice that 
all of these words have the property WORD; this is to distinguish them from the punctuation items. This property 
is used occasionally to determine whether a word encountered in the input is known in the lexicon or not 

The lexicon file can be updated simply by editing it. A new entry can be added, preferably at the corresponding 
alphabetized location, or the properties modified. One should take care that the parentheses are properly balanced 
within each new or modified item; the symptom of unbalanced parentheses will be quite obvious when loading the 
file, but it will probably take an inconveniently long time to show up. The lexicon file as currently defmed must 
end with the atom STOP. This is a vestige of earlier LISP implementations not being able to halt properly upon 
end-of-file. 

Supplementary lexicon. The entries of the main lexicon are mostly standard English words. The 
supplementary lexicon has been used for various special and unusual lexicon defmitions. A condensed version of the 
supplementary lexicon file appears below: 

;text fomatting cocnnand l«xical items 

{>HE:ADING punctuation KEADINC-MARK TEXT-FORMAT-CCWWJD) 

'(>?ARAGRAPH PUNCTUATION HEADING-MARK TEXT-PORMAT-CCMMAND) 

;eg run-in, or si.Tply a paragraph start 

(>£SD-OP-SENTENCE PUNCTUATION) 

OTIME-OUT PUNCTUATION) 

;present-particlple veros used frequently as ".ocns 
(PITTING NOC'N (PITTING)) ;word is already derir.ed 
(TESTING NOUN (PITTING)) ;word is already defined 

(O.D. ABBREVIATION NOUN (OUTS IDE-DIAMETER) WORD) 
(I.D. ABBREVIATION NOUN (INSIDE-DIAMETER) WORD) 

(TORCH-CUT VERB (TORCH-CUT) VERB-INP ROOT VERB-PS? TRANS WORD) 
(CHISEL-CUT VERB (CHISEL-CUT) VERB-INP ROOT VERB-PSP TRANS WORD) 
(WORLDWIDE ADV (WORLDWIDE) ROOT WORD) 



(CNLY^IP IDIOM PROP -CON J-A-3 (ONLY IP) ADVCL-CCNJ (ONLY ID WORD) 
(BECAUSE OP IDIOM PCON-A-B (BECAUSE OP) WORD) 
(TO_THE_SlGHT_OP IDIOM PREP (T0_THE3IGHT OP) WORD) 

(regardless op idicm prep (regardless op)''word) 
(responsiblx^por idiom prep (responsible por) word) 
(consists op idiom verb (consists op) verb-3ps word) 
(And_/_cr":dicm conj (And_/ or) word) 
(such as idiom prep (such as) word) 

(POR^EXAMPLE idiom ADV (F5r_EXAMPL£) WORD) 
;sarp2e jargon 

(A3oard_sh:p :d:cm adv (A3card_ski?) adj (ascard^sk:?) wcrdj 

;sarrple job title 

('SL£CTRICIAN_*_S_MATEI idiom noun (iELECTRIC:AN_*_S^MATEi) WORD) 
STC? 



8 lU 



A couple of items, such as >HEADING and >PARAGRAPH, arc special punctuation symbols thai are inserted 
by the preprocessor in response to encountering text-formatting commands in the input file. Note that the properties 
on this arc both HEADING-MARK and TEXT-FORMAT-COMMAND. Both the grammar and the semantics 
module respond to these in useful ways. 

Notice that if a source file is supplied as input that has text-formatting commands not known to the 
picproccssor, they will either be ignored if they correspond to the currently defined syntax for text processing 
commands, or will simply pass through where they may or may not be recognized as existing lexicon items or 
defined as new words. Thus if text-formatting commands arc to be included in the input, the preprocessor must be 
prepared to accept them. 

A few items in this excerpt, PITTING and TESTING, are defined as nouns. These words arc already present in 
the main lexicon defined only as verbs. One of the samples used to develop CCS had these words, especially 
PITTING, heavily used as a noun. It would have been possible to modify the grwmar so that any present participle 
verb would be accepted as the head noun of a noun phrase, but such a sweeping decision also had undesirable side 
effects in parsing other sentence forms. The most conservative strategy is to simply use the supplementary lexicon 
to define popular verb-based nouns such as PITTING or TESTING. If experience siiows that there is a very high 
frequency of such words, then the grammar would need to be suitably modified and strengthened to accept all such 
words as nouns. 

The next two items are some examples of abbreviations. Abbreviations have a special status since they contain 
periods, which nornudly mark the end of a sentence to the preprocessoc When the preprocessor encounters a period, 
it checks to see if the item immediately preceding the period is an abbreviation, by looking to see if the constructed 
word containing the period is listed as an abbreviation in the lexicon. If an actual abbreviation is not in the lexicon, 
the preprocessor is likely to break the abbreviation in i:vo, most likely giving an incorrect parse. Thus, the most 
commonly used abbreviations should be added to the lexicon in the manner shown here. 

The next few items, TORCH-CUT, CHISEL-CUT and WORLDWIDE are examples of peculiar verbs and a 
somewhat imusual adverb that were encountered in working with one of the NPRDC samples. 

The next several items arc some of the idiomatic expressions currently in the supplementary lexicon. An 
idiomatic expression is defined as a fixed sequence of word^; which in some sense plays exactly the same grammatical 
role as a single word would. A good example is the phrase to the right of ; this could be processed literally as a 
prepositional phrase embedded inside another prepositional phrase, but in fact to the right of defines a single 
semantic relationship of one object being located in a certain direction from another object, in the same kind of way 
as simpler prepositions such as near or below. Thus, to save the parser from doing more woric than necessary, and to 
obtain a simpler semantic structure, it makes sense to define to the right cf as denoting a single relationship. Thus 
this phrase is defined as an idiom. Prior to parsing a sentence, one of the lexicon functions in the file "lex.funcs" is 
used to find the idiomatic expressions. The FlND-lDIOMS function scans the sentence, and forms every sequence of 
words up to a certain maximum length (currently four) and checks to see if the resulting compound word is defined as 
an idiom in the lexicon. The convention for connecting the words into the compound words is to separate the 
original individual words with an underscore character, as shown in this excerpt* If the sequence of words is listed as 
an idiom in the lexicon then the sequence of words is replaced with the compound word defined as the idiom. Thus, 
as you can sec in the excerpt from the siq>plemcnlary lexicon, each idiomatic phrase is defined as a sequence of words 
separated with underscore characters, given the property IDIOM, and then given some syntactic pmperties, such as 
being a preposition designating the relationship TO_THE_RIGHT_OR 

My recommendation is to use idioms to define unusual or jargon phrases, or for phrases that have a very fixed 
conventional structure, such as those shown in the excerpt The excerpt shows a piece of sample jargon, aboard 
ship which syntactically could be processed as a condensed prepositional phrase, but is often used in unusual places 
in the sentence such as both as an adverb or as an adjective. Defining this piece of jargon as an idiom simplifies 
processing considerably. 



9 




Another stereotyped kind of phrase is a job title such as Electricians Mate or Machinist's Mate., Notice that the 
apostrophe and the 5 are separated in the idiom definition; this is the work of the preprocessor, one of whose basic 
functions is to separate punctuation from the adjacent words. As noted before, the last item in the supplementary 
lexicon flle is the atom STOP. 

Loading the lexicon. A lexicon file is put into effect by loading it with the function called LEXICON- 
LOAD in the file ^'lex-funcs.lisp*'. This function reads the definitions in a file, expands the condensed property Iist» 
and assigns the properties to the individual words. Thus, when this function has finished, every symbol listed as a 
lexicon entry in the file will have the listed properties on its property list Since this is a fairly slow process for the 
entire lexicon, the relevant functions for loading die lexicon have been sq)arated into a much smaller set of functions 
in the file **Iex-build.lisp'*. An image can be constructed by using these functions to load the lexicon, and then the 
resulting image can be saved. The rest of the system can then be built relatively quickly by activating the lexicon 
image, loading the remaining functions of die system, and compiling the grammar and production rules. 

Lexical preparation of the sentence. Several passes are made on the sentence to prepare it for parsing, 
which cause new lexicon items to be defined. Notice that these run-time additions to the lexicon do not modify the 
lexicon file; Uiey have effect only during the execution of the current image. Thus, if more than one file is criticized 
within a single image execution, all of the new lexicon definitions constructed during the criticism of the first file 
will be in effect during the processing of the second file. Provision is made for writing the new lexicon enuies into 
a file using die GUESSED- WORDS output option. The contents of this file can then be added to the permanent 
lexicon file and a new CCS Image built 

The relevant function for these operations is PREPARE-SENTENCE in "ccs-funcs.lisp**. This function calls 
several oUier functions which are in the file **lex-funcs.lisp**. The first pass removes the maricer for initial capital 
letters installed by the preprocessor, because this information is not currenUy used. The next pass finds any 
acronyms in the sentence and add them to the lexicon if they are not already known. The next pass through the 
sentence consists of finding the idioms and modifying the sentence accordingly, followed by a pass that finds and 
replaces apostrophes with the special possessive mark (>POSS). Once the sentence has been processed this far, the 
remaining words in die sentence are checked to be sure diey are all known, and any unkiK3wn ^*cz6s are assigned a 
guessed part of speech. 

Guessing die part of speech is done by two functions. RECOGNIZE-CLASS recognizes number strings 
generated by die preprocessor (e.g., >1974), or labels, which are unknown words containing numbers; diese arc very 
common in technictd text (e.g., V104). If an unknown word is not one of diesc two classes, a function GUESS- 
WORD-CLASS is invoked. This does an analysis of die ending of die word to see if it can be assigned a 
grammatical class. For example a word ending in ive is almost certainly an adjective whereas one ending in ly is 
probably an adverb. This function attempts to also construct die root form of a guessed verb; diis ^goridim is 
slighUy defective in that it does not do a proper job widi verbs whose root ends in e. If all else fails, die word is 
guessed to be a noun since diis quite often is a correct guess. 



2.4 The Parser 

Overview. The parser is perhaps die most subde, difficult and critical part of die entire system. Analyzing 
die grammar of sentences is a severely difficult computational problem which has not in general been solved. This 
parser uses a co;'.ibinat^on of old approaches, and so is severely limited in some ways compared to more modem 
ideas, but die coverage, die variety of syntactic structures, diat die parser can handle is quite large compared to many 
newly proposed parsers. 

The philosophy of much of die grammar is to make use of constraints in English grammar to help parse die 
sentence. For example, die grammar tests for agreement of die subject of a verb and die form of die verb in person 
and number. This has die disadvantage diat if die writer has made a grammatical error, die sentence will fail to parse, 
and die system will be able to make fewer useful comments about die sentence. On die odier hand, it has die 



10 



advantage that such constraints on grammatical structure help parse the sentence in a reasonable amount of time, and 
normally in the proper fashion. 

The basic form of the parser is that it is an augmented transition networic (AIT^O llus document will not 
try to explain the basic principles of ATN parsers: these can be found in abnost any textbook on artificial 
intelligence; it is one of the oldest approaches to syntax analysis. The file -parseiilisp*' includes two families of 
functions. The first is the compiler for the hig^-level grammar specification file, and the second is the actual ATN 
interpreter. The compiler reads the grammar definition file, and constructs the ATN. The interpreter is then given a 
sentence and follows the ATN and returns a parse tree for the sentence. 

Grammar specification. There are two relatively unusual twists to the ATN approach that are used in this 
parser. First, the transition network is not coded directly, but is compiled from a fairiy compact linear notation, the 
High-Level Grammar specification language (HLG) described Li Mayer and Kieras (1987). Thus extensions to the 
grammar are made by woiidng in a compaa and simple specification language, and the new granunar specification is 
then compiled into a transition network. Experience has shown that attempting to work with an ATN directly is 
impractiod when it becomes as large ana comfdex as required for this sort of materiaL Thus using the high-level 
specification language has made this fairiy large parser relatively easy to develop. 

The chart mechanism. The second twist on the parser is that it incotporates a cAorr that greatly speeds up 
the ATN processi!.^. That is, the classic problem with an ATN parser is that if the parse fails, the ATN interpreter 
backs up to each previous decision point in the network and tries all possibilities at that point Thus, if one of the 
earliest decisions in processing the sentence was incorrect, the ATN parser will have to back all the way up to that 
decision point, after exhausting all other alternatives along the way, and then reanalyze the sentence. Normally this 
reanalysis would be done completely from scratch. Thus, it can take an ATN parser a very long time to analyze an 
unusual sentence, and an extremely long time before it discovers that it cannot parse the sentence at all. This is 
remedied by using the chart facility as discussed somewhat in Winograd (1983) and Allen (1987). 

The chart is simply a table; whenever a constituent, such as a noun phrase, is found, an entry is made in the 
chart that shows that a noun phrase has been found starting at a certain positkxi in ti« sentence and extending for a 
certain length in the sentence. In the future, if the ATN requests a search for a tKxm phrase at that same position, the 
results are simply found in the chart, and then processing can continue inunediately. Likewise, if the parser 
discovers that there is no noun phrase to be found at a certain position, an entry is made in the chart that there is no 
parsing path through the noun phrase network at that point Thus, rather than waste its time in futile re- 
explorations, the parser simply goes on to try something else. If the parse is successful, a chart entry is eventually 
made that covers the entire sentence. The chart itself is rather large, but without the chart, the parser would be 
indulging in multiple repeated combinatorial explorations, so the chart generally results in much faster parsing. 
Thus this strategy represents a substantial uadeoff of space for time. 

ATNs normally use registers, which are variables that can be assigned values during the parse which are then 
used later. The ATNs described in the literature typk:ally use the registers for a variety of purposes, but here they are 
used only for a steering function. For example, the noun phrase networic will set a register to indicate the person and 
number of the noun phrase; the verb phrase network will then use the register value to steer the parse to check for 
the corresponding form of the verb. Making use 'i^' a chart in conjunction with registers is especially tricky. The 
^proach taken here is to save with each chart entry the values of any registers that were set during the processing of 
the networic, and any register values that were tested during the processing of the network. A chart entry will be 
reused only if the current value of the tested registers agree with those in the chart, and reusing the chart entry entails 
setting the registers to any values that were noted as set in the ciiart entry. 

There i> also a provision for scoping register in a networic. A variable scoped for a network means that the 
variable is defined as having a new binding within that networic and all subnetworics that arc dynamically called by 
that networic. For example, in the current grammar, this scoping is used to ensure that modifiers of a noun phrase 
do not change the value of the register 7PERS0N-NUMBER, which is then tested in the verb phrase networks to 
ensure proper agreement of the verb with the subject Most of the mechanism is available for maintaining these 



11 




register notations in chart entries automatically, but in the current version, the grammar programmer is responsible 
for specifying which registers are set and tested by individual networks and for defining the scope of registers. 

Symiax of HLG frammar definitioms. The defmition of a graininar for the parser consists of a series of 
network definitions in a file. The syntax of these expiessions is given below: 

(NS7-DE? <r.etwork-name> (optional register specification} 
expression-series 

) 

The NET-DEF expression is used to define an AIN network. The name of the network must start with a dollar sign 
($). Following the network name there is an optional register specification and then there is an expression of the 
type called an expression series. The syntax the network qponfication is of the form 

:REGIS7ERS (type-keyword register-list ) 

type-keyword » : SCOPED or :SET or : TESTED 
register-list » (register-name ...) 

The significance of the ^ification of the register type for the network has SCOHED, SET, or TESTED is 
discussed more in the section explaining how the parser interpreter works. Each of these type q)ecifications is 
followed by a list of register names of the specified type. A register name should appear as only one type in a 
network definition. 

The exi^ession series ^)ecifies a pattern of sentence constituents that must be present for parsing to succeed in 
this network. An expression series can consist of a single item, a sequeiKre, or an alternation, where a sequence is a 
seriesof items that must ^)pear in the listed order and an alternation indicates that any one of the items mav -appear, 
but only one: 

expression-series - 
item) 
or sequence 
or alternat ".on 

sequence « (item item item ...) 
alternation = (item / item / item) 

Each item in an expression series can one of several types as listed below 



item " 


<gr ammat ical -cat ego r y > 




or 


<netvork-name> 




or 


!<li;eral> 




or 


- expression-series 


roptional (0 or 


or 


+ expression-series 


;one or more 


or 


* expression-series 


;2ero or more 


or 


code-expression 





The grammatical category is the name of a grammatical category such as NOUN for a noun, or ADV for an adverb. 
This specifies that the current word must belong to that grammatical category. If tiie item is a network name, it 
means tiiat at this point in the parse a subnetwork should be invoked to see if the specified constituent is present 
The literal specification tests for a specific litenil word or charactet There are three types of items tiiat indicate 
various forms or iteration or repetition of an embedded expression series. These arc optional, one or more, or zero or 
more, instances of tiie structure indicated by the: following expression series. One final type of item is a code- 
expression. These specify a test tiiat allows a transition if tiie arc is crossed, where tiie test is eitiier a piece of LISP 
code or a register operation: 



12 K 



code-expression = 

(LISP <form>) ;test is satisfied if <form> evaluates to no'.-NIL 

or (TESTR <reaister-name> <value- f orm>) ;test satisfied if val*;'. in <register-name> is 

;EQL to value of <value-form> 
or (TESTR NOT <register-narne> <value-f orm>) ;test satisfied if value in <register-name> is 

;NOT SQL to value of <value-form> 
or (SETR <register-nanie> <vaiue-form>) ;set <register-name> to value of <value-form> 

;with the test always satisfied 

The LISP expression allows one to include an arbitrary piece of LISP code to constitute a test for whether the arc 
should be crossed The arc is crossed if the specified form evaluates to non-NIL« The TESTR expression allows one 
to test the value of a register The test is satisfied if the value in the named register is EQL to the evaluated value 
form. The TESTR NOT expression is a negation of the regular TESTR expression; the test is satisfied if the 
register is not EQL to the value. Finally, the SETR form is used to set a named register to a value; however, the 
test is always satisfieo. 

Here is an example of some HLG network definitions that will help explain the syntax: 

(NET-DEF SINITIAL-VERBKOD 

(* ((ADV / NEG / SPREPPHR) - (A,))) 

) 

(NE7-DEF SPREPPHR :REGISTERS (-.SCOPED ( ?PERSON-NUMB£R) :TESTED ( ?POST-VERB) ) 
(- (ADV) SPREP SNP) 

) 

(NET-DEF SPREP 

(PREP * ((!\, / CONJ / (!\, CONJ)) PREP -(!\,) )) 

) 

The first NET-DEF defmes a network named SINmAL-VERBMOD. This network is used to describe a constituent 
that modifies a verb and that can appear at the beginning of the sentence. The network specification is that we must 
have one or more items, each of which can be an adverb, a negation word (such as never), or a prepositional phrase. 
Each such item can be followed by an optional comma. The SPREPPHR is a reference to another networic, which is 
dePned in the second NET-DEF. This network has a scoped register and a tested register specified As described in 
m t I'^^Moii cn the parser interpreter, the scoped register takes on a new value, in the same manner as a locally defined 
vTtt <-:-ie does in LISP; the previous value is restored when we leave this network. The tested register means that 
later on, either in this network or in some subnetwork, this register will be tested for the specific value. The tested 
register is specified here to inform the parser interpreter that this value should be saved in the chart A prepositional 
phrase is defined in this network very simply as an optional adverb followed by a preposition (which is specified by 
yet another network), followed by a noun phrase which is also defmed in another network. The nature of a 
preposition is defined in the networic SPREP, which shows that a preposition form can consist of a single 
preposition (grammatical caiegwy PREP), followed by zero or more sequences in which commas or conjunctions 
both can appear, followed by another preposition, followed by an optional comma. This network allows for 
compound prepositions such as above and below to play the role of a single preposition. 

The HLG compiler. The compiler has a relatively simple strucnirc. The top-level function reads a network 
definition from the input file; the syntax of this defmition file is such that each network definition is a single top- 
level object in the file. The network defmition is handed to a series of functions, basically one for each type of 
construction in the network definition. Each of these functions is given as input a START and END network node, 
and returns updated STAKI* and END nodes. These are the starting and ending nodes for the piece of the parsing 
network that each function builds. As described in the Mayer and Kieras (1987) report, there are some inefficiencies 
in how this network is constructed, which a future revision may attempt to optimize. The syntax for defining 
registers, and setting and testing them, is new to this version of the system and not described in the Mayer and 
Kieras report. 




ERIC 



The network data structure consists of the following: Each node in the ATN network is a symbol; the first node 
in each netwoik is simply the name of the network, and the names of nodes within the network are simply the 
netwodc name with a numeric value appended. The acuial contents of the networic can be examined by looking at the 
values (or the netwoik name and then looking at the values for the various other node names defined in the netwoik* 
Each node is defined in the value of the symbol as simply a list of arcs, where an arc is a structure that includes the 
type of the arc, the value, and the name of the next node. The type designates what test should be performed on this 
arc and the value is information used in the test. Some specifics are given in the maintenance examples later in this 
report 

ATN interpreter The interpreter function is large and complex. At the top level it consists of a series of 
functions most of which are called from only one place. The code was prepared in this fashion to make future 
modifications and extensions easier, but there is cleariy some processing time being lost in calling from one 
function to the next If your LISP implementation supports the compiler INLINE directive, some speed 
improvements might be obtained. I suggest modifying this code only extremely carefully; it is very hard to debug, 
since analyzing a sentence typically involves many thousands of function calls. 

The basic philosophy of the ATN interpreter is to keep a stack of arcs. The basic processing is to take an arc off 
the top of the stack and perform the test associated with it If this takes us to a next node in the netwoik, the first 
arc for that network will be pushed onto the stack, and then we will then loop around to the top of the stack again. 
Now to augment this simple picture: The arc on top of the stack is not really the next arc to be followed, but is an 
arc frame containing a number showing the last arc that was used. To process an arc, we increment this number, 
which gives the next arc leaving the node. If no arcs have yet been followed out of a node, this number is negative, 
so the first arc we try is numbered zero. Then as a further complication, the slack actually c(xitains two kinds of 
frames. The first is an arc frame, which is as has been described. The second is a net frame, which is a record of 
when we have called a subnetwork. TliC net frame records information about the invoking arc, which is the arc that 
invoked the subnetwork. 

If we fail to leave a node, we pop the previous frame off the stack. If it is an arc frame, we simply follow the 
next arc leaving the earlier node and thus try the next previous decision point However, if it is a net frame, this 
means that we have failed to find a path through an invoked networic We return to the node containing the invoking 
arc and try the next arc from that node. 

But if we process a POP arc, it means that we have succeeded in finding a pathway through the network. The 
chain of frames since we called the network is taken out of uHe stack and a new chart entry is made that contains this 
pathway. Thus the chart entry represents the fact that we found a constiuient corresponding to the network, and the 
pathway in the chart entry shows the chain of arcs or networic calls that were used to fmd that constituent 

If we fail to find a pathway, as indicated by backing up to the frame in the slack where the network was called, 
an entry is made in the chart that there is no pathway for that network at this position in the sentence. 

If a network is called from an arc, the conventional thing for an ATN to do would be to start processing the first 
arc leaving the first node in that network. However, making use of the chart entails first checking the chart to see if 
there is an entry for that network leaving this position. If a qualifying entry is found, the net frame for that chart 
entry is simply placed on the stack, and we continue at the point in the sentence where the chart entry says the 
network has reached. If we fail to parse from this point we will not give up on this networic until we have 
exhausted all of the chart enuies for that network, and then if more paths are possible, we will back up into the 
network to look for a new parse. Some of the more subtle code in the parser is ensuring that the chart never gets 
redundant entries, because these slow the processing considerably 

The parsing stops when there is a POP out of a special, top-level network defmed with the reserved name 
SSTAPT. This networic must be included in the grammar definition. When we pop from SSTART, the parse is 
complete. The stack at this point will contain a single net frame which refers to the chart entry for the top level 
constituent in the sentence. 



14 t r> 



The parse tree returned from the parser is computed by the function STACK-TO-TREE This simply unpacks 
the stack using the chart entries to recover the parsing path through the sentence in terms of the networks and arcs. 
The path of arcs is examined for the tests to determine the grammaticai category used to account for each word in the 
sentence* The parse tree that results is a nested list, where the CAR of each list is either the name of a network or a 
grammatical category fof a word* It is this tree that is listed as the detailed output if so requested. Another function, 
PARSE-PRINT in "ccs-funcs.lisp" prints a simplified form of this tree by stripping out all of the lower-level 
networic names. Here is an example parse tree produced for the sentence 
The large motor on the engine always powers the pump. 

(SSTART 
(5 STATEMENT 
( 5STATD4ENT-S IMPLE 
(5DEC LARATIVE-STATEMENT 
(SNP 

($NP-SIMPLE (DEFDET THE) (5ADJ (5ADJ-SIMPLE (ADJ LARGE) ) ) (NOUN MOTOR) 
($R£LCIAU$E 
(SSUBRELCLS 
(SPREPPKR (5PREP (PREP ON)) 

(SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (DEFDET THE) (NOUN ENGINE)))))))) 

($CL5PR£D 
($cL5PR£D-SIMPtE 
(SVERBPKR 
($VERBPKR-SIMPLE 
($VERBPHR-AaiVE 
(SVERBSEQ-AaiVE (SVERBMOD (ADV ALWAYS) ) 

(SVERB-SIMPLE (VERB-3PS POWERS))) 
(SVCOMP-ACTIVE (SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (DEFDET THE) (NOUN PUMP))))))))))) 

\.) 

>END-Or-SENTENCE) 

Non'parsable input The parser is actually called by the function ATTEMPT-PARSE in "ccs-fancs.lisp". 
This function is part of the strategy for dealing with non-parsable input The grammar contains a network 
SGRAMMAR-PROBLEM that is routinely resorted to if no other top-level analyses of the sentence succeed, 
SGRAMMAR-PROBLEM is simply another parsing networic, and attempts to analyze the sentence just in terms of 
miscellaneous noun phrases, punctuation, and so forth. However, sometimes non-parsable sentences cannot be 
analyzed even by SGRAMMAR-PROBLEM, or it is possible for sentences to involve stmctures sc deq)ly nested 
that the combinatorics of possible parses are excessively large. For this case, the parser includes a time-out variable, 
PARSER:*TOANSrnON-COUNT-LIMrT, that halts the parser if the specified number of transitions (arc crossings) 
in the network have been exceeded In this case the ATN interpreter returns a special value which ATTEMPT- 
PARSE detects, and then the parser is called again with a special symbol >TIME-OUT at the beginning of the 
sentence. The current grammar then calls another special network, SSENTENCE-TOO-COMPLEX, which attempts 
an even simpler analysis of the sentence. Part of the logic is in place for reusiiig the chart after the first failure, so 
that this reparsc will be considerably fasten However this piece of work was not completed. If there are many cases 
of time-out failures in actual materials, it might help to finish implementing this feature. 

A technical note about the parser The data structures used in the parser were chosen after some benchmaiic tests 
on LUCID COMMON LISR It was found that the property list format, accessed by the functions GETF and SETF, 
were extremely fast Thus, the chart is simply a doubly embedded list, where a GETF using the network name 
followed by a GETF using the current position could recover a specific chart entry quite rapidly. It is possible that 
newer or different LISP implementations would dictate other choices. But notice that array structures are generally 
not applicable simply because there are variable number of entries, and no clear maximum number, for most of the 
situations where one would be tempted to use an array. 



2.5 The Semantics Module 

Overview. The semantics module is a collection of functions in the file "propositions.lisp". The top level 
function is STS .TRANSLATE. This function translates a parse tree, as described above, into ACT structures. It 
docs this by calling a series of functions, one function for each networic defined in the grammac Each fimction 
analyzes the contents of the parse tree at its level, and constructs a series of ACT links to represent the semantics 
content of the corresponding portion of the parse. For example, the parse tree for a noun phrase would be analyzed 
with a series of functions which construct the semantic network links to show that a referent has the predicates of 



ERIC 



15 

17 



being large and being a motor. These functions are basically arbitrary, and so are not easily summarized. However 
they have a basically simple structure, and are further simplified by the use of some macros defuicd in the 
"propositions-Usp" file. The example below of adding new parses and criticisms describes these macros in more 
detail. 

Syntax of ACT structure. The semantic content of sentences is represented using a form of the ACT 
semantic network structure proposed by Anderson (1976). This document is not the place to discuss knowledge 
representation or semantic knowledge in general; suffice it to say that this representation was chosen mainly because 
of its great technical simplicity, evidence showing that it is at least a plausible representation for human memory of 
sentence meanings, and the interesting property that it is close enough to the syntactic structure of sentences that it 
is easy to establish a relationship between the semantic content and the original syntactic form in which it was 
expressed. That is, there is a semantic representation node that can be "tagged" for almost any original syntactic 
form. For example, there is a distinct node that represents the main proposition of a sentence, and other nodes 
correspond to each subordinate clause, each modification of a noun, each modification of the main proposition, and 
each modification of the relationship between constituents (such as prepositions). One reason why the ACT 
representation has this property is that it is relatively "close" to the surface form of the sentence. Other knowledge 
representation proposals, such as conceptual dependency, are relatively distant from the surface form of the sentences. 




1 1 



Figure 2. Example of ACT semantic network structure for the content of the sentence The energy booster is used by 
the Phaser system. The arrows labelled with 5. P, /?, A, and are links in the ACT structure, while the curved arrows 
represent TAGS specifying surface-structure information about the parts of the semantic structure. 



A conventional way to display ACT structure is in the form of a diagram (see Figure 2 for an example). CCS 
operate^ jn ACT structure in terms of a list of binary relations or links. Each link consists of a list containing a 
link type followed by a source node and a target node. The possible link types arc S abject, Predicate, R elation, 
A rgument, and N umber. A node is simply a LISP symbol. In CCS there are effectively three different types of 
nodes, and they are indicated by convention with symbols with particular letters. To these initial letters are appended 
digits so as to produce unique symbols. The three types are: proposition nodes (PROPn), relation or predicate nodes 
(PREDn), and referent nodes (REFn). The referent nodes represent the entities or concrete objects discussed in the 
text; proposition nodes represent propositions indicating that some referent stands in a relationship to a specified 
predicate. A proposition node has a subject link to the subject and a predicate link to the predicate. A predicate can 
be either a simple predicate concept, such as an adjective, or a predicate (relation) node. A relation node has a 



ERIC 



16 



relation link to a relation concept such as a v^b, and an argument link to an argument, such as the object of the 
verb. Note that the subject of a proposition need not be only a referent node; it may be another proposition node 
(e.g., to indicate that a proposition is false), or a relation node (e.g., to modify a verb with an adverb). The number 
link (N) indicates the number of items in the set represented by the referent The following summarizes the syntax 
of these expressions succinctly: 

link « (<link-type> <source> <target>) 

link-type « S or P or R or A or N 

<source> « proposition node or relation node 

<targGt> proposition node, relation node, or referent node 

Possible combinations: 

(S <proposition-node> <subject>) 

(P <proposition-node> <predicate>) 

<subject> » referent node, proposition node, or relation node 
<predicate> - simple predicate concept or relation node 

(R <relation-node> <relation>) ^ 
(A <rela*-ic-n-node> <argument>) 
<relation> ■ a relation concept 

<argumenc> • referent node, proposition node, or relation node 
(N <referent node> <cardinality>) 

<cardinality> « a symbol for the number of members of the referent set 

The following is an example of ACT structure resulting from the analysis of the sentence The large motor on 
the engine always powers the pump. 

((S PROPl REFl) (P PROPl LARGE) (S PR0P2 REFl) (P PR0P2 MOTOR) 
(S PR0P3 REF2) (P PR0P3 ENGINE) 

(S PR0P4 REFl) (P PR0P4 PREDl) (R PREDl ON) (A PREDl REF2) 
(S PROPS REF3) (P PR0P.> PUMP) 

(S PROPS REFl) (P PROPS PRED2) (R PRED2 POWER) (A PRED2 REF3) 
(S PROP? PRED2) (P PROP? ALWAYS)) 

The proposition PROPl specifies that the object REFl has the predicates of large and motor; in other words, 
REFl is a large motor. PR0P3 specifies that REF2 is an engine. PR0P4 specifies that REFl stands in an ON 
relationship to the argument REF2; in other words, the motor is on the engine. PROPS defines REF3 as being a 
pump, and PR0P6 specifies that the motor has a POWER relationship to a pump, REF3. Finally, PROVJ applies 
an ALWAYS predicate to the P0WER-REF3 relationship. 

Operation of the Semantics Module. The basic philosophy underlying the corrbination of the parser 
and the semantics module is to separate the computational pn^Iem of correctly parsing the sentence, which is quite 
intimidating, from the problem of generating a semantic interpretation of the parse tree. That is, more conventional 
uses of ATNs involves constructing the semantic structure by means of various operations during the parse itself. 
However, this parser docs not build a semantic structure; it simply generates a parse tree of the constituents defined 
by the networks. Thus for example, an active and passive sentence will have different parse upccs reflecting whether 
the passive verb phrase network was used rather than the active verb phrase networic. The semantics module will 
then construct semantic interpretations of these parse trees which, for example, will be essentially identical for 
passive and active pan^)hrases. The functions in the semantics module can be written in an essentially deterministic 
fashion, because \ht parser has already done all of the analyses to arrive at the final parse tree. 

Thus the semantics module only has to unpack the parse tree laycr-by-layer, and build a corresponding semantic 
structure. This is sometimes complicated by the fact that some embedded structure must be built before the final 
structure. For example, we don't know where to auach the proposition for an adverb until we know the name of the 

ERLC ^ 



relation node constructed for the verb. Thus a common pauem that ^pears in the semantics functions is to 
accumulate certain portions of information from the parse tree, then call other functions to build the smicture for 
other portions of the tree. These Iower*Ievel functions reuim the names of various nodes, and then the calling 
function attaches additional structure to these returned nodes. 



2.6 The Reference Module 

Simple reference. The key feature of connected text is that each sentence is supposed to refer to objects or 
entities mentioned in previous sentences. The analysis of text, both from the information processing point of view, 
and human comprehension behavior, has received considerable attention since the seventies in cognitive psychology. 
See Kieras (1977; 1983) for discussion of diese issues in the context of the simulation model that was the precursor 
to CCS. 

Many of the important functions of CCS are based on analyzing these rrferendal relationships. Computing the 
referent of a reference is called resolving the reference. The basic assumption underlying CCS is that if these 
referential relationships are very simple to compute, then the text will be coherent and easy to understand. The 
reference module computes simple r^erence, which represents a particular set of ideas about what referriice forms are 
easy to compute. Namely, a reference should either be explicidy to a new referent, an object not previously 
mentioned, or explicitly to an oic/ , or given referent, an object that was previously mentioned in the passage. If the 
object was previously mentioned, it should be referred to either with the exact same word string as was previously 
used to describe it, or by a set of predicates (in the ACT sense) that form a pibset of the predicates that have been 
attached to the object thus far. For example, an object might be initially intrcxiuced as an auxiliary lube oil pump. 
Later on. it could be referred to ^propriately either by uie auxiliary lube oil pump or as the auxiliary pump, which 
is a subset of the original description. Notice that if the text contained the main pump it would appear that the text 
was referring to a different pump. Likewise if the text simply said the pump it could either be the auxiliary lube 
oil pump or perhaps some other pump; the reference might easily be ambiguous. 

Of course, more complicated references are possible. If the engine is flrst inttxxluced with the sentence the 
ship is powered by an engine, later in the text it may be referred to as the engine that powers the ship. Although 
this is a substantial panq)hrase from the original description of the engine, once the initial sentence has been 
translated into ACT structure, it has a form that is identical with the description the engine that powers the ship. 
The reference module is able to resolve references as complicated or more complicated than this. Even in this case, 
the basic form of the reference is that the text is still referring to an object with a subset of its previous description. 
If the reference module can not resolve a reference this way, it is a matter for the criticism rules to comment upon; 
there is a good chance that the writer of the material has assumed knowledge on the part of the reader, or has simply 
used inconsistent terminology or otherwise indulged in some form of incoherence. 

Resolving SM references against PM. A basic step that is done in processing the propositions in 
CCS is that the propositions derived from the current sentence are stored in PPS in sentence memory (i.e., a tag of 
SM). After a sentence hafi been completely processed, its propositions are moved from SM into passage memory 
(PM). Thus as CCS processes a passage, the contents of PM grow larger and larger. 

Resolving the reference involves taking the noun phrase propositions that are cumently in SM and comparing 
them to the propositions in PM, to determine whether there is a referent node in PM whose propositions natch the 
referent node in SM. If so, then the conclusion is that the referent node in SM is actfially the referent node in PM, 
and so the matched propositions in SM can be discarded, and the name of the PM referent node can be substituted for 
the SM referent node in all of the remaining SM propositions. Thus, resolving the references consists of rewriting 
the SM semantic structure until the SM propositions refer to referents already defined in PM as much as possible. 
Thus, suppose that all of the noun phrases in the sentence (he auxiliary lube oil pump is powered by (he auxiliary 
lube oil pump mo(or ^r. dr^Ady define I in passage memory. If so, there will only be one new proposition of 
information added by this sentence, rnir ely that the described motor powers the described pump. 



ERIC 



18 

20 



Resolving noun |:Ara5e5. The references in the form of an ordinary noun phrase are resolved as follows: 
When the representation of a new referent is created, the head noun is retained as the head noun form (HNF;. and the 
simple referentialform (SRF) is also retained. The head noun form defines the basic category of the referent, such as 
motor for the noun phrase auxiliary lube oil pump motor. The head noun form corresponds to the basic kind of an 
object that is being referred to. The simple referential form is available if the object is described as a sequence of 
adjectives and nouns, with no relative clauses or co )licated modifiers. This is intended to c^ture the heuristic that 
in technical prose, objects are often referred to with a standardized string of words. It is probably advantageous for 
the reader if the same object is always referred to with the same suing. Thus maintaining this suing of words is a 
simple way both to determine whether the writer has followed a pattern of consistent terminology, and also as a way 
to easily resolve the reference. 

The noun phrase semantics function calls the reference module. The first stq) in the reference resolution is 
simply to determine whether the SRF for the referring noun phrase matches the SRF of some previously mentioned 
referent If so, the referring noun phrase propositions are simply dropped from further consideration, and the referent 
node name for the matching previous referent node name is substituted into the remaining propositions for the 
sentence, replacing the matched referent If the SRF is not available, or does not match a previous referent SRF, a 
more tedious search of the previously mentioned referents is made, using the externally available copy of the PPS 
database stored on the symbol PPS;*DBCONTENTS. 

The first step in the search is to find all candidate referents. These will be referents whose HNF matches the 
current noun phrase HNF. Then the candidates arc examined to see which ones have predicates in the database that 
match each predicate in the referring noun phrase from the current sentence. Any candidates that fail to match en a 
predicate are dropped If there is ai least one candidate remaining after all predicates have been matched, then the 
reference has been resolved. If there are no candidates left, then the reference is unresolved, and the reference module 
reuims all of the original propositions along with other indicators that the criticism rules will use to comment upopa 
the £^arcnt lack of coherence. 

Pronoun references. The refei^nce module is also responsible for resolving pronouns. Pronouns are 
surprisingly complicated but also very well behaved. Since this function is pretty straightforwaid, it will not be 
summarized in any detail. First and second-person pronouns arc resolved to the prc-dcfmed referents THE^WRITER 
and THE^READER. Reflexive pronouns (e.g., himself ) are resolved tn the referent occupying the role of the 
sentence subject Third-person pronouns have a more complicated set of resolution rules. Since CCS docs not make 
any use of semantic or general knowledge, it uses only some relatively knowledge-free heuristics for determining the 
probable antecedents of pronouns. The related criticism rules merely comment on what the assumed antecedent is; 
CCS has no way to know what it is actually supposed to be. The heuristics used are based on various 
psycholinguistic research that shows, for example, that a pronoun normally should refer to the subject of the 
previous sentence. The reference module has mechanisms for making use of gender in resolving pronouns, but this 
is often limited to only two - a combination of male and female versus neuter. If there is no previous antecedent that 
appeared as the subject of an earlier sentence, then antecedents that appcered as main objects of the previous sentences 
are entertained A special type of antecedent is tracked for pronouns such as this ; these are assumed to refer to the 
previous sentence main proposition. 

Accuracy of semantic representation and reference. Knowledge representation, even in the form of 
an idea as old as semantic networks, is a very difficult technical problem wiih no agreed-upon solutions. In 
extending or maintaining CCS, one can easily get bogged down in the niceties of exactly how various semantic 
contents should be represented I have followed a strategy of trying to avoid this pitfall, based on the fact that as far 
as CCS is concerned, the only important features of the semantic structure arc those that relate to reference, and the 
various criticisms that might be made. Thus, one needs to ensure that two syntactic expressions that are supposed to 
refer to the same object result in ACT suiicture that can be matched by the reference module, or that represents the 
information required by the criticism mles one is interested in. Whether it is technically correct in other aspects will 
not make much difference to CCS. An example of this can be given. 

A major puzzle in computational linguistics is the prepositional phrase attachment problem. The problem is 
that a prepositional phrase that directly follows a noun that appears after a verb is ambiguous in terms of what it is 



19 



ERIC 




intended to nKxiify. The favorite classic example is / saw the man on the hill with the telescope. Did the action of 
seeing happen on the hill, or was it the man who was on the hill? Is it the man who had the telescope? Or did I do 
the seeing with the telescope? In general* this problem can not be solved without full access to not only general 
knowledge abc M the world, but also knowledge of the specific situation under discussion. 

This problem uimed out to be significant for CCS because a prepositional phrase directly following a noun was 
assumed to be a condensed relauv;^ \.!ause modifying the noun. But if instead the prepositional phrase modifies the 
previous verb, the reference module would fail to find a match for the noun as modified by the prepositional phrase. 
The criticism rules would then generate a bogus criticism that there was no previous referent for the noun. Thus the 
semantic interpretation for this syntactic stnicture sometimes had a serious impact on the validity of the criticisms. 

The current form of CCS attempts a paitial resolution of this problem. Such prepositional phrases are parsed 
by a separate network, SPVPNPPHR for post-verb-post-mun-prepositiond'phrase. The noun phrase function in the 
semantics module first attempts to resolve the noun phrase reference by ueating this prepositional phrase as a 
modifier of the noun. If the result successfully resolves to a previously mentioned referent, then we conclude that 
the prepositional phrase must indeed modify the noun. If not, a search is done using the reference without the 
prepositional phrase. If it successfully resolves this reference, then we conclude that the prepositional phrase must 
be a modification of the main verb, and the content of the prepositional phrase is returned through the nested 
semantics functions until the verb phrase semantics function can add the prepositional phrase as a modifier to the 
verb. 



2.7 The Production System Interpreter 

The production system interpreter consists of a set of production rules and a database. The interpreter tests the 
conditions of the production rules to determine if there are items in the database that match the conditions. If a 
production rule has all of its conditions matched then the interpreter performs the actions listed in the production 
rule. 

The production system interpreter is the current version of the Parsimonious Production System interpreter 
(PPS) (tescribcd in Covrigaru and Kieras (1987). PPS is probably the simplest production system interpreter 
available in terms of the syntax and generality of the production rules. However, internally it is pretty complicated, 
since it uses a variation on Forgy's (1982) rete match algorithm for doing pattern matching. Future woricers may 
want to consider replacing PPS with some more common or generally known production system interpreter such as 
OPS, but this woric would have to be done fairly carefully, and it is not clear whether there would be any great 
advantage in doing so. An important fact for such work is that the database of the production system interpreter is 
also used by the reference module and some of the output functioas, such as those that print out topic stnicuire, or 
those that fetch the referential forms of a referent These functions assume that the database is available and has a 
certain format, and so would also need to be changed if the production system interpreter was changed. 

The syntax of PPS rules is intended to be as simple as possible, reflecting the author's experience with the 
difficulty of programming large cognitive simulations in existing production rule languages. The syntax of PPS 
rules will be described, along witii an overview of tiie PPS code itself. This is a fairly stable piece of code, having 
undergone only a few small corrections and modifications for some years now. 

Syntax of production rules. The PPS database contains clauses: 

clause » (constant_symbol constant^symbol constant_symboi ...) 

A clause can contain a item tiiat is a list instead of a constant symbol, but it is not possible to write PPS conditions 
to test individual items in tiie list; it can only be matched as a whole to a variable or wild card. By convention, tiie 
first item in a clause is a "tag" for tiie "type" of item, such as SM, PM, STEP, but PPS docs not give tiiis item any 
special status except in displaying tiie contents of tiic database. 



20 



The syntax of an individual rule is: 

(<name> IF <conciition> THEN <action>) 

Each production rule has a name and then the special symbols IF and THEN marking the condition and action. The 
entire rule is enclosed in parentheses. The condition is simply a list of patterns which are implicitly conjoined: 

condition • (pattern pattern pattern ...) 

All of the patterns have to be satisfied before the entire condition is satisfied A pattern consists of a list of items, 
or a list of items surrounded by a list headed with the symbol NOT, or a predicate pattern: 

pattern - (item item item ...) or 

(NOT (item item item ...) (item item item ...) ...) or 
(<preciicate> item item) 

The NOT is not the standard LISP function. Rather this indicates that this pattern is satisfied if the internal pattern 
is not present These negated patterns look just like normal paucms, except they may not in turn include a NOT 
pattern. 

The items within a pattern are either a constant symbol, a variable pattern name, or a wild card: 

item " constant^symbol, pattern variable name, or wild card <"???") 

Tne variable pattern names arc prefixed with a question mark and have a scope corresoonding to the production rule; 
that is their values aze not defmed outside the production rule in which they appear, note that the same pattern 
variable name can be used in more than one rule, and the values within a rule are kept sq)arate. Variables used 
within a NOT pattern have a special status. Such a variable must either be mentioned elsewhere in the pattern, or at 
least twice within the NOT to tie sq>aiate negated patterns together If one is tempted to use a variable which does 
not follow these rules then one probably should be using a wild card instead. 

The fmal type of pattern is a predicate; these test one or two variables for either equality or some other 
relationship or specified values: The current predicates are DIFFERENT, UNIQUE, EQUAL, and GREATER, The 
EQUAL pattern predicate is satisfied if its arguments have equal values. The GREATER predicate is satisfied if the 
first argument has a numerical value greater than the second The DIFFERENT predicate is satisfied if the two 
arguments have different values. The UNIQUE predicate is somewhat peculiar but extremely useful. It is always 
satisfied if the rest of the condition is satisfied, but only permits a unique set of bindings for the two named 
variables. This will be discussed more in the example below. 

The actions of the production rules are executed once for each set of variable values that satisfies the condition. 
The action consists simply of a list of action forms which arc either functions built in to PPS, such as ADDDB and 
DELDB which add or delete a clause from the database, or a uscr-defmed function. The arguments to these functions 
can be any normal lisp arguments, pattern variable names, or action local variable names (prefixed with "'^O which 
arc scoped within the action. ThcGc local variables arc quite useful, for example, to pass values from one action 
function to anothcn 

action « (action-form action-form action-forr. ...) 

action-form - (ADDDB clause) or (DELDB clause) or 

(<user-cief ined function> argument argument ...) 

User-defined functions must return specified values as follows: 

NIL - normally should be returned 

<string> - halts the interpreter, returning <string> 



21 



(addlist deletelist) - addlist is a list of clauses to be added to the database, 

deleteiist ic clauses to be deleted from the database 

OvcrvUw of PPS. Ilie basic coix^ept of PPS can be found in the Covrigaro and 
be described only very briefly. The essence of the rete maich algorithm is to compile a set of production rules into a 
data-flow network. The condiuons of the rules are used to construct the networiq the subpattcms in the conditions 
correspond to nodes in the network, and the flnal output nodes correspond to the individual production rules. When 
an individual item is added to or removed from the database, it is passed into the daia*flow network, and the relevant 
nodes are updated Adding an item to the database may result in the node for a rule being updated, and so that rule 
may be fired, or cease to fire. 

For a large set of rules, the data-flow network is fairly large and complex. But the rete match principle is to 
save as much computation as possible Lom one database updating to the next That is, simple ways of 
implementing a production rule interpreter involve recomputing all nuuches every time the database is modified. 
However, the rete network maintains the current state of the database in terms of the patterns that are dready 
matched Modifying the database involves updating the states only of the particular patterns that are affected by the 
changed item. 

Each node in the rete match networic is either off or on. If it is on, it means that items exist in the database 
corresponding to that node. If the pauem includes variables, then a node that is on will also have an associated list 
of the bindings of those variables that satisfy the pattern. When the production system is first started, the nodes are 
all in an '*empty'* and off state. When a node changes state, change information is sent to all of the successor nodes 
in the network and those nodes are correspordingly updated Whether ornot a production rule fires depends on 
whether or not the node corresponding to a rule gets updated to an on or off state. 

When a production rule fires it is fired with all instantiations of the variable bindings. That is, if there are five 
ways the variables in the pattern can be assigned to make the condition true, the action of the production rule is 
executed once for each binding. Unlike some other production system interpreters, PPS has no data nfractoriness or 
cof^ct resolution. If a production rule has its conditions met, it will fire on that cycle regardless of whether it fired 
before or regardless of which other rules have their conditions met The production rule programmer must ensure 
that a rule does not fire when it is not supposed to. The examples given below show how this can be done. But 
this decision was made in ?fS because it was my experience that programming in more complex production 
systems was actually harder rather than easiet 

The PPS code is commented extremely heavily. To a great extent, it has been written so as to execute as fast as 
possible, but there are some known modifications which will eventually be made to improve the running speed. The 
"pps.lisp" file contains two top-level functions. One is the compiler function COMPILE-PS-FILE, and the other is 
the interpreter function INTERPRET-PS. 

The PPS compilen The c ipiler luncticn is given a file name and rule set name. The rule set name is 
simply appended to the beginning ol ^ch rule name, and makes it possible to have different sets of prxxluction rules 
defined at the same time with no name conflicts. This function calls various functions to first detect any obvious 
syntax errors, such as duplicate names, in the production rules. However there are some potentially nasty syntax 
errors that are not detected. Then odwr functions construct the data-flow network. 

In outline, the PPS compiler works as follows; Fu^t the patterns in all of the production rules arc used to build 
a discrimination networic for clauses that appear in the conditions. This results in a set of PATTERN nodes, one for 
each of the possible pauems that appear in the set of production rules. The predicate patterns are not treated in this 
fashion; they are attached to the rule node created for each rule. They take effect only after the rest of the pattern has 
been matched. After constructing the discriminaUon net and the pattern nodes, the compiler then goes through the 
production rules from first to last, and examines the first two patterns in the first production rule. It forms a 
combining node for these two patterns; usually an AND node, that, in a sense, performs a logical AND between 
these two patterns. Ttiat is, if both pauems are present in the database, the two PATTERN nodes will be ON. and 
the AND node will then detect that both patterns arc present, ai.d mm ON. The compiler will then look at the next 
pattern and fonn another AND node to combine this pattern with the previous pair of patterns. The compiler 



22 



continues in this fashion through the entire condition, and then goes on to the next production rule. However, 
before forming a new combining node, the compiler checks to see if those two patterns (or combinations of patterns) 
have already been formed If so it iqplaces the patterns with the name of the already*existing combining node. In 
this fashion, the compiler uses the network that has already been constructed, subjeci to !he constraint that it 
processes the patterns in the order that they are listed in the production rules. This re2>ults in a relatively fast 
compiling process compared to the alternatives, but the running speed depends heavily on whether the patterns were 
listed in an optimal order. Notice that one pattern being slightly different will cause the compiler to build additional 
network for the remainder of the production rule condition even if it overlaps heavily with preexisting patterns. 
Future revisions to PPS might include adding optimizers to improve the speed. 

Patterns containing NOT are handled fairly differently. A negated pattern results in the creation of a NEGATION 
combining node, which is asymmetrical. A NEGATION node has two inputs; one is the positive input 
corresponding to the rest of the condition, the other is the negative input from the negated pattern. The negated 
pattern may either be a single pattern node, or an AND node that combines several patterns togethet The negation 
node performs the analog of the function POSITIVE INPUT & -NEGATIVE INPUT. That is, it is ON only if the 
positive input is ON and the negative input is OFF 

These combining nodes have been described as if they were simple logical operators. However if the patterns 
involved have variables, the calculations done for a node are in tcmis of the variables. The notion is that an AND 
node is ON only if the two inputs have variables that have consistent bindings relative to a list of specified 
variables. Likewise a NEGATION node subtracts the bindings in the negative input from the bindings supplied by 
the positive input, over a set of specified variables, and is ON only if there are some bindings remaining. This 
process is described in more detail in the Covrigaru and Kieras report and also in the very heavy comments in the 
PPS source file. 

The combining network eventually terminates in RULE nodes, which are nodes for the the individual rules. A 
RULE node is ON if the production rule is to be fired in this cycle, and OFF if not The bindings arriving at the 
RULE node are passed through any predicate patterns that have been specified and if any bindings are left over, then 
the rule node is ON; otherwise OFF. 

The PPS interpreter. Each cycle of the production rule mtcrprcicr consists of first finding out which 
production rules have their conditions satisfied, and then executing their actions. First, all of the clauses to be 
deleted from the database are processed* and then all of the clauses to be added ^ This 
results in the updating of the RULE nodes. The production rules that are now to be fired are then known, as so the 
actions of each rule are executed. This results in a new set of clauses to be deleted from or added to the database and 
the process is repeated. The production rule interprcicr halts if no production rules arc fired 

The updating of the database is done by passing each individual clause into the rctc-match network. Each clause 
is sorted to the pattern node at the bottom of the discrimination network. If the pattern node changes state, the 
successor nodes, which arc either AND nodes or NEGATION nodes, arc then updated. If these combining nodes 
change state, then their surcessors are updated, and so forth, until we may update a RULE node. This process is 
repeated for each clause. When the production actions are executed, the list of bindings arc used in a COMMON 
USP PROGV function to dynamically scope and bind the pattern variables and any local action variables, and 
sequentially evaluate the actions. 

PPS outputs and displays. Action functions currently in CCS produce output messages, such as 
criticisms to the output file. Other functions can be readily defined, but be sure to observe the conventions described 
above for what action functions must return. In the context of CCS most of these action functions should return 
NIL, but if you want to update the database with such a function, you need to return the list consisting of the add I) si 
and delete list of clauses. 

In a verbose trace, PPS shows on each cycle the current contents of the database, showing those clauses whose 
first item is a member of the TAGS-TO-TRACE list supplied as an argument to INTERPRETPS. It then lists 
which niles have fired, and sho*-*^ he variable bindings for each rule, and lists the actions performed by the rule. 
Using this verbose trace one can diagnose exactly why a rule does or docs not fire. A terse race simply lists the 




23 



rules that were Tired or each cycle. It is possible to control the interpreter so that it runs stcp-by-stcp, or halts after 
running a certain number of cycles and so forth, but these are rarely necessary to use. 



Some important control variables art PPS:nX}P-LEVEl OUTPin; which causes various internal PPS 
messages to appear in your top-level USP window. PPS:*TOP-LEVEL-ALL-OUTPUT will send all output to the 
top-level window, both PPS messages and the contents of the terse and verbose traces* PPS:* VERBOSE-TRACE 
and PPS:*TERSE-TRAC£ turn on and off the verbose and terse traces. In my implementation, the verbose and terse 
traces can each be written to a separate Apollo window; if you have implemented the window functions on your 
platform, there are various variables that would hold the window name for the different traces. 

One last output facility is the variable PPS:*DBCONTENTS. This symbol is used to store the property list 
copy of the database, to make it available outside of the PPS intf-pretet This requires some explanation. Within 
the rete match framework, the contents of the database is actually stored implicitly as the contents of all of the 
PATTERN nodes in the network. However if code outside of the PPS inter(mter wants to know what is in the 
database independently of the production rule matching mechanism, it needs to determine which clause patterns are 
present One way to do this would be to examine all of the PATTERN nodes in the network; however this would be 
relatively slow. In addition, one might want to have clauses in the database that do not have PATTERN nodes. That 
is, a PATTERN node only exists if that pattern appeared in a production rule c<'/ndition. If a production rule action 
adds something to the database that no other production rule tests in its condition, there will not be a PATTERN 
node that matches that clause. PPS will simply print out a message that the clause was not matched. But it is 
sometimes useful to add things to the database even if they are not going to be tested later, such as recording some 
conclusbn of interest io the user. 

For all of these reasons, there is a separate copy of the database maintained 2S the property list of the symbol 
PPS:*DBCONTENTS. When a clause is added to or deleted from the database property list of this symbol is 
updated The flrst item of the clause (the **tag") is used as the property name. This copy of the database is used in 
the debugging display of the verbose trace, and is also accessed by the reference nKxiule. The apparent inefficiency of 
two copies of the database seems to be justified by the greater processing speed; a search of a property list is much 
faster than examining all of the individual PATTERN nodes. However, future implementations may want to 
reconsider this decision. 



ERLC 



24 



3. MAINTENANCE EXAMPLES 



3.1 An Introductory ^^^ample: Elided Verb Phrase Problem 

This introductory example shows a small and single correction to the grammat T^hnical details of the process 
appear in later examples. The presenting symptom of this problem is that the following sentence does not parse: 
On the receipt of the call, the station addressed should hoist the answering pennant at the dip. 

The apparent problem is the word addressed after the station. If the word addressed is left out, then the sentence 
parses normally Examining the granimar, this word is supposed to be handled by the network SELIDED- 
VERBPHR, which is called by SRELCLAUSE, which is called by SNP-SIMPLE. Since this simply does not seem 
to be happening, a parser TERSE-TRACE of the simple sentence The station addressed is big was used to find out 
whether the correct sequence of calls was being performed (see below). This revealed that SELIMD-VP was indeed 
called on the word addressed and addressed was recognized as a verb past participle (VERB-PSP) by SVERB-PSP. 
But then it suddenly becomes clear, both from the trace and by taking a closer kx4c at the grammar, that the passive 
form of the elided verb phrase networic insists that there be a complement to the verb, SVCOMP-PASSIVE. This 
means that the sentence The station addressed by the ship is big should parse conectly, which it does. So the 
problem in this case is that the grammar was defined too restrictively. 

A trial fix of this will be done simply by making the complement q)tional. However, it was noted in the 
grammar file that the complement was optional in previous versions, and the grammar had bee*} iriodified to make it 
mandatory. There is no record for why this change was made. We will go ahead and make the change and see what 
happens; we will have to be on the alert for various misparses that might result from this change. So, in the 
grammar file, the original fonn of the network SELIDED-VP-PASSIVE: 

(NET-DEF SELIDED-VP-PASSIVE 

<- (SVERBMOD-PASSIVE) SV£RB-?SP SVCCMP- PASSIVE - (SVERBMOD-PASSIVE) 



This sort of situation is perhaps one of the hardest to deal with in parsing; the grammar is not quite capturing the 
important constraints, and one finds oneself oscillating between different grammars, depending on which sample one 
is woridng with. It is possible that the ch^ge was previously made to make up for a lack of constraints elsewhere 
in the grammar, and so now the grammar can be expressed in the new, more general form- The only way to really 
tell will be to try to parse the same large set of sample sentences as before, to see whether something is now no 
longer working properly. 



3.2 A Detailed Example: Quoted Noun Phrases 

The problem. This example shows in detail how to add a whole new network to the grammar. Along the 
way, a uivial error is made that occasions tracing the parser and examining the acoial ATN, before the trivial error is 
realized. 

This problem presented itsCif with sentences from an NPRDC sample in which terms were enclosed in quotation 
marks. Thus a sentence like the following would fail to parse: "Range" is the minimum distance from which an 
observer can see the light. This sentence completely failed to parse although is clearly a very simple sentence. 
The first step is to characterize tlie problem. Inspecting the grammar definition revealed that the only place in which 
quotations marics were used was the S APPSTRING network and the only place this networic was referenced was in 



will be changed to: 



(NET-DEF SELIDED-VP-PASSIVE 

(- (SVERBHOD-PASSrVE) SVERS-PS? - (SVCCMP-PASSIVE) - (SVERBMOD-PASSIVE) 



25 




ERLC 



the SNP-SIMPLE network, where it is one of the options that could appear after the head noun in the slot normally 
occupied by a relative clause. Thus this sentence would parse: The value "range" is the minimum distance from 
which an observer can see the light. Likewise, trying the offending sentence without the quotation marks produces a 
correa parse. Thus it is clear that the only problem is the appearance of the quotation marics around the entire noun 
phrase. 

Modifying the grammar. Once the problem is understood, the next step is to arrive at some specifications 
of how the sentence should be analyzed. Qcariy, quoting a word is intended to convey something, so we should not 
simply ignore the quotation marks, but should convey some semantic content Finally, the quotation marks should 
have minimal impact oa how the parsing is done. A simple first-draft solution is to foUow a general principle: try 
to make use of existing structure wherever possible. In this case a new network is simply defined that allows a no^m 
phrase to be surrounded by quotation marks, and a reference to it inserted into the definition for a noun phrase; it is 
simply a recursive statement that one form of a noun phrase would simply be a noim phrase surrounded by quotation 
maiics. This is a fairly general solution which would allow the different kinds of noun phrases, such as SNP-PAIR, 
SNP-LIST, or even SNP-STATEMENT to appear in quotati jn marks. Thus the following is the original grammar 
code: 

iSET-DE? SN? rREGISTERS (:T£S7£D {??0ST-V£a3) ) 

<SN?-?Aia / s.s?-s:y?i£ / snp-list / sn?-state«ent> 

) 

k is changed to the following: 

{SE7-D£F SS? :. LISTERS {: TESTED {??0ST-VEil3) ) 

{SS?-?hX?. / SN?-SI.M?LE / SS?-L:S7 / SN?-STATE3f£.ST / :\- SN? !\-) 

Although this change is very simple, the basic decision is whether to define a new network, or simply elaborate the 
existing one. The argument in favor of defining a new network, such as one called SQUOTED-NP, is that a new 
network constitutes a distinct structure which the semantics module can then quite easily identify. The argument for 
just elaborating the existing network Ls basically one of avoiding proliferation of routines. One way to make the 
decision is to examine the semantics module code in "proposilions.lisp" to determine how the eventual modifications 
that well need can be most easil v made. Examining the code for SNP shows that this routine has an extremely 
simple structure, just simply a call for each constinient, and so it looks like a better way to implement our quoted- 
np would be to define a sqjarate network. So our second draft of the grammar code is the following: 

(NcT-OE? SN*? r.^EGISTERS (iTESTED (??0ST-VER3> ) 

(SN?-?AI,R / SN?-S:.M?L£ / SN7-LIST / SNP-STATEyENT / SQUCTED-N?) 

1 

Then the following new network definition is also included (this turns out to contain a syntax error): 

(SE7-DEF SQUOTED-N? : TESTED {?PCST-VER3) 
{:\- SN? :\-) 

) 

At this point, the tested register for the parsed verb also needs to be specified here in order to ensure that the parser 
lakes this register setting into account The basic reason why we know to do this is simply a matter of symmetry; 
all of ihe other noun phrase nets have this specified on it and there is no apparent reason why this one should not 
have it specified as well. 

Testing the modification. Once the grammar is modified, the next step is to test the ^^rammar definition 
by using the convenience functions in Ae top level of CCS. Making any such modifications is always simplified 
by working first with the parser until it is producing the dc- 'red parse, followed by modifying the semantics module, 
and then finally dealing with the criticism production rules. If any modifications need to be made to the reference 
module, they should also be done before the criticism rules. 

A convenience function is provided in CCS for quick loads of a file named "grammathig"; after starting CCS, 
the function (LOAD-COMPILE- HLG) is executed. This loads and compiles the current version of the grammar file. 



2' 2: 



The HLG compiler prints out a list of the network names as it compiles them. Each network name appears before 
the compilation process is started, so if the compiler fails the problem is almost certainly somewhere in the 
definition of the last network name printed. The HLG compiler has only very weak error detection facilities; it 
catches most syntax errors, but does not provide much in the way of useful feedback. Perhaps the best suggestion 
for how to ensure that the syntax for the network is correct is to base new networics on modifications of existing 
ones. 



Once the new network definition is compiled, invoke the convenience function (PARSE). This will prompt for 
a sentence and show the results of the parse directly on the display, and will not do any of the other processing in 
CCS. This allows for quick exploration of different parses. Start with a simple sentence that tests whether the 
grammar as a whole is still working, without intentionally involving the modified code. Thus in the example 
below, our first sentence will be very similar to our second test sentence, but witliout the quote marks. 



When using the (PARSE) function, the preprocessor is not involved. For this reason, the input sentence must 
be LISP-readable, meaning that it has to be enclosed in parentheses, and punctuation needs to be separated from 
words and indicated with a backslash character to prevent it being interpreted as part of LISP syntax. Our test 
sentence yields a correct parse, in which range is considered the first noun phrase in a declarativv* statement 

Enter sentence or STOP: 

(RANGE IS THE DISTANCE \. >END-0^-SENTE^^CE) 
Parsing Transitions: 230 
((DECIARATIVE-STATEMEtn (NOUN RANGE) 

( (BE-FORM IS) ( (DEPDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE) ) ) ) 
\.) 

(PARSER:: SUCCESS 
(S START 
(SSTATEMENT 
(SSTATEMENT-SIMPLE 
(SDECLARATIVE-STATEMENT (SNP (SNP-SIMPLE ..OUN RANGE) ) ) 
(SCLSPREO 
(SCLSPRED-SIMPLE 
(SCOPPHR (SCOPSEQ (BE-PORM IS)) 
(SCOPCOMP 
(SCOPCOMP- SIMPLE 
(SNP 

(SNP-SIMPLE (DEFDET THE) 

(NOUN DISTANCE) ))))))))) 

\.) 

> END-OP- SENTENCE) ) 



Now we'll try surrounding the word range with quotation marks. Only as before, the quotation marks need to be 
separated out for the parse. It is clear that we are in trouble right from the beginning, because the parser takes a long 
time to re..um the result that there is a grammar problem: 

Enter sentence jr STOP: 

(X" range \* is the distance \.) 

(ri RANGE ri IS THE DISTANCE \. >END-OP-SENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 1033 

(GRA^^^AR-PROBLEM (PUNCTUATION t"|) (NOUN RANGE) (PUNCTUATION I")) 

({BE-PORM IS) ((DEFDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE))) (PUNCTUATION \.)) 
(PARSER:: SUCCESS 

(SSTART 

(SGRAWiAR-PROBLEM (PUNCTUATION ri) (SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (NOUN RANGE))) 
(PUNCTUATION | - | ) 
(SCLSPRED 
(SCLSPRED-SIMPLE 
(SCOPPHR (SCOPSEQ (BE-PORM IS) ) 
(SCOPCOMP 
(SCOPCOMP-SIMPLE 
(SNP {<5NP-SIMPLE (DEPDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE) )))))) ) 
(PUNCTUATION \.)) 

>£ND-OP-SENTENCE) ) 



The top-level network in the output is the grammar problem network; the quote marks are tagged as punctuation by 
this network, and range is shown as a noun phrase surrounded simply by quote marie punctuation. So for some 
reason, a quoted NP network was not invoked properly here. Trying a couple of variations of the sentence, such as 
quoting the distance instead of range showed that the failure to parse the quoted NP appeared no matter where the 



ERIC 



27 

29 



quoted noun phrase appeared in the sentence. Trying something simpler of course is always a good idea, so the 
definilion of SQUOTED-NP was changed from the recursive call to SNP to simply $NP-SIMPLE as shown below: 



(NET-DEF $QOOTED-NP : TESTED (7P0ST-VERB) 
(!\" $NP-SIMPLE !\-) 

) 

The same sentence again still fails after reloading and compiling the grammar This is very puzzling; it certainly 
should work. So it is time to bring out the big guns and do some tracing. 

Tracing a parse. The source Hie for the parser, "parsenlisp", includes a list of some tracing flag variables, 
which cause various traces to be printed out One that is generally useful for Finding out what is going on is 
♦TERSE-TRACE. This should allow us to tell when and why the QUOTED-NP networic is called and whether it 
fails. However quite a bit of output is generated, so depending on your woricstation. you need to make arrangements 
to be able to review this output The tracing variable name is defined as part of the PARSER package so we need to 
(SETQ PARSER:*TERSE-TRACE T). 

When we try our failing sentence, the result is a few thousand lines of output Below is a sample of the flrst 
few lines with some explanation: 

Terse 0 0" First -time call: SSTART 

Terse 10" First -time call: SSENTENC "-TOO-COMPLEX 

Terse 2 0 - Failed back to #s (PARSER: :NET-FRAME :NET-NAME $SENTp:NCE-TOO-COMPLEX : INVCKING-ARC #s (PARSER: : ARC-FRAME 
:STATE SSTART :LAST-ARC 0 :POSITION 0) :STARTING-POSITION 0 :C'1ART-ENTRY-USED NIL : SCOPED-REGISTER-VALUES (2PER ON- 
NUMBER INITIAL-VALUE)) 

Terse 2 0 " At No-more-paths from $SENTENCE-T00-COMPLEX 
Terse 2 0" Call completely falls: SSENTENCE-TOO-CCMPLEX 
Terse 2 0" first-time call: SHEADING 

The word Terse is simply an identifier of which trace output this is. The first number is the contents of 
'TRANSITION-COUNTER, which counts how mariy transitions (arc crossings) through the ATN have been done. 
This counter is used to time out the parser and is a crude metric of how much parsing etTort is required for a sentence. 
The second number is the current position pointer in the sentence, in which the first word is numbered 0. Following 
this number is the current constituent, normally a word, only here it is a quote mark. The next item in the line is 
the string firsHime call which means tliai this is the first lime the call to the following network SSTART is made. 
In the next line we see that there is a first-time call to the $SENTENCE-TOO-COMPLEX networic. which is what 
the grammar definilion specifies as the first thing the parser should chect The next line of trace output shows that 
we failed back to the calling frame on the slack for $SENTENCE-TOO-COMPLEX. in other words we were not able 
to parse using this network. The next line means that there are no more alternative ways of trying to parse that 
network, and the next line shows that tlie call to it completely fails. The next line shows that we have a first-lime 
call to the SHEADING network, which is the next item specified by the grammar: 

What we are interested in. of course, is the attempt to call the noun phrase network in the context of a 
declarative statement This is in the vicinity of transition number 12. where we have a first-lime call to 
SDECLARATIVE-STATEMENT followed by a first- lime call to SNR Then we see that the parser begins to try 
every possible pathway out of every possible network. At transition 55 we find the following information: 

Terse 55 0 Plrst-tlme call: SQUOTED-NP 

Terse 56 0 Palled back to #3 (PARSER: : NET-FRAME :NET-NAME SQOOTED-NP : INVOKING-ARC #s (PARSER: lARC-PRAME :STATE SNP 
: LAST-ARC 4 : POSITION Q\ : STARTING-POSITION 0 : CHART-ENTRY-USED NIL : SCOPED-REGISTER-VALUES NIL) 
Terse 56 0 " At No-more-paths from SQUOTED-NP 
Terse 56 0 " Call completely falls: SQUOTED-NP 

Terse 56 0 " Palled back to #s (PARSER: :NET-PRAME :NEi.-NAME SNP : INVOKING-ARC #s(t»ARSER: :ARC-PRAME : STATE 
SDECLARATIVE-STATEMENT52 :LAST-ARC 0 :POSITION 0) tSTARTING-POSITION 0 :CHART-ENTRy-USED NIL : SCOP ED-REGISTER-VALUES 

aiL) 

Terse 56 0 At No-more-paths from SNP 
Terse 56 0 " Call completely falls: SNP 

Terse 56 0 " Palled back to #s (PARSER:: NET-FRAME :NET-NAME SDECLARATIVE-STATEMENT : INVOKING-ARr #s (PARSER: :ARC-PRAME 
:STATE SSTATEMENT-SIMPLE :LAST-ARC 1 :POSITION 0) : STARTING-POSITION 0 : CHART-ENTRY-USED NIL : SCOP ED-REGISTER-VALUES 
(2PEBS0N-NUMBER INITIAL-VALUE)) 

Terse 56 0 " At No -mo re -paths from SDECLARATIVE-STATEMENT 
Terse 56 0 " Call completely falls: SDECLARATIVE-STATEI^ENT 



ERLC 



28 3 J 



This is pretty disturbing; it shows very clearly that we called the SQUOTED-NP network and we failed to make any 
progress with it This is not supposed to happen. So at this point, we will get very detailed, and along the way, 
illustrate how one actually looks at the compiled network. 

Examining the ATN. The network can be examined simply by looking at the values of the symbols for 
the nodes in the ATN. Or to put it differently, the ATN is represented by values assigned to the node name symbols. 
The node name for the beginning node of each network Is simply the name of the networic, so evaluating 
SQUOTED-NP gives us this value: 

> SOUOTED-NP 

(#S (PARSER:: ARC :TYPE PARSER:: LEX : VALUE : TESTED :NEXT SQUOTED-NP163) ) 

The value of a node symbol is a structure, and the various keywcxd items in the structure are the values assigned to 
the various slots in the structure. The first item, here PARS£R::ARC, is simply the type of structure; namely a 
structure specifying an arc. The type of the arc comes next; it is a LEX arc, which means that it tests for a lexical 
item. The puzzling thing here is that the value slot is empty, meaning that no value was ever assigned, which is 
abnormal. In contrast, look at the value assigned to $NP-PAIR: 

> SNP-PAIR 

(#S (PARSER:: ARC :TYPE PARSER: : WORD :VALUE BOTH :NEXT SNP-PAIR136) 
#S (PARSER:: ARC :TYPE PARSER: : WORD IVAIUE EITHER :NEXT SNP-PAIR142) 
#S (PARSER:: ARC :TyPE PARSER: :WORD :VALUE NEITHER :NEXT SNP-PAIR147) 
#S (PARSER:: ARC :TYPE PARSER: : WORD : VALUE WHETHER :NEXT SNP-PAIR152) ) 

\Vfe see that this consists of four arc structures, where the type is WORD, where we are testing for a specific word in 
this case both» either, neither, or whether Thus it is clear that something went wrong in the parser compiler; our 
first arc should be testing for a quote maifc The network SAPPSTRING ^parently works correctly and tesis for 
quote marks. Taking a look at SAPPSTRING seems to be a good idea: 

> SAPPSTRING 

(#S (PARSER:: ARC :TYPE PARSER: :WORD zVALUE ri :NEXT SAPPSTRING221) ) 

This is exactly what the value of SQUOTED-NP is supposed to be. Let's fmd out what the HLG compiler is 
doing. 

Checking the compiler. The HLG compiler contains the key function EXPRESSION, which does the 
work of compiling each HLG expression. Examining the code, we see that if the first character of the first term in 
the expression is a "!," EXPRESSION it is supposed to call another function WORD-TEST. So the brute force 
approach, which the Apollo platform supports reasonably well, is simply to LISP-tracc the functions 
PARSER::EXPRESSION and PARSER::WORD-TEST and simply wait for our SQUOTED-NP networks to come 
by. Comparing SAPPSTRING and SQUOTED-NP will allow us to see whether the compiler is doing what it 
should We need not wait for the entire compilation to complete, but can simply stop it aiftcr those netwoiks have 
been traced. 

Oops! As usual, brute force debugging reveals that a simple error was the problem. My error turns out 
embarrassingly to be nothing more than a syntax error in specifying the register in the SQUOTED-NP definition. 
The defmition for SQUOTED-NP should have included the keyword :REGISTERS, and so should have read as 
follows: 

(fJET-DEF SOUOTED-NP :REGISTERS <:TESTED (?POST«VERB) ) 
('\- SNP-SIMPLE '\-) 

After cleaning up and recompiling the grammar definition, we are ready to get back to where we were supposed 
to have been, and find out if the sentence "/?an^e"w//i^dfjtonctf is parsed correctly. It does! The correct parsing 
output is shown below: 




29 



31 



(\* range \- is the distance \.) 

{|"| RANGE 1-1 IS THE DISTANCE \. >EKD-Or-SENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 2B9 

( (DECURATIVE-STATEMENT {1*1 (NOUN RANGE) !»t) 

((BE-FORM IS) ((DEPDET THE) (NCUN DISTANCE)))) 
\.) 

(PARSER:: SUCCESS 
(SSTART 
(S STATEMENT 
(SST^TEMENT-SIMPLE 
($DECLARAT IVE- STATEMENT 
($NP (SQUOTED-NP |-| ($NP-SIMPLE (NOUN RANGE)) |"|)) 
($CLSPREO 
($CLSPREO-SIMPLE 
($COPPHR ($COPSEQ (BE-PORN IS)) 
($COPCOMP 
(SCOPCOMP-SIMPLE 
($NP ($NP-SIMPLE (DEFOET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE) )))))))) ) 

\.) 

>END-Or-SENTENCE) ) 



This parses correctly, but it uses our debugging fom of $QUOTED-NP in which only $NP-SIMPLE was allowed; 
let's find out if our original nr)ore general definition will work: 



(NET-DEF SQUOTED-NP :REGISTERS (:TESTEO (7P0ST-VERB) ) 
(!\- SNP !\") 

I 

This £^pears to work; the initial noun phrase in the sentence is parsed as SNP containing SQUOTED-NP containing 
SNP which contains SNP-SIMPLE. 

Checking the lexicon. Let's try something a little more elaborate: "Maximum visible range" is the 
distance. This fails to parse, producing the following output: 



Enter sentence or STOP: 

(\- K\XIMUM VISIBLE RANGE \" IS THE DISTANCE \.) 

(ri MMCIMUM VISIBLE RANGE I"! IS THE DISTANCE \. >EN0-OP-SENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 1323 

(CRW«AR-PROBLEM (PUNCTUATION r I) (NOON MAXIMUM) ( (ADJ VISIBLE) (NOUN RANGE) ) 
(PUNCTUATION 1-|) ( (BE- FORM IS) ( (DEFDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE))) 
(PUNCTUATION \.)) 

(PARSER:: SUCCESS 
($ START 

(SGRAifiAR- PROBLEM (PUNCTUATION ri) ($NP ($NP-SIMPLE (NOUN MAXIMUM))) 
(SNP 

('•5NP-SIMPLE (^ADJ ($ADJ-SIMPLE (ADJ VISIBLE))) 
(NOUN RANGE))) 
(PUNCTUATION I "I) 
($CLSPRED 
(SCLSPREO-SIMPLE 
($COPPHR ($COPSEQ (BE-PORM IS)) 
(SCOPCOMP 
(SCOPCOKP-SIMPLE 
($NP ($NP-SIMPLE (DEPDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE) )))))) ) 
(PUNCTUATION \,)) 

> END-OP-SENTENCE) ) 



Examining this output uncovers the fact that maximum parsed as a noun, whereas visible was recognized as an 
adjective. Any time a puzzling parse result like this appears, one should always check the lexicon contents to make 
sure that words have the proper parts of speech assigned to them. This is easily done at run time just by using 
SYMBOL-PUST to look at the properties of the wont 

> (SYMBGL-PLIST 'MAXIMUM) 
(WORD T ROOT T NOUN (MAXIMUM) ) 

)\fe sec that the word maximum is only defined as a noun, so maybe that is why our last test failed to parse; we can 
tell from the definition of the SNP-SIMPLE that a noun followed by an adjective followed by a noun is not 
recognized as a legitimate noun phrase. This could be a general problem, excq)t that we know that maximum 
should be listed as an adjective. We make a note to update the lexicon, and try our test sentence again with a 
different word instead of maximum. In this case we get a correct parse: 



ERIC 



Enter sentence or STOP: 

(\- USABLE VISIBLE RANGE \- IS THE DISTANCE \.) 



(ri USABLE VISIBLE RANGE n IS THE DISTANCE \. >END-Or-SENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 317 

((DECLAMTm-STATCMENT (|«| ( (ADJ USABLE) (ADJ VISIBLE) (NOUK RANGE) ) |"|} 

((B£»FORM IS) ((DEFDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE)))) 
\.) 

tPARSER:: SUCCESS 
(SSTART 
(S STATEMENT 
(SSTATEMENT-SIMPLE 
(SDECLARAT I VE - STAT EMENT 
(SNP 

($QUOTED-NP I-l 
(SNP 

(SNP-SIMPLE (SAOJ (SADJ-SIMPLE (ADJ Uf ABLE) ) ) 

(SADJ (SADJ-SIKPLE (ADJ VISIBLE) ) ) (NOUN RANGE) ) ) 

l-D) 
(SCLSPREO 
(SCLSPREO-SIMPLE 
(SCOPPHR (SCOPSEQ (BE-PORM IS)) 
(SCOPCOMP 
(SCOPCOMP-SIMPLE 
(SNP ($NP-SIKPLE (DEFDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE))))))}))) 

\.) 

>END-Or-SENTENCE) ) 



Modifying the semantics. It looks like our parsing nf k is now succeeding. So now it is time to 
move on to the semantics module, the file '^propositions Jisp**, to maku the ^propriate modifications there. Our 
first modification will be very simple, to simply add a call to $QUOT£E)*NP as one of the constituents that SNP 
will look fot So the following original code will be modified: 



(DEF7RAN SNP NIL (REPS PVPNPPHRLINKS) (REPS PVPNPPHRLINKS) 

;hlg: 

(SNP-SIMPLE / SNP-LIST / SNP-PAIR / SNP-STATEMENT) 
;RErs, a list of created referents, is returned 
(SCANFOR 

(CONSTITUENT SNP-LIST (REFS) ) 
(CONSTITUENT SNP-PAIR (REPS) ) 
(CONSTITUrST SNP-STATEMENT (REFS)) 
(CONSTITUENT 3NP-SIMPU (REPS PVPNPPHRUNKS) ) 
) 



The syntax of the DEFTRAN macro needs some explanation. The macro is defmed ai the head of the 
'•propositions.lisp" file and is extensively commented. Here only a brief summary will bi given. Basically, 
functions in the semantics module uranslate the parse tree output of the parser into pieces of simple list structure 
based on Anderson's (1976) ACT rq)rcsentation. The parse tree is simply an embedded list of lists, where each list 
is headed by the name of the networic that was invoked at that point in the parse. Each netwoiic has a corresponding 
function which analyzes the piece of the parse tree corresponding to the netv^ork. The:^ functions simply take the 
contents of the remainder of the Ust and analyze the subparts. Eventually, a function is called that analyzes the basic 
word-level constituents, and assembles a set of ACT links to represent the prc^sitional, content of that portion of 
the sentence. The macros DEFTRAN, SCANFOR, CONSTITUENT, and TERMINAL were defined to make these 
functions very easy to write by exptoiting their highly repetitive and stereotyped nature. 

The original SNP function shown above is defmed as taking no input arguments, having local variables REFS 
and PVPNPPHRLINKS, and returns those two variables (using the multiple-value facility in COMMON LISP). 
Corresponding to the grammar defmition, a noun phrase consists of one of the five listed constituents. The 
SCANFOR macro simply iterates through the contents of the SNP tree, and depending on which constituent is 
encountered, the function is called to analyzed the sub-nelworic Each function gets only the piece of the tree that it 
needs to work on. Thus, for example, SNP-SIMPLE is called, and the va!ues of REFS and PVPNPPHRLINKS are 
to be returned. Our new SQUOTED-NP network should simply return the same values. So our new version of SNP 
is as follows: 

(DEPTRAN SNP NIL (REPS PVPNPPHRLINKS) (REPS PVPNPPHRLINKS) 

;hlg: 

(snp-pair / snp-simple / snp -li st / snp-statement / r^uoteo-np) 
;REPS, a list of created referents, Is returned 
(SCANPOR 

(CONSTITUENT SNP-LIST (REPS)) 
(CONSTITUENT SNP-PAIR (REPS)) 



ERLC 



31 

33 



(CONSTITUDTT 5NP-STATEMENT (REFS>) 
(CONSTITUENT SNP-SIMPLE (REFS PVPNPPHRLINKS) ) 
(CONSTITUEKT $QUOTED-NP (REFS PVPNPPHRLINKS)) 
) 
) 



A general fact about these functions to be noted is that any constituents in the tree that are not actually scanned 
for and analyzed are simply ignored Thus our definition of SQUOTED-NP is potentially extremely simple. An 
easy way to get the skeleton for a new function is to simply copy an existing one. The new function is as follows: 



(DEFTRAN SQUOTED-NP NIL (REFS PVPNPPHRLINKS) (REFS PVPNPPHRLINKS) 

;hlg: 

(!\- $NP !\*) 
(SCAN FOR 

(CONSTITUENT $NP (REFS PVPNPPHRLf S) 

(DOLIST (REF REFS) (NEW-LINK '(TAG ,REF QUOTED-NP) ) ) ) 

) 
) 

All this function does is simply call the original SN? network and returns everything from that network would do. 
However, presumably a noun phrase is quoted for some good reason which our criticism rules or integration rules 
may want to take into account For this reason, the referents created by the noun phrase network will be tagged as a 
quoted noun phrase. Thus, the body of the CONSTITUENT macro call includes a DOLIST where each referent 
returned by $NP has attached to it the tag that it was part of a quoted noun phrase. Then if we choose, this tag could 
be made use of by the criticism rules. 

Tbsting our new version of the proposition functions can be done very easily by simply reading into a running 
CCS image the new definitions of the SNP and SQUOTED-NP functions. On the Apollo this is done simply by 
doing a copy-paste to the LISP input window running CCS. Alternatively, one could simply load 
'*propositions.lisp** to redefine all oS the functions in the semantics module. 

Once the new functions arc loaded, it is then time to test to see if the correct set of propositions is defined. The 
top-level function (PROPOSITIONS) is like (PARSE), except the next step in the irocessing is done. The parse 
tree is handed to the semantics module and the returned propositions are displayed. This ou^ut is shown below: 

> (PROPOSITIONS) 



Enter sentence or STOP: 

(\- RANGE \- IS THE DISTANCE \.) 

(ri RANGE l-l IS THE DISTANCE \. >END-OF-SENTENCE) 
Parsin9 Transitions: 293 

((DECLARATIVE-STATEMENT (|-| (NOUN RANGE) I" I) 

((BE-FORM IS) ((DEFOET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE)))) 
\.) 

(PARSER:: SUCCESS 
{$ START 
(SSTATEMENT 
(SSTATEMENT-SIMPtE 
( SDECLARATIVE- STATEMENT 
(SNP ($QUOTED-NP |-| (SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (NOUN RANGE))) fl)) 
(SCLSPREO 
(SC:5PRED-SIMPLE 
(SCOPPHR (SCOPSEQ (BE-FORM IS)) 
(SCOPCCMP 
(SCOPCCMP-SIMPLE 
(SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (DEFDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE) ))))))))) 

\.) 

>END-OF-SENTENCE) ) 
Pronoun antecedents: 
NIL 

ACT propositions: 

((S PROPl REFl) (P PROPl RANGE) (S PR0P3 REFl) (P PR0P3 REF2) (S PR0P2 REF2) 
(P PR0P2 DISTANCE)) 

ALL Propositions: 

((TAG PR0P3 SENTENCE-MAIN) (TAG REFl QUOTED-NP) (TAG REFl COMPLETELY-NEW) 
(TAG REFl NEW-REFERENT) (TAG REFl NP-REFERENT) (TAG PROPl NP-PROP) 
(S PROPl REFl) (P PROPl RANGE) (TAG PROPl HEAD-NOUN) (TAG REFl NOOETERMINER) 
(NUMBER REFl SINGULAR) (GENDER REFl N) (SRF REFl (RANGE)) (HNF REFl RANGE) 
(NP-PROP-NUMBER REFl 1) (TAG REFl STATEMENT-SUBJECT) (S PR0P3 REFl) 
(P PR0P3 REF2) (TAG REF2 COMPLETELY -NEW) (TAG REF2 NEW- REFERENT* 
(TAG REF2 NP-REFERENT) (TAG PROP 2 NP-PROP) (S PROP 2 REF2) (P PROP 2 DISTANCE) 



32 



(TAG PR0P2 HEAD-NOUN) (TAG REP2 DEFINITE) (NUMBER REP2 SINGULAR) 
(GEfn^ER REr2 N) (SRP REP2 (DISTANCE)) (HNP REP2 DISTANCE) 
(NP -PROP-NUMBER REP2 1) (TAG PR0P3 STATEMENT-MAIN) 
(TAG SENTENCE-PROP- NUMBER 3)) 



It is often helpful to draw a semantic network diagram of the proposition links. The ACT propositions contain just 
the basic ACT links. Here we sec that referent 1 (REFl) has predicated of it with PROPl that it is range, and also 
with PR0P3 that it is REF2, which in turn has predicated (PR0P3) of it that it is distance. So this is saying that 
range has the property of being a distance, which is a correct semantic structure. 



The list of all propositions shows the various tags that are attached to these basic links. Many of these tags are 
used by the criticism rules and also play a role in reference resolution. Here what we are concerned with is whether 
our new tag of QUOTED-NP was aUached to the correct place. Sure enough, the item (TAG REFl QUOTED-NP) 
appears in the list So we have successfully modified the piopositions file. 



Tracing semantics functions. If things had not gone well, a good approach is to trace the individual 
functions in the semantics module, such as SNP and SNP-SIMPLE, as well as our new function SQUOTED-NP, to 
examine the tree structure that is handed to each function and whether the anticipated results were reuuned. This 
output for the same sentence is shown below: 



(N** RANGE \- IS THE DISTANCE \.) 

(1*1 RANGE |-| IS THE DISTANCE \. > END-OP -SENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 293 

((DECLARATIVE-STATEMENT (ri (NOUN RANGE) I"!) 

( (BE-PORM IS) ((DEPDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE)))) 
\.) 

(PARSER:: SUCCESS 
($ START 

(v^TATE2^E^fr 

(SSTATEMENT-SIMPLE 
( SDECIARATXVE- STATEMENT 
(5NP (SQUOTEO-NP ri (SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (NOUN RANGE))) j"!)) 
($CLSPRED 
(SCLSP RED-SIMPLE 
(SCOPPHR ($COPSEQ (BE-FORM IS)) 
($COPCOMP 
($COPC0MP-SIMPLE 
(SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (DEPDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE) )))))))) ) 

\.) 

> END-OP-SENTENCE) ) 
Pronoun antecedents: 

(NON-SUBJECT (SINGULAR (N (REP2) ) ) SUBJECT (SINGULAR (N (REPl)))) 
0: (SNP (($QU0TEO-NP n (SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (NOUN RANGE))) I"!))) 
I: (SOUOTED-NP (I -I (SNP (SNP-SIMPLE (NOUN RANGE) ) ) j"!)) 
2: (SNP ((SNP-SIMPLE (NOUN RANGE) )) ) 
3: (SNP-SIMPLE ( (NOUN RANGE) ) ) 

3: returned ((TAG REP3 COMPLETELY-NEW) (TAG REP3 NEW-REPERENT) 
(TAG REP3 NP-REPERENT) (TAG PR0P4 NP-PROP) (S PR0P4 REP3) 
(P PR0P4 RANGE) (TAG PROP 4 HEAD-NOUN) (TAG REP3 NODETERMINER) 
(NUMBER REr3 SINGULAR) (GENDER REP3 N) (SRF REP3 (RANGE)) 
(HNP REP3 RANGE) (NP-PROP-NUMBER REP3 1)) (REP3) NIL 
2: returned ( (TAG REP3 COMPLETELY-NEW) (TAG REP3 NEW-REPERENT) 

(TAG REP3 NP-REPERENT) (TAG PR0P4 NP-PROP) (S PR0P4 REP3) 
(P PR0P4 RANGE) (TAG PR0P4 HEAD-NOUN) (TAG REP3 NODETERMINER) 
(NUMBER REP3 SINGUUR) (GENDER REP3 N) (SRP REP3 (RANGE)) 
(HNP REP3 RANGE) (NP-PROP-NUMBER REP3 I)) (REP3) NIL 
I: returned ((TAG REP3 QUOTED-NP) (TAG REP3 CCMPLETELY-NEW) (TAG REP3 NEW-REPERENT) 
(TAG REP3 NP-REPERENT) (TAG PR0P4 NP-PROP) (S PRCP4 REP3) 
(P PR0P4 RANGE) (TAG PR0P4 HEAO-NOUN) (TAG REP3 NODETERMINER) 
(NUMBER REP3 SINGULAR) (GENDER REP3 N) (SRF REP3 (RANGE)) 
(HNP REP3 RANGE) (NP-PROP-NUMBER REP3 I)) (REP3) NIL 
returned ((TAG REP3 QUOTED-NP) (TAG REP3 COMPLETELY-NEW) (TAG REP3 NEW-REPERENT) 
(TAG REP3 NP-REPERENT) (TAG PR0P4 NP-PROP) (S PR0P4 REP3) 
(P PR0P4 RANGE) (TAG PROP 4 HEAD-NOUN) (TAG REP3 NODETERMINER) 
(NUMBER REP3 SINGULAR) (GENDER REP3 N) (SRP REPS (RANGE)) 
(HNP REP3 RANGE) (NP-PROP-NUMBER REP3 D) (RLP3) NIL 
0: (SNP ( (SNP-SIMPLE (DEPDET THE) (NOUN DISTANCE) ) ) ) 

ACT Propositions: 

((S PR0P4 REF3) (P PR0P4 RANGE) (S PR0P6 REP3) (P PR0P6 REP4) (S PRuPS REP4) 
(P PROPS DISTANCE)) 



35 



For brevity, the trace was abbreviated for the second noun pJuase, and the ALL propositions output was deleted. But 
here you can see in each level of the trace thai the first call to SNP was given a piece of tree begin: ^ng with 
SQUOTED-NR The SQUOTED-NP function was then given a piece of tree starting with a quote niark and 
including SNP. Our SQUOTED-NP function ignored the quote maik (which is redundant with the fact that we are in 
the SQUOTED-NP function), and the SNP function was then handed the tree beginning SNP-SIMPLE, which 
function was in turn handed the tree that just included (NOUN RANGE). SNP-SIMPLE then returned the bulk of 
the propositions and SQUOTED-NP simply added the QUOTED-NP tag. 

Conclusion. The revision that we have at this point thus allows a quoted noun phrase to appear anywhere a 
noun phrase would appear, builds the same structure would if the quotes had not appeared, except the referent of the 
noun phrase is tagged as having appeared as a quoted noun phrase. This would suffice to simply allow sentences of 
quoted noun phrases to be analyzed as if the quotes had not appeared. However if we wish to pay attention in the 
criticism rules to the quoted noun phrases we need to have some notion of what comment or criticism we should 
make. 

Subsequent trials showed that this set of definitions was defective, because the quote marks are required to 
enclose the entire noun phrase. So The "range** is the distance would fail. So these definitions were discarded in 
favor of simply allowing quote marics to appear inside SNP-SIMPLE, whose semantics function then adds the tag if 
it finds a quote mark. 



3.3 A Summary Example: Imperative Copulative Sentences 

The following sentence failed to parse - there was no provision for imperative sentences based on the verb to be: 
Be aware that this situation could arise. 

The original imperative statement network called a network for handling the special form of an imperative 
statement verb and its complement: 

(Sl.T-DEP S IMPERATIVE-STATEMENT :REGISTERS (rSCOPEO (7PERS0N-NUMBER 7P0ST-VERB) ) 
(- (SINITIAI^VERBMOO - (!\,)) SIMPERATIVE-VERBPHR) 

) 

W: could handle our problem by just calling SCOPPHR, which is the nwworic that analyzes the general copulative 
predicate phrase. The problem is that it accepts a variety of constructions that would be ungrammaticai in this form, 
such as Are aware that this situation could arise. The corresponding problem is why imperative sentences were 
defined with the specialized imperative verb phrase network. We will try the same pattern here, where the copulative 
phrase for imperative sentences will require an infinitive form of the verb to be and will otherwise be similar in 
structure to SCOPPHR. 

Here is the new fomi of SIMPERATI VE-STATEMENT and the new network SIMPERATI VE-COPPHR: 

(NET-DEF SIMPERATI VE-STATEMENT :REGISTERS CSCOPED (?PERSON-KUMBER ?POST-VERfl) ) 
(- (SINITIAL-VERBMOD - (!\,)) 

{ SIMPERATI VE-VERBPHR / SIHPERATIVE-COPPHR) ) 

) 

(NET-DEF SIMPERATIVE-COPPHR 
OE-IHF - (SVERBMCX)) SCOPCCMP - (SVERBMOD) ) 

) 

The new nets appeared to woric correctly, so the next step is to modify the semantics code. Below is the original 
form of the SIMPERATIVE-STATEMENT function- 

(DEFTRAN SIMPERATIVE-STATEMENT NIL 
(REF PROPS RELS MAIN-PROPS REL-NODES) 
(MAIN-PROPS) 

/output is the main proposition no<Je(s) from the clause predicates 
(SETQ REF 'SELF) 

(NEW-UNK * (TAG , REF STATEMENT-SUBJECT) ) 
(SCANFOft 



34 



(CONSTITUENT (SIMPERATIVE-VERBPHR STS .GENERAL-VERBPHR) 

((PROPS REL-NODES) (NIL REF 'UNSPECIFIED)) 
(SETQ MAIN-PROPS (APPEND MA >-PROPS PROPS)) 
(SETQ REL-NODES (APPEND REL-NOOES RELS))) 
) 

;Xf thtre were initial verb modifiers, apply them to each clause predicate 

;inain proposition and rel-node. We don't care about the propositions for the verb modifiers 

; themselves 

(SCANFOR 

(CONSTITUENT (SINITIAL-VERBMOD 5VERBM0D) (NIL (MAIN-PROP*? REL-NODES))) 
) 

♦•Maybo only one of MAIN-PROPS should get returned as the naln proposition 
> 

This function aiustraies a useful rschnique and principle. Notice how the constituent SIMPERATIVE-VERBPHR is 
actually processed by the function STS.GENERAL-VERBPHR. Once the grammar has properly parsed a particular 
string, the constraints that the grammar imposes are no longer relevant to how the semantic structure should be built 
for the parse u^ce. Thus, STS.GENERAL-VERBPHR is a function that builds semantic structurc for a very broad 
class of verb phrases, being quite unconcerned with what syntactic constraints should be present Thus the 
constraints of grammar need only be reflected in the grammar definition, not in the propositions functions. The new 
imperative statement function takes advantage of the same principle to analyze the output of the new 
SIMPERATIVE-COPPHR networic just by using the existing the existing SCOPPHR function: 

(DEFTRAN SIMPERATIVE^STATEMENT NIL 
(REF PROPS RELS MAIN-PROPS REL-NODES) 
(MAIN-PROPS) 

♦'output is the main proposition node(s) from the clause predicates 
ISETQ REF 'SELF) 

(NEW-LINK * (TAG ,REF STATEMENT-SUBJECT)) 
(SCANFOR 

(CONSTITUENT (SIMPERATIVE-VERBPHR STS .C£NER>»L-VERBPHR) 
((PROPS REL-NOOES) (NIL REF 'UNSPECIFIED)) 

(SETQ MAIN-PROPS (APPEND MAIN-PROPS PROPS)) 

(SETQ REL-NOOES (APPEND REL-NOOES RELS))) 
(CONSTITUENT (SIMPERATIVE-COPPHR SCOPPHR) ( (PROPS) (REF) ) 

(SETQ MAIN-PROPS (APPEND MAIN-PROPS PROPS) ) 
;ma)ce REL-NODES the same as props to show that all VERBMODS will be attached to 
.'propositions 

(SETQ REL-NOOES (APPEND REL-NOOES PROPS))) 

) 

;if there were initial verb modifiers, apply them to each clause predicate 

;nain proposition and rel-node. We don't care about the propositions for the verb modifiers 

;thGres elves 

(SCANFOR 

jtCONSTITUENT (SINITLAL-VERBMOD SVERBMOD) (NIL (MAIN-PROPS REL-NOOES))) 

;TAG that these wore expressed imperatively 

(DOLIST (PROP MAIN-PROPS) (NEW-LINK '(TAG .PROP IMPERATIVE))) 

♦'Maybe only one of MAIN-PROPS should get returned as the main proposition 

This set of modifications appears to work correctly but Uic parse and propositions arc still not correct for the original 
sentence Be aware that this situation could arise. A basic reason why is that for some inexplicable reason awcre is 
shown in the lexicon only as a noun. But the sentence Be happy that this situation could arise also fails to parse, 
and we now see that the copulative sentence form will not allow the sentences of the form subject <subject> is 
<adjective> thai <staiemenr>. This is another substantial hole in the grammar, but one that did not previously 
appear. Incorporating this requires first, a modification to the grammar to allow this tyoe of sentence to appear, and 
second, a further addition to the propositions function for copulative complements tiiat builds a cause relationship 
between the embedded statement and the outer proposition. Such sentences arc actually a form of complex sentence, 
being paraphrasable as Because this situation could arise, be aware. Thus a better place to make this set of changes 
might be to form a new kind of complex sentence; however the new definitions would then be nearly duplicated 
between this type of complex sentence and this imperative form of copulative sentence. So instead, the changes 
were made to SCOPCOMP-SIMPLF. 'ind its corresponding propositions functions. These changes are not shown in 
this example. 



37 



3.4. Adding a SimpSe Criticism Rule 



The new criticism. This example is a simple very one, and is perhaps not very realistic, but it will serve 
to introduce the basic ideas about how one goes about adding a new criticism rule to the system. 

Consider this sentence from an actual piece of Navy material: The proper installation and maintenance cf the 
various electrical systems aboard ship are very important to the electrician's mate. The basic form of this sentence 
is Cables are important to the electricians mate. Such sentences can be criticized being "weak" sentences. The 
author probably had something more pertinent in mind but could not express it very well. The object of this 
example will be to install a criticism rule that will detect and comment on sentences like this. We will base the rule 
on a fairly specific form, namely, the use of the adjective important in a sentence based on the verb to be: that is, 
sentences of the form <subject> <is> important <other material>. Of course some simpler text-criticism programs 
could detect such patterns, but this system could detect this basic structure even if the word important is surrounded 
by a variety of other material. 

Checking available information. The Hrst step is to determine whether the parser and the senumtics 
module already supply the necessary infonnation. The way to do this is to use the interactive mode of CCS, and try 
various sample sentences and examine the parse output and the propositions output For example, the sentence The 
job is important produces the following output: 

> (propositions) 

Enter s«nC«nce or STOP; 
(the job Is Important \.) 

ITHE JOB IS IMPORTANT \. >END-Or-$ENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 164 

((DECLARATIVE- STATEMENT {(DEFDET THE) (NOUN JOB)) 

(rSE-FORM IS) (ADJ IMPORTANT))) 
\.) 

(PARSER: ;SUCCESS 
($START 
($STATEMENT 
($STATEMENT-SIMPLE 
(SDECLARATIVE- STATEMENT ($NP ($NP-SIMPLE (DEFDET THE) (NOUN JOB))) 
(SCLSPRED 
(SCLSP RED-SIMPLE 
. (5C0PPHR (SCOPSEQ (BE-FORM IS)) 
(SCOPCOMP 
($COPCCMP-SIMPLE 
($ADJ (SADJ-SIMPLE (ADJ IMPORTANT) ))))))))) 

\ . ) 

>END-OF-SEin'£NCE) ) 
Pronoun antecedent 
NIL 

ACT Propositions: 

((S PROPl REFl) (P PROP! JOB) (S PR0P2 REFl) (? PR0P2 IMPORTANT)) 
ALL Propositions: 

((TAG PRC?2 SENTENCE-MAIN) (TAG REFl COMPLETELY- NEW) (TAG REFl NEW-REFERENTJ 
(TAG REFl NP-REFERENT) (TAG PROPl NP-PROP) (S PROPl REFl) (P PROPl JOB) 
(TAG PROPl HEAD-NOUN) (TAG REFl DEFINITE) (NUMBER REFl SINGULAR) 
(GENDER RETl N) (SRF REFl (JOB)) (HNF REFl JOB) (NP-PROP-NUMBER REFl 1) 
(TAG REFl STATEMENT- SUBJECT) (S PR0P2 REFl) (P PR0P2 IMPORTANT) 
(TAG PR0P2 STATEMENT-MAIN) (TAG SENTENCE- PROP -NUMBER 2)) 

Here we see that the basic structure of a sentence that simply modifies something as being important is an S 
link to a referent and a P link to the picdicate IMPORTANT. But note that a sentence like The important job is 
difficult would also show something as being modified by IMPORTANT. To distinguish these two cases, the 
SENTENCE-MAIN lag can be used. In the above example, we sec thai this tag is attached to PR0P2, which is the 
proposition node for the IMPORTANT predicate. There arc other potentially useful tags as well. The 
STATEMENT-MAIN and STATEMENT-SUBJECT r^gi; idftnufy the main proposition and subject of all statements 
embedded or top-level. However, the SENTENCE-MAIN tag is the one we want to use here because it identifies the 
top-level statement 

Adding the new rule. The second step is to di^t a prx>duction rule for the criticism that matches the pattern 
that we have chosen from the propositions and insert this into the set of production rules. 



36 



Examining the produciion rules file '^compsys.prs" shows a first section tilled "Grammatical and sentence-level 
criticisms". The criticism that we have in mind is basically a criticism at the level of the single sentence, as 
opposed to criticisms about the referential content of the sentence, or how it relates to the topic structure. 
Examining further, we see a rule relativdyck>se to the one we wou^ NEGAIBD-MAIN 
CLAUSE* which criticizes a sentence whose main clause is negated, such as The job is not important. This rule is 
shown below: 

(NCCATEO>KA I N<>CLAUSE 
IF ((STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE-LEVEL) 
(SM TAG ?P1 SENTENCE-MAIN) 
(SM S ?P2 ?P1) (SM P ?P2 FALSE) ) 
THEN ( (WRITE-MESSACE NECATED-MAIN-CLAUSE CRITICISM 

*Thtt main clause of this sentence Is negative, which can be hard to understand. « 

*%Can you rewrite the sentence Into a positive form?** 
•Try to rewrite Into positive forro.") 



An explanation of this rule will help in constructing the new rule. The first term in the expression is simpiy 
the name of the rule; then there is the symbol IF, followed by an expression for the production rule condition, and 
then the symbol THEN followed by the production rule action. The components of the condition, the clauses, 
simply match a pattern in the Sentence Memory (indicated by the term SM), which contains the proposition links of 
the sentence. The first clause is a piece of control information; other production rules cause clauses like this one to 
be put in to or taken out of the production system database in order to control the order in which the rules fire. 

The paucm that this rule looks for is that the SENTENCE-MAIN proposition node, which is assigned to the 
variable ?P1 , has attached to it another proposition, ?P2, that has the predicate FALSE. If the pattern is present for 
some values of the variables ?P1 and ?P2, this rule fires and the message is output 

The message consists of two strings, which follow the rules for the COMMON USP FORMAT function. The 
first string is the verbose message form, and the second is the terse laessage form. The first argument of the 
WRITE-MESSAGE function is a lag that identifies the message. This is used by the verbose/terse mechanism to 
determine whether this message has been delivered before. The second argument is cither CRmaSM or 
INFORMATION, which is used by the output options mechanism to determine whether only criticism messages or 
both criticism and information messages appeac 

Our new rule for weak sentences will clearly be very similar to this one; the only difference is that instead of 
testing for a false predication on the nuiin proposition, we will simply be testing for whether the main proposition 
consisted of the predicate IMPORTANT. Here is our draft production nile: 

(OF-COURSE- 1 T- 1 S- IMPORTANT 
IF ( (STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE-LEVEL) 
(SM TAG ?P1 SENTENCE-MAIN) 
(SM P ?P1 mPORTANT) ) 
THEN ( (WRITE-MESSACE WEAK-SENTENCE CRITICISM 

"The luln clause of this sentence simply says that socnethlng Is Important,-- 

*%Can you nake the sentence more to the point?** 
"Try to make more to the point.") 

)) 

This title for the rule is flippant, but it is normally invisible to the user. The wording of the message tag 
WEAK-SENTENCE and the actual message text needs to be chosen carefully, because this is the interface between 
the user and CCS. If these messages do not convey the meaning of the criticism, and what the writer should do 
about it, then the criticism will not be useful. These arc not issues of programming, so they will not be dealt with 
further here. 

will insert the new rule into the "compsys.prs" file right after the negated main clause rule. Generally, it is 
not very important where the rule appears in the production system file, because the production system interpreter 
does not rely on ordering of the rules. However, for ease of programming it is best to group related rules together. 

Testing the new rate. After the new nile has been inserted into the file, we are ready to try it out The 
only provision for installing a new rule is to compile and install the entire set of production rules. The way to do 




37 




this on a permanent basts is to build a new iniage of CCS. However, this is very time consuming, so a better 
debugging strategy is to invoke CCS and temporarily recompile and install the production rule set using the 
convenience function (LOAIKX)MPILE-PS). Ibis gives the result shown below: 

> (lo«d*cQnipil«*pi) 

RULE CCKPIIXO: CPS-CRITICIZE-SENTENCE-LEVEL 
RULE COMPILED: CPS -SENTENCE -NONPARS ABLE 

RULE COMPILED: CPS-MISSINC-DETERMINERS 
RULE COMPILED: CPS-NEGATED-HAIN*CUUSE 
RULE COMPILED: CPS-OF-COURSE-IT-IS- IMPORTANT 
RUU COMPILED: CPS-MOLTIPIX-NEGATION 

RULE COMPILED: CPS-CtEANUP-FIVES 
RULE COMPILED: CPS-PROCESS ING-DONE 
"PPS cofRplUtlon don«" 
> 

Something to look for is whether the new rule is listed as compiled which is the case here* If something is 
seriously wrong with the syntax of the rule* enor messages will normally appear; if nothing happens, or the 
compiler hangs, one should of course suspect the new rule, and the list of whkh rules are compiled can tell you how 
far along the compiler got before the problem appeared. 

wiil now try out our new rule by invoking the interactive convenience function (CRITICIZE) and providing 
an input sentence. Debugging aids for this step show the trace of the production system as it is executing. These 
can be turned on by means of the global variables listed in the file **ccs-buildJisp**. In paiticular, the variables 
PPS:*VERBOSE-TRACE and PPS:*TERSE-TRACE turn on and ofif a verbose or terse trace of the production 
system activity. If you do not have the multiple window facilities implemented, then you will be interested in the 
variable M>S:*TOP-LEVEL- ALL-OUTPUT which, if non-NEU causes the contents of the verbose trace and terse 
trace to appear on the top-level LISP window. The best strategy is to try running a new rule set without any tracing, 
especially if the change is fairly simple, because the traces are quite lengthy Here is the results from trying out our 
new rule without tracing: 

> (critlclztt) 

Ent«r Mnt«nc« or STOP: 
(thtt ship is important \.) 

(THE SHIP IS IMPORTANT \. >ENO-or-SENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 169 
Pronoun antttc«d«nts: 

SIL 

ACT Propositions: 

as PROPl REFl) (P PROPl SHIP) (S PR0P2 REFl) (P PR0P2 IMPORTANT)) 
ALL Propositions: 

({TAG PR0P2 SENTENCE-MAIN) (TAG REFl COMPLETELY-NEW) (TAG REFl NEW-REFERENT) 
(TAG Rtri NP-REFERENT) (TAG PROPl NP-PROP) (S PROPl REFl) (P PROPl SHIP) 
(TAG PROPl HEAD*NOUN) (TAG REFl DEFINITE) (NIMBER REFl SINGULAR) 
(GENDER RETl N) (SRT REFl (SHIP)) (HNF REFl SHIP) (NP-PROP -NUMBER REFl I) 
(TAG RETl STATEMENT-SUBJECT) (S PR0P2 REFl) (P PR0P2 IMPORTANT) 
(TAG PR0P2 STATEMENT-MAIN) (TAG SENTENCE- PROP-KUMBER 2)) 

WEAK-SENlcSCE 

Th« aain clau • of this sentence simply says that sooething is important. 
Can you aake the sentence more to the point? 



Success! Our new rule fired right away. If it hadnX we would need to debug using the trace. For this next 
example I deliberately crippled the rule to keep it from working. We set up the trace and start the criticism: 

(OF-COURSE-IT-IS -IMPORTANT 
IF ( (STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE-LEVEL) 
(SM TAG ?P1 MAIN-PROPOSITION) 
(SM P ?pl aMPORTANT) ) 
THEN ( (HRITE-MESSACE WEAK-SENTENCE CRITICISM 

•The main clause of this sentence simply says that something is important, - 
*ICan you make the sentence more to the point?" 
•Try to make more to the point.") 




> (secq pps:*topievel-ali-outpuc 7) 



T 

> (secq pps:*verbose-crace T) 



T 

> (criticize) 



Enter sentence or STOP: 



(the ship is import anc \.) 

A very large amount of material appears; this is a good place to use any "dribble'* facilities in your LISP 
implementation. The output consists of a listing of the contents of the production system database on each 
production system cycle, along with a list of which rules were fired and what the variable bindings were for them. 
Here is shown just the output from the relevant cycle. We know what the lelevant cycle is because we know that the 
rule will only trigger if the clause (STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE-LEVEL) is present So we simply find the 
cycle in which we have the corresponding step listed as database contents. In this example this turns out to be on 
cycle 2; the trace is shown below: 



(S7E? CRITICIZE SE!n"ESCE-LEVEL) 

WM 

L7M 

?M 

(PM TAG UNSP EC in ED-GLOBAL-TOPIC GLOBAL-TOPIC) 

(PM TAG UNSPECIPIED-SUBTOPIC SUBTOPIC) 

(PM TAG UNSPECIPIED-PARAGHAPH-TOPIC PAFAGRAPH-TOPIC) 

(P.M TAG UNSPEC IFIE D- LOCAL-TOPIC LOCAL-TOPIC) 

(PM TOPIC-STRUCTURE UNSPECIPIEO-GLOBAL-TOPIC UNSPEClFIED-SUaTOPlC) 

(PM TOPIC-STRUCTURE UNSPECIPIED-SUBTCPIC UNSPtCIPIED-PARAGRAPH-TCPiC) 

(PM TOPIC-STRUCTURE UNSPECI PI ED-PARAGRAPH-TOPIC UNSPECI PIED-LOCAL-TOPIC) 

(?M TAG UNSPECI PIED-SUBTOP I C CURRENT- SUBTOPIC) 

(?M TAG UNSPECIPIED-PARAGRAPH-TOPIC CJRRENT-PARAGRAPH-TOPIC) 

(PM TAG UNSPECI PI ED- LOCAL-TOPIC CURRENT-LOCAL-TOPIC) 

SM 

(SM TAG PR0P2 SENTENCE-MAIN) 

(SM TAG REFl COMPLETELY-NrW) 

(SM TAG REFl NEW-REPERENT) 

(SM TAG REFl NP -REFERENT) 

(SM TAG PROPl NP-PROP) 

(SM S PROPl REFl) 

(SM P PROPl SHIP) 

(SM TAG PROPl HEAD-NOUN) 

(SM TAG REFl DEFINITE) 

(SM NUMBER REFl SINGULAR) 

(SM GENDER REPl N) 

(SM SRP REPl (SHIP)) 

(SM HNP REPl SHIP) 

(SM NP-PROP -NUMBER REFl 1) 

(SM TAG REFl STATEMENT- SUBJECT) 

(SM S PR0P2 REPl) 

(SM P PROP 2 IMPORTANT) 

(SM TAG PR0P2 STATEMENT-MAIN) 

(SM TAG SENTENCE-PROP-NTWBER 2) 

cc^!ME^^r 

rired: 

CPS - P I ND -S ENTENCE-SUBJECT- 1 

CPS-NOMINATE -Nrrf-MAIN-P ROP -ANTECEDENT- 2 

CPS-OUTPUT-SENTENCE-LEVEL 
Rule Plred: CPS-PINO-SENTENCE-SUBJECT-1 
Bindings: ((?P PR0P2 ?R REPl)) 
Rule Actions: 

ADD: (SM TAG REPl SENTENCE-SUBJECT) 

Rule Pired: CPS-NOMINATE-NEW-MAIN-PROP-ANTECEDENT-2 

Bindings: ((?P PR0P2 ?R REPl ?N LMPORTANT) ) 

Rule Actions: 

Rule Pired: CPS-OUTPUT-SENTENCE-LEVEL 
Rule Actions: 

DELETE: (STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE-LEVEL) 
ADO: (STEP OUTPUT SENTENCE-LEVEL) 



The first part is the different categories of information present in the production system database. By 



convention, the first item in a clause (the "tag") is the "type" of information. In CCS, two especially important 
types are PM for passage memory and SM for sentence memory. So this is the cycle on which our rule is 



cycle 2 

GOAL 

STEP 



39 



ERLC 




supposed to fire. If we look down to the list of rules that arc fired, we sec that our new rule did not fire. To find out 
why, we compare each clause in the rule with the contents of PM and SM to determine if indeed the clauses were 
present Most errors in programming production rules are in writing a condition that is not in fact satisfied when it 
is $ui^)osed to be» either because previous rules or previous processing did not insert the right clauses, or because the 
rule tests for the wrong clauses. 

Systematically looking at the clauses in our rule we see that the STEP clause is present, but looking for the 
clauses starting with SM TAG, we see that there is no clause containing MAIN PROPOSITION, which this 
erroneous version of the rule tests for. On the other hand we see thai there is defmitely a clause that matches the one 
about a proposition being important So our only difHculty hero is that the defective rule looks for MAIM- 
PROPOSmON when it should be looking for SENTENCE-MAIN, which is, of course, what our original rule 
tested foe If we make this change then the rule should work again. 

Below is the condensed trace from a correct rule: 

cycle 2 

GOAL 

STEP 

(STEP CRITICIZE SEKTEKCE- LEVEL) 

LTM 
?.M 

SM* 

(SK TAG PROP 2 SENTENCE-MAIN) 

(SM TAG REFl STATEMENT-SUBJECT) 

{SM S ?aOP2 REFl) 

(SM ? PR0P2 IMPORTANT) 

(SM TAG PR0P2 STATE24ENT-MAIN) 
COW-ENT 
Fired: 

CPS-OF-COURSE-IT-I S- IMPORTANT 

CPS-FIND-SENTENCE-SUBJECT- 1 

CPS-NCHINATE-NEW-MAIN-PROP-ANTECEDENT-2 

CPS-OUTPUT-SENTENCE-LEVEL 
Rule Fired: CPS-OF-COURSE-IT- IS- IMPORTANT 
Bindings: ((?P1 PR0P2) ) 
Rule Actions: 

The aain clause of this sentence simply say that something is iirportant 
Can you malce the sentence more ro the point? 

WEAK^SENTENCE 

The main clause of this sentence simply says that scnething is Important, 
Can you malce the sentence more to the point? 
Rule Fired: CPS-FIND-SENTENCE*SUBJECT-l 
Bindings: ((?P PR0P2 ?R REFl)) 
Rule Actions: 

ADD: (SM TAG REFl SENTENCE-SUBJECT) 

Rule Fired: CPS-NOMINATE-NEW-MAIN-PROP -ANTE CEDENT- 2 

Bindings: ((?P PR0P2 ?R REFl ?N IMPORTANT)) 

Rule Actions: 

Rule Fired: CPS-OUTPUT-SENTENCE-LEVEL 
Rule Actions: 

DELETE: (STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE-LEVEL) 
add: (STEP OUTPUT SENTENCE-LEVEL) 

By way of a liule further explanation, the trace contains a list of the names of rules that have fired, and then for 
each fired rule, there is a list of the bindings of any variables that appeared in the rule. So we see for our new rule 
that the variable ?P1 was assigned to the value PR0P2. This list of binding information can be useful, especially 
when there are multiple bindings that satisfy a rule. Following the list of bindings is die rule actions, which in this 
case is the returned vali"* of the WRITE-MESSAGE function and the actual ouq)Ui of the WRTTE-MESSAGE 
function appears in the tq)-level window. The rest of the example shows other rules that were fired and what their 
bindings arc. Notice that one of the rules binds three different variables, and that some of the actions consist of 
adding and deleting step information to the database to lake the production system on to the next phase. 

Elaborating the new rule. Now that the rule appears to work, it is important to U7 it out on a variety of 
other sentences to gain confidence that it does what we want it to do. For example, here is a trial which shows how 
the CCS system can find the vacuous main proposition in spile of a relatively elaborate sentence: 




40 



Enter sentence or STOP: 

(the job performed by the electrician is always extremely important to the effectiveness 
of the ship in combat situations \.) 



WEAK-SENTENCE 

The main clause of this sentence simply says that something is important. 
Can you make the sentence more to the point? 

SENTENCE-TOO-BIG 

The sentence contains 13 propositions of new information, which may be too 
much to understand easily. Check whether all of the information is actually 
necessary at this point, and if so, try expressing it with smaller sentences. 



This sentence, which looks just like a typical piece of Navy writing, triggers both the weak sentence criticism 
and also the sentence-too-big criticism, among others. Notice that when testing sentences in Uiis situation, many 
criticisms will appear that are related to the coherence (or lack of it) of the sentence wiia previous material. 
Normally, you would ignore such messages, because you are testing single sentences out of context If we were 
testing for criticisms where context is imp :»iant of course, we would need to supply iH-evious sentences. 

Let's add a refinement to this rule that will also illustrate some of the other mechanisms available. Let*s have 
the rule identify the sentence subject Here is the revised production rule: 

(OF-COURSE- IT- IS- IMPORTANT 

IF ((STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE- LEVEL) 

(S.M TAG ?P1 SENTENCE-MAIN) 

(SM P ?P1 IMPORTANT) 

(SM S ?P1 ?R) 

(SM TAG ?R STATEMENT-SUBJECT) 

) 

THEN ((FRF-SM-PM ?R "R) 

(WRITE-MESSAGE WEAK-SENTENCE CRITICISM 
"The main clause of this sentence simply says that -A -A is Important, - 

-%Can you make the sentence more to the point?" 
•Try to say something more to the point about -A -A." 
?R *R) 

» 



The condition of this rule is elaborated to find the referent node, ?R, at the end of the S link from the 
proposition node, ?P1. ?R is also tagged as STATEMENT-SUBJECT. Thus ?R will be assigned the value of the 
referent node corresponding to the statement subject Then in the action of the rule, the function FRF-SM-PM 
looks in the production rule database for the special forms that are available for describing referents. It looks for the 
SRF form, which is a simple noun phrase word string that was actually used to introduce or describe the referent, or 
if that is not present, it looks for the HNK which is the original head noun used to describe the referent The 
purpose of this is to provide an intelligible description of the subject of the sentence. Simply showing "REF2" 
would not be very useful. 

in this example, the function takes a variable from the production rule condition, and finds the referential form, 
and supplies that to the value of the local action variable ^R. Note that the PPS interpreter requires local action 
variables to be designated with a "'^^ prefix; these are variables whose bindings exist only during the execution of a 
pioduction rule action. In contrast, the variables designated with a have values defined only over the entire 
production rule. Of course, other variables can be used, but then the programmer will be completely responsible for 
ensiuing that their values always have appropriate scope. 

The message in our rule follows FORMAT function rules to print out the values of these variables with -A 
items. By convention, whenever a referent is described, the actual node name (e.g., REFl) is printed first, followed 
by the referential form. 

When we install and test this rule, we get the following fancier output, which is shown here for a series of two 
sentences so that we can see both the verbose and terse forms of the criticism. The terse option means that the 
verbose form of the message appears the first time, and the terse form on later times. The philosophy of this is that 
the verbose message can be more explanatory to remind the user of what the criticism means and what to do about it. 
and then later appearances of the message can then be more compact 

ERLC 



(criticize) 



Selecced output options are; 

Output iMSMges are TERSE and CRITICAL-C^JLY 

*(th* ship is impoztant \.) 

WEAK*SENTENCE 

The main clause of this sentence simply s^ys that REPl SHIP Is Important, 
Can you make the sentence more to the pct.^t? 



Enter sentence or STOP: 

(the electrician Is also Important \«) 

WEAK-SENTENCE 

Try to say something more to the point about REr2 ELECTRICIAN. 



Notice that we now have a message that is perhaps a little more informative in that it identifies the subject of 
the sentence to the usen In very elaborate sentences this might help make the message more precise and persuasive. 
For example: 

(the job performed by the electrician during shipyard maintenance 
that might be required by battle damage ^s always extremely important 
to the effectiveness of the ship In combat situations \.) 

WEAK-SENTENCE 

Try to say something more to the point about REP3 JOB. 

3.5 Recognizing Possible Procedural Content 

A multiple^sentence criticism. The purpose of this example is to illustrate how to construct a 
complicated criticism. The new criticism is intended to recognize when prose text should be presented as a step-by- 
step procedure. The criticism is that if there are multiple imperative sentences within a paragraph^ then perhs^s the 
paragr2q)h should be writt^ as a step-by-step procedure. We wiU develop this criticism piecemeal. 

Evenuially we will need to know whether the imperative sentences are in the same paiagrq)h or not, but Hrst we 
need to just recognize multiple imperative sentences. So first let's see if the parser and semantics module already 
give us some markers for imperative s^tences that we can use in the new criticism rule. We do tliis by simply 
giving some sample sentences to the system and examining the output of the semantics module. We can do this 
with the convenience function (PROPOSITIONS). 

(propositions) 

Enter sentence or STOP: 

(first \, press the red button \.) 

(FIRST I,) PRESS THE RED BUTTON \. > END -OP -SENTENCE) 
Parsing Transitions: 477 
((IMPERATIVE-STATEMENT ((ADV FIRST) I, I) 

((VERB-INF PRESS) ( (DEFDET THE) (ADJ RED) (NOUN BUTTON)))) 
\.) 

(parser:: SUCCESS 

(SSTART 
($ STATEMENT 
(SSTATEMENT-SIMPLE 
($ IMPERATIVE-STATEMENT (SINITIAL-VERBMOD (ADV FIRST) |,|) 

(SIMPERATIVE-VERBPHR (SVERB-INF (VERB-INF PRESS)) 
(SVCOMP-ACTIVE 
(SNP 

(SNP-SIMPtX (DEFDET THE) 

(SADJ (SADJ-SIMPLE (ADJ RED) ) ) 
(NOUN BUTTON))))))) 

\.) 

>END-OF-SENTENCE) ) 
Pronoun antecedents: 
NIL 



O 42 

ERLC 



44 



ACT Propositions: 

((S PR0P3 TH£_R£AO£R} (P PR0P3 PR£D1) (R PREDl PRESS) (A PRCDl REPl) (S PROPl REPl) 
(? PROPl RED? (S PR0P2 REPl) (P PR0P2 BUTTON) (S PR0P4 PREDl) (P PR0P4 PIRST) ) 

ALIi Propositions: 

((TAG PR0P3 SENTENCE-MAIN) (TAG SELP STATEMENT- SUBJECT) (S PR0P3 SELF) 
(P PR0P3 PREDl) (R PREDl PRESD (A PREDl REPl) (TAG REPl COMPLETELY-NEW) 
(TAG REPl NEW-REFERENT) (TAG REPl NP-REFERENT) (TAG PROPl NP-PROP) 
(S PROPl REPl) (P PROPl RED) (TAG PR0P2 NP-PROP) (S PR0P2 REPl) 
(P PRwP2 BUTTON) (TAG PR0P2 HEvD-NOUN) (TAG REPl DEFINITE) 
(NUMBER REPl SINGULAR) (GENDER REPl N) (SRF REPl (RED BUTTON)) 
(HNF REPl BUTTON) (NP-PROP-NUKBER REPl 2) (S PR0P4 PREDl) (P PR0P4 FIRST) 
(TAG PR0P3 IMPERATIVE) (TAG PR0P3 STATEMENT-MAIN) (TAG SENTENCE-PROP-NUMBER 4)) 

The ACT propositions in the output show that this imperative sentence is analyzed as the reader 
(THE^READER) having a PRESS relationship to an item which is RED and is a BUTTON. The syntactic mariners 
are listed in the All Propositions output Notice that there is a tag that shows that PR0P3 is an imperative 
sentence. So apparently the parser and the semantics module already give us the markers that we need; all we need is 
a rule that looks for multiple instances of propositions tagged as imperative. 

First draft rule. We need to decide what we mean by multiple imperative sentences; let's just say if three 
imperative sentences appear, then we will trigger th.s criticism. We want the criticism to appear relatively late in 
the criticism process, where the relationship of the sentence to the rest of the passage is being commented upon. 
Examining the production rules, we see that a good place to try it will be at (STEP FINAL-REPORTS). At this 
point the last imperative sentence will still be in sentence memory (SM) but the previous two will be in passage 
memory (PM). Here is our first draft rule: 

(MULTIPLE-IMPERATIVES 
IP ((STEP FINAL-REPORTS) 

(SM TAG ?P1 IMPERATIVE) 

(PM TAG ?P2 IMPERATIVE) 

(PM TAG ?P3 IMPERATIVE) 

(DIPPERENT ?r2 ?P3) 

(UNIQUE ?P2 ?P3) 

) 

THEN ( (WRITE-MESSAGE POSSIBLE- PROCEDURE CRITICISM 

"Thre* Imperative sentences have appeared. Should this be a procedure?"* 
NIL) 

)) 



This rule needs some explanation; some of the more advanced features of PPS appear here. The rule looks for a 
pattern in which a proposition in sentence memory is tagged as imperative, and two propositions in passage memory 
are also tagged as imperative. The pattern predicate DIFFERENT requires that ?P2 and ?P3 be matched to different 
propositions. Without this predicate, the pattern matcher will find a match in which both of these variables are 
assigned to the same proposition, which of course is not what we want. In addition, the pattern matcher is very 
general and will give us a match in which ?P2 and ?P3 arc both assigned to two propositions, say PROPl and 
PR0P2, but with both possible assignments. That is, one match would have ?P2 = PR0P2 and ?P3 = PROPS, and 
then another match would have ?P2 = PR0P3 and ?P3 = PR0P2. Using the UNIQUE pattern predicate requires that 
only one set of unique assignments be given to ?P2 and ?P3. 

The action of the rule then will simply write out the message, called POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE, that three 
imperative sentences have appeared and asking whether this should be a procedure. Thus, this rule will fire on a 
match of one imperative sentence in sentence memory and two different ones in passage memory. 

However, the rule will only fire if the imperative tag is in passage memory. Normally the tags are thrown away 
when the semantic content of the sentence is added to PM, since the tags usually show just syntactic information 
about the sentence. So we need an additional rule to ensure that we keep the imperative tag around Looking at the 
prodaction rules, we see that the updating of PM is done at STEP UPDATE-PM. So the following simple rule will 
copy a?, imperative tag in SM to PM. 

/Save an Imperative tag 
(START-IMPLIED-REPERENT-HNP 
IF ((STEP UPDATE-PM) 

(SM TAG ?P IMPERATIVE) 

) 



THEN ((ADDDB (PM TAG ?P IMPERATIVE)) 
)) 



Now that we have installed our two rules we can then try them out using the criticize function. We will type in 
a series of simple imperative sentences and see if our rule fires* 

> (criticiza) 

Entar Mntanc* or STOP: 
(press thm r«d button \.) 



Enter sentence or STOP: 
(press the blue button \.) 



Enter sentence or STOP: 
(press the green button \.) 



POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE 

Three inperetlve sentences heve appeared. Should this be a procedure? 

Sure enough, the criticism spears after we have typed in three imperative sentences. But when we continue and 
type in a fourth sentence. Press the yellow button, the criticism appears again; moreover it spears twice: 

Enter sentence or STOP: 
(press the yellow button \.) 



P0SSIBLE*PROCE0URE 

Three imperative sentences have appeared. Should this be a procedure? 
POSSIBLE*PROCEOURE 

Three inperative sentences have appeared. Should this be a procedure? 

The lockout technique. Let's say we do not wp'tt the criticism to reappear, although it might be wise to 
keep pestering the writec But we certainly do not want the criticism appearing multiple times. Why is this 
happening? The reason why is that we now havj a total of four imperative sentences in CCS, three in PM and one 
in SM, and there are thus two combinations of these sentences in PM (the first and second, and the first and third) 
that« together with the fourth sentence in SM, match the pattern in our MULTIPLE*IMPERAnVES production rule. 
So the rule is fired twice, once for each combination of variable values. If we went on to add another sentence we 
would get even more repetitions of the message. We will prevent the rq)ctitions by using the lockout technique. 
^ will also modify the wording of the message a little bit as well. 

Something to remember about PPS is that unlike many other production rule interpreters, PPS is written to be 
very simple and very general. Thus it does not keep track of how many ways a production rule can fired now or 
whether it has been fired before* Rather any rule whose conditions are met will fire at any time. So a simple 
technique to ensure that a production rule fires only once is to have it add a piece of information to the database 
whose absence is tested in the condition: 

(HULTI PLE- IMPERATIVES 
IF ( (STEP FINAL-REPORTS) 

(SM TAG ?P1 IMPERATIVE) 

(PM TAG ?P2 IMPERATIVE) 

(PM TAG ?P3 IMPERATIVE) 

(DIFFERENT ?P2 ?P3) 

(UNIQUE ?P2 ?P3) 

(NOT (PM POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE) ) 

THEN ( (ADDDB (PM POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE) ) 

(WRITE-MESSACE POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE CRITICISM 
•Three Iraperetive sentences have appeared In this paragraph.* 
-Ishould It be written as a step-by-step procedure?" 
NIL) 

)) 



ERLC 



44 4Q 



The action of this rule adds to the PM database the symbol POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE. The condition clause of the 
rule with the NOT function tests for the absence of this symbol in PM. Thus, the rule will only fire if POSSIBLE- 
PROCEDURE is not in PM. When the rule fires, it adds POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE to PM, and so will not me 
again. 

lb save time when testing this revision, we will use the CRITICIZE-FILE function and put a sample test in a 
file called "tcsu" 



Press th« red button. Press the green button. Press the blue button. Press the 
yellow button. Qpen the v«lve. Close the door. 

Here in condensed form is the results of running CRITICIZE-FILE on this file: 

(crltldze-fUe "test") 
Press the red button. 

Press the green button. 

Press the blue button. 

POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE 

Three Imperative sentences have appeared. Should this paragrar^ be 
a step-by-step procedure? 

Press the yellow button. 

Open the valve. 

Close the door. 

Processed 6 sentences. 



So we sec that the POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE message appears as soon as we have entered three imperative 
statements, but it stays locked out for the rest of the passage. 

Paragraph sensitivity. >^fe want this criticism to apply to individual paragraphs. If the text is already 
written as a step-by-step procedure, then presumably each step will have been formatted as a separate paragraph, and 
so the criticism would not be uiggered. So we will arrange to clean up and reset the contents of PM whenever we 
start a new paragraph. 

The processing of paragraphs is part of the STEP CRITICIZE-TOPICALIZATION phase. This is where we 
process a new paragraph and we can cleanup there. If the first sentence of the paragraph happens to be an imperative 
sentence that tag will be copied into PM during the later UPDATE-PM step. We will try adding the following two 
rules to clear the imperative tags at the beginning of a paragraph and also to remove the POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE 
information when we start a new paragraph. Note that we have to do this in two separate rules, since we may have 
imperative tags present but not have triggered the POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE rule: 

(CLEAR-IK?ERAT I VE-TAGS-WHEN-PARAGRAPH 
IF ( (STEP CRITICIZE T0PICALI2ATI0N) 

(SH TAG ??? >PARAGRAPH) 

(PM TAG ?P IMPERATIVE) 



(CLEAR-POSS I BLE-PROCEDURE-WHEN-PARAGRAPH 
IF ((STEP CRITICIZE T0PICALI2ATI0N) 
(PH POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE) 

) 

THEN 

( (DELDB (PM POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE) ) 

)) 



THEN 



((DELDB (PH TAG ?P IMPERATIVE)) 



ERIC 



45 




The first rule detects the combination of something tagged as a paragraph; this is how the parser and semantics 
module process a text-formatting command designating the beginning of a new paragraph. The rule simply removes 
any and all imperative tags in PM. The second rule simply matches the POSSIBLE-PRCXXDURE clause and 
removes it 

A new lest file will make it easy to try this out The first paragraph will have just one imperative sentence in 
it; the second will have several and the third a couple of impcrati'^e sentences, and so forth. This way we can 
exercise our new criticism rule: 

•pp 

Th« naintenancc procedure must b« perfoxmed :x>rrectly. 
.pp 

Press the red button. Press the green button. Press 
the blue button. Press the yellow but ten. 

.pp 

Open the valve, close the door, 
.pp 

Closa the valve. Open the door. Shift th« strainer. 
Clean the filter. 

■ pp 

The maintenance Is now complete. Report to the duty officer. 

The following is a condensed form of the output Here we see that the new criticism is woricirig correctly; the 
second paragrs^h triggers the POSSIBI^-PRCXJEDURE criticism as does the fourth paragraph, and no others. 

.pp 

The mainteunce procedure must be performed correctly. 
•PP 

Press the red button. 
Press the green button. 
Press the blue button* 
POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE 

Three imperative sentences have appeared in this paragraph. 
Should it b« written as a step-by-step procedure? 

Press the yellow button. 

.pp 

Open the valve. 
Close the door. 
»PP 

Close the valve. 
Open the door. 
Shift the strainer. 
POSSIBLE- PROCEDURE 

Three imperative sentences have appeared in this paragraph. 
Should it be written as a step-by-step procedure? 

Clean the filter. 

.pp 

The maintenance is now complete. 
Report to the duty officer. 
Processed 13 sentences. 

Conclusion. Thus* this example shows not only how to add a specific rule criticism that delivers a message* 
but also rules make use of passage memory to keep track of information over multiple sentences, and how the rules 
can make use of the text-formatting commands in the input 




46 



4, CRITICISMS CURRENTLY PROVIDED BY CCS 



This listing is divided into sections cone^nding to the STEP clauses added and removed by the production 
rules. Each criticism is identified with the output message tag, and brieny described The actual messages produced 
are then listed. Messages identified with "Vf and are the verbose and terse message forms. If no verbose or 
terse forms arc identified, the same message is used for both. 



4.1 Gramatical and Sentence-Level Criticisms 

(STEP CRITICIZE SENTENCE-LEVEL) 



NONPARSABLE 

Detect the nonparsable tag (SM TAG SENTENCE NONPARSABLE) that is produced by the semantics module 
SGRAMMAR-PROBLEM to designate a grammar problem. A complete parse failure is reported by ATTEMPT- 
PARSE in "ccs.funcs". 

V: Couldn't figure out sentence grammar, but trying to continue with the analysis. 

Some of the following cownents may be Inappropriate. 
The sentence may be telegraphic In style, too complex, or unusual In 
structure or punctuation - try to simplify the sentence. 

T: Can't analyze grammar; try to simplify sentence; attempclng to continue.) 



OBJECT.RELATIVE-CLAUSE 

The sentence includes a clause whose proposition is tagged as an object relative clause (t.g.jht engine powers 
in The ship that th.* engine powers is large) and is also tagged as including a relative pronoun {that). The logical 
subject (engine) is described as connected to the logical object (ship) by the verb or relation (powers). 

V: The clause describing these new Items Is an 'object relative clause:' 

<loglcal subject> as connected by <relatlon> to <loglcal object> 
This construction can be hard to understand - can you rewrite It? 

T: Try to rewrite clause about <loglcal sub3ect> connected by <relatlon> to <loglcal ob3ect> 



OBJECT.RELATIVE-NO-PRONOUN 

Like OBJECT-RELATIVE-CLAUSE, but without a relative pronoun present The grammar may not allow an 
object relative clause witiiout tiie relative pronoun. 

V: The clause describing these new Items Is an 'object relative clause:' 

<ioglcal subject > as connected by <relatlon> to <loglcal object > 
Because the relative pronoun 'that' Is missing. It Is very hard to understand 
Add a 'that', or tven better, rewrite the clause. 

T: Add Pronoun that or rewrite clause about about <loglcal subject > connected by <relatlon> to <loglcal object> 

CENTER.EMBEDDED 

The classic impediment: The oil that the pump that the motor powers circulates lubricates the bearings. This 
mle detects the presence of two object relative clauses that are chained togcihen The three referents (motor pump, 
oil) arc listed to identify the clauses. 

V: Ouch! These new items appear In a 'center embedded' structure: 

<llst of referent s> 




47 



id 



This construction is extrttncly hard to understand and should be rewritten. 
Try rearranging the ideas into a simpler order. 

I 

T: Ouchl Rewrite clause about <list of referents> 



MISSING-ARTICLES 

These are accumuloied and reported at the end of this STEP. Noun phrases which have no article or determiner, 
and have a head noun which is not mailced as MASS in the lexicon (e.g. water, sand), are rqxxtcd. 

V: Possibly missing articles (a, the) for the following: 

<refer«nt naine> 

Telegraphic style is hard to read and should be avoided. 
T: Check and write in if needed: 



NEGATED-MAIN-CLAUSE 

Criticizes a statement based on a negation • a clause that is tagged as the main clause of a sentence, and also has 
the predicate FALSE attached to it (e.g. The ship is not large .) 

V: The nuin clause of this sentence is negative, which can be hard to understand. 

Can you rewrite the sentence into a positive fonn? 

T Try to rewrite into positive fom. 



WEAK-SENTENCE 

An experimental rule. If the main clause of the sentence is simply a predication that the statement subject is 
important, criticize as being weak. The subject is listed. 

V: The main clause of this sentence sijnply says that <subject> is inportant, 

Can you make the sentence more to the point? 

T: Try to say something more to the point about <subject>. 



MULTIPLE-NEGATION 

Like NEGATED-MAIN-CLAUSE, but comments on a sentence that has two or more negated propositions, 
which may not include the main clause. This message could appear more than once if there are more than two 
negated propositions. 

V; This sentence has multiple negatives, which can be very hard to understand. 

You should rewrite it into posUive form. 

T: Try to rewrite into positive form. 



SENTENCE-TOO-BIG 

The semantics module counts how many propositions remain in the sentence memory representation after 
propositions describing given referents have been removed, and supplies this information in SM to the criticisms 
rules. This is a rough indication of how much new inforrnation thai the reader must assimilate in this sentence. A 
threshold of 12 propositions is used; this can be easily changed. This number is based on what intuitively seems to 
be too much information. The literature on the role of Short-Term Memory capacity during comprehension is 
incomplete. 



ERiC 



V: The sentence contains <nurU:>er> propositions of new Infonnatlon, which may be too 

much to understand easily. Check whether all of the Information Is actually 
necessary at this point, and If so, try expressing It with smaller sentences. 

T: <nuinber> propositions of new Infonnation - simplify or break up. 

DESCRIPTIONS-TOO-BIG 

This is accumulated and reported at tii3 end of this phase. Noun phrases that describe new referents using more 
than some number (currently 7) of propositions are repoacd. 

V: These items were described in noun phrases that are probably too large: 

<referent name> was described with <number> propositions 
Try to refer to them with smaller, more compact descrlptl'^ns, 

T: Try smaller descriptions for: 

NONPARSABLE-SENTENCE-SUBJECT • INFORMATION 

If the sentence is nonparsable, the semantics module guesses the subject as being the first noun phrase. This 
message reports it 

V: Can*t be sure of the sentence subject, but assuming that it is <subject> 

Later cocnments may be inappropriate if this is not the correct subject. 

T: Assuming subject is <subject>. 

SENTENCE-SUBJECT-ACTIVE and SENTENCE-SUBJECT- PASSIVE - INFORMATION 

These comments repoit the main subject of the sentence; the corresponding rules identify the subject for the 
remainder ot ihe criticism rules. 

The main subject of this sentence is <subject> 

MAIN-PROP-RELATION - INFORMATION 

This comment points out the main proposition in the sentence. 

The main proposition of this sentence is <proposition name> 
- <logical aubject> has relation <relation> to <logical object> 

MAIN-PROP-PREDICA. E - INFORMATION 

This comment points out the main proposition in a copulative sentence. 

The main proposition of this sentence is <proposition name> 
<subject> is modified by <predicate> 

4.2 Referential Criticisms 

(STEP ANALYZE REFERENCE) 
(STEP CRITICIZE REFERENCE) 



49 



AMBIGUOUS-REFERENT 



This message appears if the reference module tags a reference noun as ambiguous; the most recent one is 
assumed, and the other possibilities are listed. 

V: Reference co these items was ambiguous: 

Assuming Chat <noun> is <ref«rent> 

... other possibilities: <llst of referents> 
Check, and rephrase the description if this is not correct. 

T: Check and rephrase if incorrect: 



MATCHED-REFERENT 

A referent is tagged by the reference module as a GIVEN-PRED-MATCH, meaning the a referent was referred to 
using wording that was not the same as previously used, but still sufficed to identify the referent Thus the reference 
might be incorrect, or might be using inconsistent terminology. 

V: Possible incorrect or inconsistent terminology - 

These items were matched with previously mentioned ones as follows: 
<reference> is previous <r<:ferent> 

Check, and correct the t«n&inology, or consider terminology 
that will allow these to be referred to consistently. 

T: Check for consistent terminology: 



QUESTIONABLE-NEW-REFERENT 

A referent is new, but was mcndoncd in a dcfmitc noun phrase, ilicreby implied that the reader is supposed to 
know about it This comment is made only if a sentence (rather than a heading) is present - there must be 
something tagged as a main proposition. 

V: These items were referred to as If the reader already knows about them, 

but they could not be matched with something previously introduced: 
<referent >A 

Check: Can your reader easily figure out what you are referring to? 
T: Check: can your reader tell what you are referring to: 



HEADIWG-NEW-REFERENT - INFORMATION 
If a heading contains a new referent, report it 

V: This heading introduced these new items or concepts: 

<referent> 

Check that they are really new and should be introduced at this point. 
7: This heading introduced these new items or concepts: 



INDEFINIT&NEW-REFERENT - INFORMATION 

If a new referent appears in an indefinite noun phrase, or a new referent is a plural head noun with no dctcrminet 
This comment is made only if a sentence is present 



V} This sentence introduced these new items: 

<referent> 

Check that they Are really new and should be introduced at this point. 
T: This sentence introduced these new Items: 



O 50 

ERIC 



PRONOUN-REFERENCE 

This message describes the assumed antecedent for a pronoun; the system has no way to tell what Uie pronoun 
antecedent is supposed to be, so this infomuuive comment is the only possible critique. Only third person pronouns 
are commented upon. 

V: Readers will tend to astisne that the pronoun <pronoun> 

refers to <antecedent> 

li this is incorrect, avoiding use of the pronoun night be nore clear. 
T: Pronoun <pronoun> should refer to <antecedent>; avoid pronoun if not. 



UNKNOWN-PRONOUN 



This comment appears it Jierc i.^ no apparent antecedent for a pronoun; a dummy item, UNKNOWN, is used 
instead 



Can*t t^ll what pronoun <pronoun> refers to - using UKKNOWN 

Rewrite so that either no pronoun is used, or it has a clear antecedent. 



NO-KNOWN-REFERENTS 

This criticism is made if the sentence contains only new referents - this means that the sentence does not have 
any clear or direct relationship to the preceding passage sentences. 

V: This sentence does not appear to refer to anything previously mentioned, 

and so readers may not understand how it relates to the rest of the material. 
Be sure that the sentence directly snd clearly refers co a previous item. 

T: Sentence should clearly refer to something previously mentioned. 



SUBJECT-NOT-KNOWN 

If the subject of a statement is a new referent, this criticism appears. 

V; The clause subject <subject> 

could not be matched with a previously mentioned Itom. 

Try to make the clause subject be a previously mentioned item. 

T: Clause subject <subject> should be previously iMntioned. 



COMPLICATED-INTRODUCTION 

This criticism i^pcars if a new referent docs not have a simple referential form. The idea is that a new object 
should be introduced with a simple noun phrase, one that does not have relative clause modifiers. 

These items ««ere first mentioned in a complicated form: 
<referent> 

Try introducing them is a simpler way, without modifying phrases. 
Try simpler introduction of: 




SI 



53 



NO-SIMPLE-FORM 

This criticism ^>prars if a given referent did not have a simple referential form before, bui docs in this sentence. 

V: Th«s« ••nt«nc« it tins w«r« originally described in a more complicated way: 

<referent> 

Can you introduce then in the si.'rpler wording in this sentence? 
T: Try introducing these with the sir.plor wording in this sentence: 

IMPLIED*REFERENT * INFORMATION 

In phrases like the wing of the airplane, in which one noun phrase is attached by the relation OF to another 
noun phrase. This rule comments that if a new noun phrase is so attached to another, the new reference is treated as 
being implied by the other. Eg., if we have an airplane, we have anything that is OF an airplane. 

V: Assuming that these newly introduced items are implied by other items: 

New <referent> is implied by <other referent> 
a.eck: Does the reader know these implications? 

T: Check that the reader knows these implications: 

4.3 Topic Structure Criticisms 

(STEP CRITICIZE TOPICALIZATION) 

There is a set of rules that build a topic structure, and nominate various things as possible topics. Some of 
these rules generate only INFORMATION messages, but they also identify and construct the topic structure. 

The LOCAL TOPIC is updated when the sentence is criucized, which is also when the local topic changes arc 
commented otu The rules assume that PM initially contains a dummy skeleton of topic structure so that there axe 
dununy points to rq)resent missing levels of the structure. 

TITLE-GLOBAL-TOPIC • INFORMATION 

A global topic specified by a title (>TITLE) is reported. 

Global topic is <rererent> 

HEADING-GLOBAL-TOPIC • INFORMATION 

A global topic specified by the first heading is reported. 

Global topic is <referent> 

HEADING-SUBTOPIC • INFORMATION 

Report a subtopic, possibly specified by >T0PIC-HEADING, of the current global topic 

New subtopiw of <rererent> is <referent> 



ERIC 



HEADING*PARAGRAPH*TOPIC • INFORMATION 
Report the topic of a paragraph heading. 

Heading Introduces paragraph topic 
<referent> as a subtopic of <referent> 

TOPIC-SENTENCE • INFORMATION 

Report the subject of a topic sentence as a subtc^ic. 

Paragraph topic sentence introduces <refer«nt> 
as a subtopic of <referent> 

PASSIVE-OK 

Detect and comment upon a use of the passive which is appropriate because it makes the surface subject the 
same as a current topic. 

V: Using the passive voice in the clause about <referent> 
is OK because it is about the current topic. 
But checic to see if you can rephrase the clause as active. 

7: Can you rephrase passive clause about <referent> 



CHAIN.PASSIVE-OK 

Detect and comment upon a use of the passive which is appropriate because it makes the surface subject the 
same as the object of the previous sentence (a chain construction). 

V: Using the passive voice in the clause about <referent> 

is OK because it is about an item in the previous sentence. 
But chedc to see if you can rephrase the clause -^s active. 

T; Can you rephrase passive clause about <referent> 

INAPPROPRIATE-PASSIVE 

Detect and criticize an inappropriate use of the passive. 

V: Using the passive voice in the clause about <referent> 

is inappropriate because it is not about a current topic. 

This can be very hard to understand - try to rephrase into the active voice. 
T: Rephrase passive clause about <referent> 

SUBJECT- STAYS-ON.TOPIC • INFORMATION 

Comment on a simple form of coherence - the sentence subject is also the current topic. 

Sentence stays on ::he current topic <referent> 




53 



CHAIN-TOPIC-CHANGE - INFORMATION 

Comment on how a chained sentence construction coherently changes the topic - the current sentence subject is 
the object of the orevious sentence. 

* Chained* sentence changes the current topic 
frccn <referent> tc <refereRt> 

NEW-SUBJECT-CHANGES-TOPIC 

Criticize how using a new referent as the sentence subject produces incoherence. 

V; Possible Incoherence: This sentence changes the current topic 
from <referent> to <referent> 

which has not been mentioned before. You may need to rewrlce 
to achieve a good transition. 

7: You ntay need to rewrite to avoid Incoherence. 

TOPIC-CHANGE 

Criticize a milder form of incoherence; the sentence subject is neither the subject nor object of the previous 
sentence, but is already known. 

V: Possible Incoherence: This sentence changes the topic 
from <referent> to <refereRt> 

which was not "^ntloned In the previous sentence. 
T: You may need to rewrite to avoid Incoherence. 

SET-LOCAL-TOPIC - INFORMATION 

The current sertence subjea is added as a local tcq)ic, and is made the current local tc^ic. 

Sentence subject <referent> Is 
ROW a ^ocal topic under <referent> 

4.4 Make Final Reports 

(STE? FINAL-REPORTS) 

CURRENT-LOCAL-TOFIC - INFORMATION 

Report the current local topic. 

Current local topic Is <referent> 

POSSIBLE-PROCEDURE 

This is an experimental criticism: it is uiggered by the appearance of three imperative sentences within a single 
paragraph, which suggests the presence of procedural content, expressed as a prose paragraph. 

Three lirperat*ve sentences have appeared In this paragraph. 
Should It be written as a step^by-'Step procedure? 



54 



REFERENCES 

Allen, J. (1987). Natural language understanding. Mcnlo Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings. 

Anderson, J. R. (1976). Language, memory, and thought. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlhaum Associates. 

Covrigani, A„ & Kicras, D. E. (1987). PPS: A Parsimonious Production System (Tech. Rep. No. 26). (TR- 
87/ONR-26). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Tfechnical Communication Program. 

Forgy, C. L. (1982). Rete: A fast algorithm for the many pallem/many object pattern match problem. Artificial 
Intelligence, 19, 17-37. 

Kieras, D. E. (1977). Problems of reference in text comprehension. In M. Just, & P. Carpenter (Eds.), Cognitive 
processes in comprehension. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Kieras, D. E. (1983). A simulation model for the comprehension of technical prose. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The 
Psychology of Learning and ^fotivation, 1 7. New York, NY: Academic Press. 

Kieras, D. E. (1985a). Thepotemialfor advanced computerized (dds for comprehensible writing of technical 
documents (Tech. Rep. No. 17, TR-85/ONR-17). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Tfechnical 
Cbmmunication Program. 

Kieras, D. E. (1985b). Improving the comprehensibility of a simulate d technical manual (Tech. Rep. No. 20, TR- 
85/ONR-20). Ann Arbor University of Michigan, Technical Communication Program. 

Kicras, D.E. (1987). A computerized comprehensible writing aid: Find report (Tech. Rep. No. 27, 
FR-87/ONR-27). Ann Arbor University of Michigan, Tfechnical Communication Program. 

Kicras, D£., (1989). An advanced computerized aid the for writing of comprehensible technical documents. In B. 
Britton & S. Glynn (Eds.), Computer Writing Aids: Theory, Research and Design. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 

Mayer, J., & Kieras, D. E. (1987). A development system for augmented transition network grammars and a large 
grammarfor technical prose (Tech. Rep. No. 25, TR-87/ONR-25). Ann Arbor University of Michigan, 
Tfechnical Communication Program. 

Steele, G. L. (1984). COMMON USP: The language. Bedford, MA: Digital Press. 

Winograd^T. (1983). Language as a cognitive process. Reading, MA: Addison-Wcsley. 



55 



57 



Dtfcnbucioa Imi 



OapMULMC of Pgyckoio0 
»NY MOT 



Dr. fnodi Budtr 
Caour for tte So^dy of 



14SMooc«Kil 
UrriMniqr of OliCbnw 
Lot AOMtai. CA 90024 



Dr. I 
TofchtHrfl ^ 
DvpMtMM of ftjpcteio0r 
UoMciinrof 



MA OlOOS 

DtteMToctaM 
loConHUM Cioiir 

, VA 22)14 
(2Co^) 

Dr. RJcMDuno 
CtHuMi Sobool of Educatioo 
UoiMniqr of CalifioiiM 

.CA «1« 



ERlCf 

Z44» RMMRb BNi Stttt 550 
RoeftMi^ MD MS*^ 

Dr: MmM X Pan: Coiwuinm 
Cofpiriwt A liwniGiioMi SffMift 
2521 Monk VmM Stnm. 



ofEoifNb 
PA 15213 



Dr. Sm OluckitacY 
Dc^iCtMOt of Piycbolo0 



Pnaail0Q,NJ 90m 



Dr.SuMR.< 
piilciijy Toli^ Bos 45 



NvMi^TN 37209 

Dr. SbMiwGott 
AFHRUMOM) 
Brooks AFa IX 78Z35-5«)1 

Dr. M«to HoiMid 

Anqr RiMVCta Imooiu for Mat 

5001 BMaboMr Aviom 

.VA 22333 



.Mil Jute & Houfl^ 
Caobndfr Vm um f Prm 
40 Wm m Smt 
N«r Yoct. NY lOOll 

Dr. WXMiHoMi 
QmC ScHOW 
AFHRIXA 

Brooki AFa IX 7SZ35-5ttl 

Dr. Jaott JMfcMo 
RJjkauoivvrMdt GroMSfeo 
DioiopMh Ccodtiit Vleuid D 
KiftteM 3a 9751 NN Harm 
NETHERLANDS 

Dr. MicteilKaftM 
OfSet of pMie RcMMd) 
US Arvjf iUMHCb Imttuic 
5001 BMobowir AveoiM 

.VA 22333.5^00 



110ALBU^2M01 
Urtwniyof Ifiefciiwi 
Am After. Ml 4tl0»>210t 



Dr. Jai P. I 
Sdwol of CoofMiir Socnot 
Carney MHfoo UnMnujr 
Pittiburifk PA 15213.3090 

Dr. OMctoOf Uodt 
Scniciunt ScMMioi 

PatoAkaCA 94320 

Di: EImm Mmb 

SmI Cmmt for ApptM lUMftctli 
in AnifieMl IrwiOiiinni 



Codt55lO 
WmMomDC 2an5-5O0O 



Dr. JmmLI 
DcpactMCst of Paycbotopr 
Cacwp^McloQ UoMTHiy 
Pkttburiti. PA 15213 

Dr. KaiblMO Mctovn 



D iimian of Coapimr Socooc 
450 Coaipuiir Sdcoec Buddiot 
N«r Yoct, NY 10027 

De. Ctorti A Mflhr 
Dcpc of Piyobotoy 
CfMiHdl 



PnQem.NI 00540 

Dr. WXm Moonpw 

NPRDCCodt D 

San DitfOk CA 9215^4000 

Ubncy. NPROC 
Codt P»1L 

Sao Om^x CA 921524800 



Nmi Ccmar for Appbad Raaaarcb 

n AruGdal IfUdifmot 
Nml R aaaa w h Latoralocy 
Codt 5510 

WMhioi^OC 20375-5000 

Offict of Nw^ RcMtrdv 

Codtll42CS 
80O N. QiMMf Siratt 
Arfa^oo. VA 22217-5000 
(*Cop*t) 



Dr. Judidi< 
Batic ITttaarrti Ofliot 
Annjr Rttttrdi Inaomtt 
5001 Ciianhciww Avtnut 
.VA 22333 



Dr.3otaOntl 
N«9 TnioiDf SfMM 
CaiMr(Codt 212) 
12350 Rtttvcb Partawf 
Orttodo^ Ft 3212^3224 

Dr. QtoaOaii 
NOSC Codt 441 
SaoOityxCA 9215^6000 

Dr. Naoqr N. Perry 

NmI Educaooo and Tr»Mn$ 

Propaa Support AoMtf 

Codt^7 

Buddng 2435 

PcntMota. FL 32509-5000 



Dipl. of 
God* 54 

Mo0lOTi|^ CA f994V50M 

Dr. Maqr C Potur 
DtptcistQC of Bran and 
CogprtMw Sdaacta 

Mrr(&iM99) 

Caiabnd>i.MA 02139 



NurftS 
DapL ^ricofopt Bttica 
thw. gurnatoni 
Adolf Pforaaat 8JL 



SPAIN 



Di^MkMa 
NASA Aa 
M«l Slop 2^1 
Mofba FiaUl CA 94au 

Df, RMdal SbMBtkar 



Or. 



Codt 5510 
4555 Owartook AvtiM; &W. 

.oc»m.5ooo 



Dr. RobtRSaS* 
N«9 P tiaoootI RAO 
SaoOMfO^CA 921524000 

Dr. Iboata Slickc 



CoflpUwt Sdaoea^ be. 
3M2 Vdhr Vitv BM. 

Q c^ CA noif-aoso 

Dc^HMMtiiTvlar 
DCIBM 
Bos»00 

D ua —itai , Ontarto 
CANADA M3M309 

Dc: Fnolc & Wkhroar 
Oipaifant of I 
Rooa 504Oi CapiMi Ptea 
555 Ntw JacBiy Ammm. N.W. 
WaatamDCaOM 



Dk WdhM Wtdfock. m 
Nmjt Ptnoooil RAO Ccoitr 
Codt 51 

Sio Oi^ CA 921524000 

Fraok R. Yakovicb 
Dipc of BduoattOB 
Catholic Vmrnntf 
WiihfnMB^ DC 2C0M 



Or. Joatph L Youof 
NadoMl ScNOot FouBdali{>0 
Room 32B 
l800GSm«.N.W. 
WaiteMoM. DC 20550 



Dr.UriZara* 

GiMnI ElaettK: 

Raaaarrii A DMtopaaaot Ceottr 



POBost 



NY 12301 



ERIC 



58 



