IMAGE- T O-IMAGE  CORRESPONDENCE: 
LINEAR-STRUCTURE  MATCHING 


Technical  Note  No.  331 


July  13,  1984 


By:  Grahame  B.  Smith,  Senior  Computer  Scientist 
Helen  C.  Wolf,  Computer  Scientist 

Artificial  Intelligence  Center 

Computer  Science  and  Technology  Division 


SRI  Projects  4748  and  5355 


APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE:  Distribution  unlimited 


333  Ravenswood  Ave.  •  Menlo  Park,  CA  94025 
(415)326-6200  •  TWX:  910-373-2046  •  Telex:  334-486 


Report  Documentation  Page 

Form  Approved 

OMB  No.  0704-0188 

Public  reporting  burden  for  the  collection  of  information  is  estimated  to  average  1  hour  per  response,  including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  data  sources,  gathering  and 
maintaining  the  data  needed,  and  completing  and  reviewing  the  collection  of  information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  aspect  of  this  collection  of  information, 
including  suggestions  for  reducing  this  burden,  to  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  Information  Operations  and  Reports,  1215  Jefferson  Davis  Highway,  Suite  1204,  Arlington 

VA  22202-4302.  Respondents  should  be  aware  that  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  no  person  shall  be  subject  to  a  penalty  for  failing  to  comply  with  a  collection  of  information  if  it 
does  not  display  a  currently  valid  OMB  control  number. 

1.  REPORT  DATE 

13  JUL  1984  2.  REPORT  TYPE 

3.  DATES  COVERED 

00-07-1984  to  00-07-1984 

4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

Image-to- Image  Correspondence  Linear-Structure  Matching 

5a.  CONTRACT  NUMBER 

5b.  GRANT  NUMBER 

5c.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT  NUMBER 

6.  AUTHOR(S) 

5d.  PROJECT  NUMBER 

5e.  TASK  NUMBER 

5f.  WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

SRI  International, 333  Ravenswood  Avenue, Menlo  Park, CA, 94025 

8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 

REPORT  NUMBER 

9.  SPONSORING/MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

10.  SPONSOR/MONITOR'S  ACRONYM(S) 

11.  SPONSOR/MONITOR'S  REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12.  DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 

13.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

14.  ABSTRACT 

15.  SUBJECT  TERMS 

16.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF:  17.  LIMITATION  OF 

18.  NUMBER  19a.  NAME  OF 

a.  REPORT  b.  ABSTRACT  c.  THIS  PAGE 

unclassified  unclassified  unclassified 

21 

Standard  Form  298  (Rev.  8-98) 

Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std  Z39-18 


Abstract 


We  examine  the  task  of  matching  images  of  a  scene  when  they  are  taken  from 
very  different  vantage  points,  when  there  is  considerable  scale  change,  and  when 
the  image  orientations  are  unknown.  We  use  the  linear  structures  in  the  scene 
as  the  basis  of  our  correspondence  procedure.  This  paper  considers  the  problem 
of  describing  the  linear  structures  in  a  manner  that  is  invariant  relative  to  the 
variations  that  can  occur  among  images,  and  discusses  a  method  of  finding  the  best 
description  of  the  linear  structures. 


1.  Introduction 


When  the  human  visual  system  is  presented  with  two  views  of  a  single  scene,  it 
det  ermines  the  relative  viewing  positions  of  the  two  images  and  brings  the  latter  into 
correspondence.  That  is,  the  relationship  of  each  image  to  the  scene  is  understood 
so  that  both  images  can  be  used  as  information  sources  for  further  processing.  This 
human  ability  functions  well  over  a  wide  range  of  viewing  positions  and  conditions. 
It  is  this  ability  to  place  two  very  different  views  of  a  single  scene  into  correspondence 
that  we  address  in  this  paper. 

We  should  draw  a  distinction  between  two  forms  of  the  image  correspondence 
task.  Traditionally,  image  registration  has  been  a  task  undertaken  by  photogram- 
metrists.  One  application  involves  registering  an  image  to  a  map  so  that  new  in¬ 
formation,  present  in  the  image,  may  be  transferred  to  the  map.  Another  is  the 
registration  of  the  two  images  of  a  stereo  pair  so  that  disparity  information  can  be 
extracted.  In  each  of  these  tasks  the  two  images,  (or,  in  the  first  instance,  the  image 
and  the  map),  are  similar  in  terms  of  both  their  viewing  position  and  their  scale. 
The  techniques  used  for  registering  the  two  images  are  point-based.  A  feature  point 
in  one  image  is  matched  to  the  same  feature  point  in  the  other  image.  In  automated 
systems  this  is  achieved  by  selecting  a  small  window  about  the  feature  in  one  image 
and  then  correlating  this  window  with  one  in  the  second  image.  If  there  is  little 
distortion  or  occlusion,  this  technique  performs  well;  it  has  become  the  basis  of 
current  automated  image-registration  systems. 

The  research  reported  herein  was  supported  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
under  Contract  MDA903-83-C-0027  and  by  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration 
under  Contract  NASA  9-16604.  These  contracts  are  monitored  by  the  U.S.  Army  Engineer 
Topographic  Laboratory  and  by  the  Texas  A&M  Research  Foundation  for  the  Lyndon  B.  Johnson 
Space  Center. 


1 


The  other  form  of  the  image  correspondence  task  seeks  to  find  the  relationship 
among  views  that  differ  widely  in  vantage  point,  scale,  etc.  We  will  refer  to  this  as 
the  correspondence  task,  and  use  registration  as  the  name  for  the  form  of  the  task 
outlined  above.  In  correspondence  tasks  there  is  significant  distortion  between  the 
images,  the  scale  may  differ  and  may  not  even  be  constant  across  a  single  image, 
as  is  the  case  in  oblique  aerial  imagery,  occlusion  is  common,  and  the  response 
of  the  various  sensors  to  a  single  feature  differs  greatly.  Feature  point  matching, 
as  used  in  image  registration,  is  prone  to  error.  However,  feature  point  matching 
is  not  the  only  means  of  placing  images  into  correspondence.  It  appears  that  the 
human  visual  system  makes  use  of  nonpoint  features,  such  as  linear  structures  and 
extended  landmarks.  The  aspects  of  our  investigation  reported  here  utilize  the 
linear  structures  of  the  images  as  the  prime  elements  for  achieving  correspondence. 

In  classifying  the  methods  that  could  be  employed  to  find  linear  structures  in 
images,  we  draw  a  distinction  between  techniques  that  use  semantic  information 
and  those  that  do  not.  If,  for  example,  we  apply  a  road  operator  to  locate  some 
of  the  linear  structures  in  an  image,  that  operator  has  had  built  into  it  semantic 
knowledge  about  the  appearance  of  roads.  We  could  proceed  in  this  manner  and 
build  comparable  operators  for  all  the  scene  objects  that  manifest  themselves  as 
linear  structures  in  images.  Alternatively,  we  could  seek  to  find  the  linear  structures 
in  an  image  without  “identifying”  their  nature.  In  this  case,  we  identify  the  image 
behaviour  interpreted  by  us  as  a  linear  structure  without  knowledge  of  the  world 
objects  that  gave  rise  to  that  structure.  We  choose  this  latter  course  because  we 
wish  to  establish  the  correspondence  among  images  without  first  having  to  identify 
the  scene  objects. 


2 


The  correspondence  task  is  carried  out  in  three  stages:  we  must  find  the  linear 
structures,  we  must  build  their  descriptions  and,  finally,  we  must  match  these 
descriptions.  The  details  of  the  first  stage  is  reported  in  Fischler  and  Wolf  |l]. 
In  this  paper  we  explain  how  those  procedures  are  employed  in  the  correspondence 
task.  We  present  a  detailed  account  of  our  implementation  of  the  second  stage  - 
namely,  building  structure  descriptions  -  along  with  an  outline  showing  how  these 
descriptions  are  to  be  used  in  the  final  matching  stage. 

2.  Finding  the  Linear  Structures 

Descriptions  of  the  semantically  free  procedures  we  use  to  find  linear  structures 
in  images  can  be  found  in  Fischler  and  Wolf[l].  In  essence,  these  procedures  first 
find  those  pixels  whose  intensity  levels  are  local  maximums  and  minimums,  then 
cluster  such  pixels  and  identify  the  minimal  spanning  tree  for  each  cluster.  The 
long  paths  in  each  of  the  spanning  trees  are  found,  whereupon  these  form  the  basis 
for  the  linear  structure  reported  by  the  procedures.  The  results  of  applying  these 
procedures  are  shown  in  Figures  1-4.  Figure  1  is  a  natural-color  oblique  view  of 
the  Eel  river  in  northern  California;  Figure  2  is  a  vertical  infrared  view  of  the 
same  scene.  Each  was  scanned  through  red,  green,  and  blue  filters;  the  results  of 
the  procedures  for  finding  linear  structures  in  each  of  these  separation  images  are 
shown  in  Figures  3(a), 3(c), 3(e)  and  4(a), 4(c), 4(e).  In  addition,  the  red,  green,  and 
blue  separation  images  were  combined  into  images  of  hue,  saturation,  and  intensity; 
these  were  also  processed  to  find  the  linear  structures  contained  in  them.  The  results 
are  shown  in  Figures  3(b), 3(d), 3(f)  and  4(b), 4(d), 4(f). 


3 


Figure  1.  Oblique  Natural-Color  Image  of  the  Eel  River 


Figure  2.  Vertical  Infrared  Image  of  the  Eel  River 


These  separation  images  differ  appreciably  in  their  linear  structure.  Certainly 
no  one  separation  image  can  be  selected  as  providing  a  complete  delineation  of 
the  river.  The  philosophy  we  adopt  is  to  view  the  original  image  from  as  many 


4 


Figure  3.  Linear  Structure  in  the  Oblique  Image 


perspectives  as  possible,  obtaining  the  linear  structures  as  seen  from  each  of  these. 
That  is,  we  look  for  structures  in  hue,  in  the  green  spectral  band,  and  so  on.  Of 
course,  the  hue  image  is  derived  from  the  red,  green,  and  blue  images,  and  contains 
only  redundant  information,  but  this  presentation  of  the  information  may  show 
structure  that  was  masked  in  other  presentations.  In  this  sense,  the  additional 


5 


Figure  5.  Linear  Structure  in  the  Composite  Oblique  Image 


Figure  B.  Linear  Structure  in  the  Composite  Vertical  Image 

perspectives  provide  new  information  on  which  the  linear-structure  finders  can 
act.  The  results  of  combining  the  linear  structures  extracted  in  all  the  various 
perspectives  are  shown  in  Figures  3(h)  and  4(h).  Clearly,  some  of  this  structure 
comes  from  shading  effects  rather  than  from  physical  structure  in  the  scene.  We 
need  to  separate  the  real  physical  structure  from  all  else. 


6 


Figure  7.  Structure  Descriptions 

Figures  3(h)  and  4(h)  were  obtained  by  adding  the  binary  images  produced  by 
the  linear-structure  finders.  Consequently,  in  the  combined  image  the  values  are 
greater  than  one  at  those  pixel  positions  where  linear  structure  was  seen  in  more 
than  one  separation  image.  We  treat  this  combined  produce  as  a  new  “grey-level” 
image  and,  once  again,  apply  the  linear-structure  finders.  The  results  obtained  from 
applying  these  procedures  to  Figures  3(h)  and  4(h)  are  depicted  in  Figures  5(b)  and 
6(b).  Figures  5(a)  and  6(a)  show  an  intermediate  result  before  we  cull  short  struc¬ 
tures.  For  each  of  the  structures  in  Figures  5(b)  and  6(b),  we  calculate  the  average 
"intensity”,  that  is  the  average  number  of  original  separation  images  exhibiting  that 
linear  structure.  Figures  5(c), 5(d), 5(e), 5(f), 5(g), 5(h)  and  6(c), 6(d), 6(e), 6(f), 6(g), 6(h) 
reveal  which  segments  would  remain  if  we  thresholded  the  “intensity”  values  at  1, 
1.5,  2,  2.5,  3,  and  3.5,  respectively. 

We  build  a  description  of  the  linear  structures  from  one  of  these  images.  The 
image  we  use  will  depend  on  the  final  matching  procedure.  If  we  wish  to  attempt 


7 


to  first  match  the  “strongest”  structures  we  use  the  image  resulting  from  a  high 
threshold.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  wish  to  match  the  complete  structure,  the 
unthresholded  image  would  appear  to  be  more  appropriate.  In  the  next  section, 
where  we  discuss  the  nature  of  the  structure  description,  we  use  as  examples 
the  foregoing  two  extremes.  In  the  case  of  the  oblique  image,  we  have  used  the 
“intensity”  image  at  a  threshold  of  3.5  (Figure  7a),  while  for  the  other  case,  the 
vertical  infrared  image,  we  employ  the  unthresholded  image  (Figure  7b). 

3.  Describing  the  Linear  Structures 

The  means  used  to  describe  a  linear  structure  is  not  independent  of  the  use  to 
which  this  description  will  be  put.  A  description  that  makes  it  possible  to  reproduce 
the  structure  is  different  from  one  that  is  sufficient  to  recognize  it.  As  matching  is 
our  goal,  we  want  a  description  that  is  general  enough  to  be  unaffected  by  noise  in 
the  data,  but  specific  enough  to  distinguish  among  structures  that  the  human  visual 
system  would  classify  as  different.  To  the  extent  feasible,  the  description  must  be 
invariant  with  respect  to  the  variations  that  can  occur  in  the  data.  Specifically,  we 
want  the  description  to  be  independent  of  orientation,  scale,  and  vantage  point. 

Our  matching  process  will  compare  graphs  of  symbolic  descriptions.  We  will  use 
as  little  metric  information  as  possible.  Consequently,  the  descriptions  we  employ 
are  symbolic  ones,  the  primitive  entities  in  each  of  which  have  qualities  that  are 
themselves  symbolic.  For  example,  a  primitive  may  be  a  straight-line  segment  whose 
properties,  such  as  an  intersection  angle  (with  some  other  primitive),  have  values 
acute,  near-colinear,  etc.  rather  than  a  value  in  degrees. 


8 


The  primitives  we  have  chosen  to  use  are  straight-line  segments,  arcs  of  circles, 
and  model-less,  that  is,  data  we  prefer  to  describe  as  indescribable,  data  for  which 
the  data  set  itself  is  the  most  apt  description.  The  choice  of  these  few  primitives 
stems  from  the  observation  that  human  description  of  linear  structures  seems  to  be 
based  on  curves  and  straight  lines  -  moreover  on  whether  adjoining  curves  curve 
the  same  or  opposite  ways  and  whether  adjoining  pieces  of  the  structure  intersect 
in  particular  ways.  It  is  also  a  fact  that  humans  find  certain  parts  of  the  structure 
too  difficult  to  describe,  and  assign  them  some  generic  term  like  “wiggles”. 

Selection  of  the  description  primitives  is  only  half  the  task  of  description 
building.  We  need  to  be  able  to  divide  the  linear  structure  into  parts  and  assign 
a  primitive  to  each.  Usually  the  task  of  dividing  the  linear  structure  into  parts 
and  describing  each  of  these  parts  has  been  handled  as  two  relatively  independent 
processes  in  which  partitioning  has  preceded  parts  description.  The  difficulty  with 
this  approach  is  that  some  characterization  of  the  breakpoints  between  parts  has  to 
be  found.  Generally,  this  characterization  is  based  only  on  local  properties  of  the 
linear  structure,  even  though  neighborhood  information  or  local  inhibition  may  be 
employed  so  as  to  benefit  from  more  broadly  based  information.  In  this  respect,  the 
task  of  describing  a  structure  in  terms  of  its  primitive  parts  appears  to  have  been 
replaced  by  the  more  difficult  undertaking  of  describing  breakpoints.  Our  concern 
is  to  find  the  “best”  description  without  first  having  to  find  the  “best”  subdivision. 
Furthermore,  we  would  like  “best”  to  be  defined  in  terms  of  a  global  criterion  rather 
than  local  properties  of  the  structure. 

The  advantage  of  defining  best  in  terms  of  a  local  criterion  is  that  many  can¬ 
didates  for  the  definition  of  “best”  spring  to  mind.  The  disadvantage  of  defining 


9 


“best”  in  a  global  sense  is  the  lack  not  only  of  likely  definitions,  but  also  of 
computationally  effective  algorithms  for  finding  this  optimal  solution.  However, 
a  description  that  views  the  data  from  a  “gestalt”  perspective  seems  more  likely  to 
be  independent  of  image  orientation,  scale,  and  vantage  point  than  one  that  applies 
local  data  measures  to  define  the  optimal  description.  We  define  best  description,  as 
the  one  that  minimizes  the  number  of  symbols  needed  to  encode  the  linear  structure 
in  terms  of  our  description  primitives. 


4.  Minimal  Encoding 

The  need  to  match  data  to  description  primitives  is  a  central  aspect  of  decision 
theory  and  pervades  artificial  intelligence  research.  It  is  a  human's  ability  to 
abstract,  data,  in  terms  of  descriptive  models  that  distinguishes  human  information 
processing  from  its  electronic  namesake.  Effective  data  abstraction  is  a  balance 
between  two  competing  requirements.  On  the  one  hand  a  descriptive  model  must 
fit  the  data  adequately,  while,  on  the  other,  the  descriptive  model  must  not  be 
needlessly  complex.  The  criterion  we  use  to  select  among  competing  descriptions  is 
based  on  the  work  of  Georgeff  and  Wallace  [2],  in  which  the  description  considered 
“best”  is  the  one  that  can  be  encoded  in  the  fewest  symbols. 

Suppose  we  wish  to  send  data  to  some  receiver  so  that  he  can  recreate  the 
data  to  some  preselected  level  of  resolution.  The  sender  and  receiver  have  agreed 
on  a  language  for  this  communication  that  consists  of  a  set  of  primitive  elements. 
What  is  the  most  efficient  encoding  of  the  data;  which  message  has  the  minimal 
encoding  length?  Consider  the  example  of  sending  a  message  that  describes  a  linear 


10 


structure.  The  latter  can  be  thought  of  as  a  list  of  x  and  y  coordinates.  Let 
us  further  suppose  that  the  language  of  communication  contains  three  primitives: 
straight-line-segments,  arcs-of-circles,  and  model-less-segments.  Is  it  more  efficient 
to  send  the  data  as  a  single  model-less-segment  primitive,  that  is,  as  a  list  of  (x,y) 
coordinates,  or  might  it  be  more  efficient  to  describe  the  data  by  one  or  more  of  the 
other  primitives,  specifying  sufficient  information  to  describe  how  the  actual  data 
differ  from  the  primitives? 

The  message  can  be  viewed  as  a  list 


■where  M  is  the  specification  of  the  primitive,  D  the  specification  of  the  data  in 
terms  of  the  selected  primitive  M.  Let  us  consider  an  example.  Suppose  we  have 
a  data  set  that  approximates  a  straight-line  segment.  We  could  communicate  this 
by  specifying  a  straight-line-segment  primitive  M,  where  M  consists  of  a  code  for 
the  straight-line-segment  primitive  and  parameters  that  specify  the  actual  straight 
line  segment.  These  parameters  might  be  the  endpoints  of  the  line.  We  also  need 
to  specify  the  actual  data  in  terms  of  this  primitive  M.  The  data  specification  D 
might,  for  each  data  point,  specify  its  coordinates  as  a  distance  along  the  line  (from 
its  centre)  and  the  perpendicular  distance  from  the  point  to  the  line. 

As  the  expected  distances  from  the  points  to  the  line  are  small,  we  shall  choose 
an  encoding  of  these  distances  so  that  the  more  probable  of  these,  the  smaller 
distances,  are  encoded  in  fewer  symbols  (or  bits)  than  those  that  are  less  likely.  In 
the  actual  examples  we  shall  describe  later,  we  assumed  a  Gaussian  distribution  for 
these  perpendicular  distances  and  we  encoded  optimally  for  that  distribution.  The 


11 


optimal  encoding  length  is  just  the  negative  logarithm  of  the  probability,  i.e.,  the 
function  denoted  as  “information”  in  information  theory. 

If  we  have  a  small  number  of  data  points  fewer  symbols  may  be  needed  to 
communicate  the  data  as  a  list  of  points;  if,  however,  there  is  a  large  number  of 
data  points  that  exhibit  behaviour  consistent  with  a  primitive,  it  will  probably  be 
cheaper  to  encode  this  data  set  as  the  primitive  and  then  specify  the  data  in  terms 
of  that  primitive.  Of  course  we  are  not  just  comparing  the  encoding  of  all  the  data 
with  either  one  primitive  or  another.  It  might  be  more  efficient  to  encode  the  data 
as  a  few  primitives,  with  each  primitive  “explaining”  a  different  part  of  the  data. 
The  encoding  we  select  is  the  one  that  is  globally  best  in  explaining  all  the  data. 

A  way  of  viewing  the  message  form  outlined  above, 


is  to  look  upon  M  as  the  overhead  of  introducing  another  primitive  while  D 
represents  the  quality  of  the  fit  between  the  data  and  the  primitive.  Of  course,  since 
different  primitives  have  different  M's,  M  also  weights  each  primitive’s  efficiency 
for  encoding  data.  In  comparing  message  length  we  are  balancing  the  complexity 
introduced  by  adding  an  extra  primitive  to  the  description  of  the  data  against  the 
quality  of  fit  between  the  assembled  primitives  and  the  data  values. 

Although  the  above  discussion  focused  on  encoding  messages  for  communica¬ 
tion,  we  use  minimal  encoding  length  as  the  criterion  for  finding  the  best  description 
of  a  linear  structure  -  without  any  interest  on  our  part  in  actually  transmitting  the 
data.  This  of  course  means  that  we  only  have  to  decide  how  many  symbols  would 
be  used  if  we  were  to  encode  the  linear  structure  in  a  particular  manner  rather 


12 


than  actually  doing  the  encoding.  We  can  use  the  results  of  information  theory  to 
determine  the  optimal  encoding  length  without  even  having  to  understand  what 
the  optimal  encoding  scheme  is.  That  is,  information  theory  gives  us  an  operator, 
or  a  measure,  that  we  can  apply  to  a  description  to  determine  how  many  symbols 
we  would  need  if  we  were  to  encode  it  optimally,  without  any  consideration  of  the 
actual  encoding  scheme  and  without  the  need  to  do  the  encoding. 

Let  us  consider  our  application,  encoding  linear  structures  in  terms  of  three 
primitives:  straight-line-segments,  arcs-of-circles,  amd  model-less-segments.  We  will 
assume  that  the  data  are  specified  on  a  NxM  grid,  and  that  the  noise  in  the  data  will 
induce  a  Gaussian  distribution  of  the  data  points  around  the  generating  primitive. 
Given  that  all  grid  points  are  equally  likely,  the  cost  in  bits  of  encoding  a  grid  point 
is  logN  +  logM,  (log  is  to  the  base  2).  Now  consider  the  three  alternative  ways  of 
encoding  r  data  points  (using  one  primitive  only). 

Model-less-segment: 

We  need  a  code  to  specify  that  the  primitive  being  used  is  the  model-less- 
segment.  As  there  are  only  three  primitives,  and  we  assume  that  they  are  all  equally 
likely,  it  costs  log3  bits  to  specify  the  code.  Specification  of  the  data  in  terms  of 
this  primitive  will  require  in  turn  that  we  specify  r  grid  coordinates,  that  is,  a  cost 
of  r(logN  +  logM)  bits. 

Straight-line-segment: 

We  can  specify  the  straight-line-segment  primitive  by  specifying  the  endpoints 
of  the  line  segment.  This  costs  2(logN  +  logM)  bits.  In  addition,  the  cost  of 
specifying  the  code  for  this  primitive  is  logS.  To  specify  the  data  in  terms  of 
this  primitive  we  will,  for  each  data  point,  specify  a  distance  along  the  line  and 


13 


the  perpendicular  distance  from  the  point  to  the  line.  If  the  line  segment  is  of 
length  /  (in  grid  units)  then,  to  specify  r  distances,  if  we  assume  that  all  distances 
are  equally  likely,  will  cost  rlogl  bits.  If  it  is  also  assumed  that  the  data  points 
have  a  Gaussian  distribution  about  the  primitive  model,  the  cost  of  specifying  r 
perpendicular  distances  is 

'52~l°9 

rpta 

where  d  is  the  perpendicular  distance  from  the  point  to  the  line,  and  <7  the  standard 
deviation  associated  with  the  distribution.  When  the  above  expression  is  expanded, 
the  sum  over  the  d's  is  just  the  sum  of  the  residuals  squared  that  is  calculated  when 
the  line  is  fitted  to  the  data  by  least-squares  methods. 

Arcs-of-circles: 

We  specify  the  arcs-of-circles  primitive  by  specifying  the  endpoints  of  the  arc 
and  one  other  point  on  the  arc.  This  costs  3(logN  +  logM)  bits,  while  the  cost  of 
specifying  the  code  for  this  primitive  is  log3  bits.  To  specify  the  data  we  use  the 
same  scheme  as  we  did  for  the  straight-line-segment  primitive. 

Using  these  costing  functions  and  a  search  algorithm  that  examines  the  various 
ways  for  partitioning  a  linear  structure  into  primitives,  we  find  the  best  description 
of  that,  structure. 

5.  Results 

The  results  of  using  the  foregoing  procedure  on  some  of  the  linear  segments 
found  in  Figures  1  and  2,  (and  shown  in  Figures  7(a)  and  7(b)),  are  depicted  in  the 
remaining  panes  of  Figure  7.  From  Figures  7(a)  and  7(b)  we  have  selected  some 


14 


linear  structures.  The  selected  structures,  which  form  the  main  course  of  the  Eel 
river,  are  shown  in  Figures  7(c)  and  7(d).  Our  interest  is  in  determining  whether  the 
description  built  from  one  image  is  the  same  as  that  from  the  other.  Of  course,  in 
the  final  version  of  the  structure  builder  we  would  need  to  handle  all  the  segments 
simultaneously,  but  this  will  necessitate  considerable  improvement  in  the  search 
algorithm  to  keep  computational  costs  down  to  a  reasonable  level. 

Figures  7(e)  and  7(f)  show  the  primitives  returned.  The  arc  of  circles  are  shown 
as  full  circles  to  improve  readability.  In  Figures  7(g)  and  7(h)  the  primitives  have 
been  overlaid  on  the  data  to  show  the  quality  of  fit.  In  assessing  these  results, 
one  should  keep  the  purpose  of  this  description  in  mind.  We  want  to  extract  a 
description  of  the  linear  structure  in  terms  of  lines  and  curves,  in  terms  of  the 
manner  in  which  parts  intersect  (acute  angles,  near-colinearity,  etc.),  in  terms  of 
relative  curvature  (tight  curves,  gentle  curves,  and  the  like),  and  in  terms  of  the 
sequencing  of  parts  in  the  structure.  Given  that  the  two  images  are  viewed  from  very 
different  vantage  points,  that  the  scale  is  quite  different  (not  even  constant  in  one 
image),  that  one  image  was  taken  in  the  infrared  band  and  one  in  the  visible  band, 
that  the  images  were  taken  one-and-a-half  years  apart  during  different  seasons, 
and  that  no  semantic  information  was  used  in  the  processing,  the  closeness  of  the 
resulting  descriptions  is  noteworthy.  This  points  to  the  usefulness  of  processing 
the  data  in  the  above  manner;  namely,  the  method  of  finding  the  linear  structures; 
the  primitives  used  to  encode  the  structure;  and  the  encoding-length  measure  as  a 
criterion  for  best  description. 

Figure  7  shows  the  results  obtained  with  real  data.  Similar  results  have  been 
obtained  in  experiments  that  employ  other  real  data  sets.  Justification  of  the 


15 


Figure  8.  Encoding  of  Synthetic  Data 

method,  however,  requires  further  extensive  experimentation.  To  better  understand 
the  behavior  of  the  description  builder  we  include  an  example  using  synthetic  data. 
The  data  points  are  shown  in  Figures  8(a)  and  8(b).  In  Figure  8(b)  one  extra  data 
point  has  been  added  to  those  shown  in  Figure  8(a).  The  resulting  descriptions  are 
shown  in  Figures  8(c)  and  8(d)  and  overlaid  on  the  data  in  Figures  8(e)  and  8(f). 
The  addition  of  one  critical  point  alters  the  description,  an  effect  not  unknown  in 
the  human  visual  system.  The  resulting  descriptions  seem  to  match  those  perceived 
by  humans  when  they  are  presented  with  Figures  8(a)  and  8(b).  While  we  could  not 
claim  that  minimal  encoding  is  the  criterion  used  by  the  human  visual  system  for 
description  building,  we  note  that  this  criterion  conforms  to  the  type  of  behavior 
we  would  want  to  achieve  if  we  were  modeling  the  visual  system.  Of  course,  if  the 
resultant  description  is  sensitive  to  every  addition  or  deletion  of  a  data  point  it  is  of 


16 


little  use.  In  general,  the  minimal-encoding-length  description  appears  to  be  stable 
with  respect  to  data  changes,  except  when  “critical”  points  are  added  or  deleted. 

6.  Matching  the  Descriptions 

If  the  description  we  obtain  from  the  description  builder  characterizes  the 
data  and  is  invariant  with  respect  to  orientation,  scale,  and  vantage  point,  the 
burden  of  matching  descriptions  is  lightened  considerably.  It  is  our  intent  to  match 
descriptions  at  the  symbolic  level,  to  represent  the  descriptions  found  by  minimal 
encoding  as  graphs  of  symbolic  entities,  and  to  match  those  graphs  on  the  basis 
of  their  structure.  Of  course,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  graphs  derived  from  different 
images  will  match  perfectly.  Nevertheless,  from  a  prospective  match  we  can  find 
correspondences  in  the  original  images,  and  calculate  the  camera  transformation 
between  the  images. 

This  procedure  allows  data  in  one  image  to  be  transformed  into  the  other.  It 
means  that  we  can  transform  a  linear  structure  found  in  one  image  into  the  other 
image.  For  those  parts  of  the  graph  where  there  is  a  mismatch  we  can  ask  the 
question:  how  would  the  linear  structure  that  is  associated  with  the  mismatch  be 
encoded  if  it  were  first  transformed  into  the  other  image  and  then  encoded?  In  this 
manner  we  can  attempt  to  explain  the  graph  mismatches.  If  we  cannot  explain  the 
mismatches  we  should  consider  another  match  of  the  graphs.  Through  this  process 
of  hypothesis  and  verification,  we  seek  to  avoid  acceptance  of  a  transformation  that 
does  not  explain  “all”  the  data. 


17 


7.  Conclusion 


Having  found  the  linear  structures  in  an  image,  we  are  faced  with  two  major 
tasks  before  we  can  use  these  structures  to  find  the  correspondence  between  different 
images  of  a  scene.  We  need  to  be  able  to  describe  these  structures  in  a  way  that  is 
independent  of  the  variations  that  can  occur  between  the  images,  and  we  need  to 
be  able  to  match  these  descriptions  to  find  the  relationship  between  the  images. 

In  considering  structure  description  we  show  that  the  usual  technique  of  divid¬ 
ing  the  structure  into  parts  and  then  describing  the  latter  can  be  replaced  by  a 
procedure  that  finds  the  “best”  description  of  the  data  on  the  basis  of  a  global 
view  of  that  data.  This  technique  simultaneously  divides  the  structure  into  parts 
and  describes  them.  “Best”  is  defined  as  the  cheapest  encoding  of  the  data  when 
we  consider  the  trade-off  between  the  quality  of  explanation  of  the  data  and  the 
complexity  of  that  explanation. 

This  approach  produces  a  description  of  linear  structures  that  appears  rela¬ 
tively  insensitive  to  the  vantage  point,  scale,  and  orientation  of  the  original  images. 
It  may  prove  to  be  a  description  that  enables  easy  matching,  and  hence  an  effective 
approach  to  solving  the  problem  of  image-to-image  correspondence. 

References 

1.  Fiscbler,  M.A.  and  Wolf,  H.C.,  Linear  Delineation,  Proceedings  of  Computer 

Vision  and  Pattern  Recognition  Con  ference,  Washington,  D.C.  1983,  pp  351- 

356. 

2.  Georgeff,  M.P.  and  Wallace,  C.S.,  A  General  Selection  Criterion  for  Inductive 


18 


Inference,  in:  O’Shea,  T.  (Ed.),  Proceedings  of  Advances  in  Artificial 
Intelligence ,  Pisa,  Italy,  September  1984,  Nor th-Ho] land,  Amsterdam,  1984. 


19 


