AD/A-006  294 

^[-jYPOTHETICAL  dialogue  EXHIBIT! NG 
A KNOWLEDGE  BASE  FOR  A P ROG R A M- U NDE R- 
STANDING  SYSTEM 


Cordell  Green,  et  al 
Stanford  University 


Prepared  for! 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 


J anu  ary  197  5 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


UNCLASSIFIED 


security  classification  of  this  page  CHTien  Oala  EnlaraJ) 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


1.  REPORT  NUMBER 


I2,  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 


RErtD  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 
3.  RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 


STAN-CS-75-476 


|4.  TITLE  (and  Subtitle) 


5.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  & PERIOD  COVERED 


A HYPOTHETICAL  DIALOGUE  EXillBITING  A KNOWLEDGE 
BASE  FOR  A PROGRAM -UNDERSTANDING  SYSTEM, 


technical,  Jan.  1975 


6,  PERFORMING  ORG.  REPORT  NUMBER 

STAN-CS-75-476 


|7.  AUTHORCs) 


8.  CONTRACT  OR  GRANT  NUMBERfs; 


C,  Green  and  D«  Barstow 


DAHC  1!?-73-C-0435 


9.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 


Stanford  Univer.sity 
Computer  Science  Department 
Stanford,  California  94-305 

11.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

ARPA/IPT,  Attn:  Stephen  D.  Crocker 

I400  Wilson  Blvd.,  Arlington,  Va.  C2L09 


10.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT,  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  a WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 


12  report  date 


Jan.  1975 


13.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 


"14.  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  & ADDRESSCi^  ditlerant  tram  Conltolling  Ollica)  [ IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (of  this  report) 


ONR  Representative:  Philip  Surra 

Durand  Aeronautics  Bldg.,  Rm.  I65 
Stanford  University 
Stanford,  California  94505 

16.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  this  Report) 


UNCLASSD'IED 


ISa,  DECLASSI  FI  CATION--' DOWN  grading 
SCHEDULE 


Releasable  without  limitations  on  dissemination. 


17,  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  the  abstract  erUared  in  Block  20,  U di/ler^nt  from  Report) 


18.  Supplementary  notes 


Reproducnd  by 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 


US  DopartmonI  of  Commofco 
Spiingfiold,  VA  22151 


I 1 9^  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  rt'vorso  ; Ido  if  i^ecessary  and  identify  by  block  number) 


ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  reverse  side  if  necessary'  and  identify  by  block  number) 


A hypothetical  dialogue  with  a fictitious  program-understanding  system 
is  presented.  In  the  interactive  dialogue  the  computer  carries  out  a 
detailed  synthesis  of  a simple  insertion  sort  program  for  linked  lists. 
The  content,  length  and  complexity  of  the  dialogue  reflect  the  under- 
j.ying  programming  knowledge  which  would  be  required  for  a system  to 
accomplish  this  task.  The  nature  of  the  knowledge  is  discussed  and 
the  codifi  ;ation  of  such  programming  knowledge  is  suggested  as  a major 
research  area  in  the  development  of  program-unders banding  systems. 


FORM  1/170 
1 JAN  73  ^ 


EDITION  OF  1 NOV  6S  IS  OBSOLETE 


uWSiSUBilEa  TO  CHANGE 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGE  (When  Data  Entetod) 


1 


Stanford  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
Memo  AIM-258 


JANUARY  1975 


Computer  Science  Department 
Report  No.  STAN-CS-75-476 


A Hypothetical  Dialogue 
Exhibiting  a Knowledge  Base 
For  a Program-Understanding  System 


by 


Cordell  Green 
David  Barf?tow 


ABSTRACT 


A hypothetical  dialogue  with  a hctitious  program-iinclei  standing  system  is  presented.  In 
the  interactive  dialogue  the  computer  carries  out  a detailed  synthesis  of  a .umplc  insertion  sort 
program  for  linked  lists.  The  content,  length  and  complexity  of  the  dialogue  reflect  the 
underlying  programming  knowledge  which  would  be  required  for  a system  to  accomplish  this 
task.  The  nature  of  the  knowlcdg.;  is  discussed  and  the  codification  of  such  programming 
knowledge  is  suggested  as  a major  research  area,  in  the  development  of  program- 
understanding systems. 


Tfiis  research  xuas  suppoual  by  the  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  of  the  Depaument  of 
Defense  under  Contract  DAHC  D-7hC-043^  The  I'iews  and  conclusions  contained  in  this 
document  are  those  of  the  authot(s)  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessniily  representing  the 
official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of  Stanford  University.  ARP  A,  or  the  V.  S. 
Covernment. 


Reproduced  in  the  V.S.A.  Avail able  from  the  National  Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield, 
Pirginia  22151. 


Ili^l 


A HYPOTHETICAL  DIALOGUE 

EXHIBITING  A KNOWLEDGE  HASE  FOR  A PROGRAM-UNDERSTANDING  SYSTEM 
Green  and  Barr.tow  January,  1975 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 

1 

(a) 

SUMMARY 

1 

(b) 

DOMAIN  OF  DISCOURSE 

2 

A DIALOGUE 

3 

(a) 

INTRODUCTION 

3 

(b) 

PART  1:  Setting  Up  the  Main  Tasks 

5 

(0 

PART  2:  Synthesizing  the  Selector 

11 

(d) 

PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 

17 

(e) 

PART  4:  Completing  the  Program 

31 

III.  TYPES  OF  PROGRAMMING  KNOWLEDGE  33 

IV.  SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS  35 

V.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  36 


VI.  REFERENCES 


37 


INTRODUCTION  Pase  1 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

(a)  SUMMARY 

The  overall  objective  of  our  research  is  to  gain  more  insight  into  the 
programming  process  as  a necessary  step  toward  building  fno^ram-inulnuanilnu;  systnus. 
Our  approach  has  been  to  examine  the  process  of  synthesizing  very  simple  programs  in 
the  domain  of  sorting.  We  hope  that  by  beginning  with  this  simple  domain  and 
developing  and  implementing  a reasonably  comprehensive  theory,  we  can  then  gauge 
what  is  required  to  create  more  powerful  and  general  program-understanding  systems. 

Toward  this  end,  we  are  working  on  first  isolating  and  codifying  the  knowledge 
appropriate  for  the  synthesis  and  understanding  of  programs  in  this  class  and  then 
embedding  this  knowledge  as  a set  of  rules  in  a computer  program.  Along  the  way,  we 
have  developed  some  preliminary  views  about  what  a program-understanding  system 
should  know. 

Our  goal  in  this  particular  paper  is  to  present  a di  gI I ( ^A/ 1 1 h a 1 1 
program-understanding  system.  A dialogue  was  chosen  as  a method  of  presentation 
that  would  exemplify,  in  an  easily  understood  fashion,  what  such  a systonri  should  know. 
The  subject  of  the  dialogue  is  the  synthesis  of  a simple  insertion  sort  program.  Each 
step  in  the  dialogue  corresponds  to  the  utilization  of  one  or  more  pieces  of  suggested 
programming  knowledge.  Most  of  this  knowledge  is  stated  explicitly  in  C'och  step.  The 
dialogue  presented  here  is  a highly  fictional  one,  although  some  portions  of  the 
reasoning  shown  in  the  dialogue  have  been  tested  in  an  experimental  system. 


INTRODUCTION 


page  2 


We  are  now  in  the  process  of  formulating  the  necessary  programming  knowledge 
as  a set  of  synthesis  rules.  However,  the  scope  of  this  paper  does  not  include  the 
presentation  of  the  current  state  of  our  rules.  So  far  come  110  rules  have  been 
developed  and  are  being  refined  in  a rule-testing  system.  The  synthesis  tasks  on  which 
tr^ese  rules  are  being  debugged  include  two  insertion  sorts,  one  selection  sort,  and  a 
list  reversal.  We  hope  to  present  in  a later  paper  a description  of  the  set  of  rules. 

As  will  become  apparent  in  the  dialogue,  one  of  our  conjectures  is  that  a 
program-understanding  system  will  need  very  large  amounts  of  many  different  kinds  of 
knowledge.  This  seems  to  be  the  key  to  the  flexibility  necessary  to  synthesize, 
analyze,  modify,  and  debug  a large  class  of  programs.  In  addition  to  the  usual  types  of 
programming  knowledge,  such  as  the  semantics  of  programming  languages  or  techniques 
of  local  optimization,  many  other  types  are  needed.  These  include,  at  least,  high-level 
programming  constructs,  strategy  or  planning  information,  domain-specific  and  general 
programming  knowledge,  and  global  optimization  techniques.  In  Section  111  we  discuss 
this  further  and  show  where  these  kinds  of  knowledge  occur  in  the  dialogue. 


(b)  DOMAIN  OF  DISCOURSE 


Topics  mentioned  in  Uie  dialogue  include  data  structures,  low-level  operations, 
and  high-level  programming  constructs.  The  main  data  structures  mentioned  in  our 
dialogue  are  ordered  sets  represented  by  lists  The-low  level  operations  mentioned 
include  assignment,  pointer  manipulation,  list  insertion,  etc.  Some  of  tile  higher-level  (in 
some  sense)  notions  or  constructs  we  consider  are  permutation,  ordering  (by  various 


INTRODUCTION 


pace  3 


criteria),  set  enumeration,  generate  and  test,  generate  and  process,  proof  by  induction, 
conservation  of  elements  during  a transfer,  and  methods  of  temporary  marking  (or 
place-saving)  of  positions  and  elements,  Time  and  space  requirements  tor  various 
methods  are  not  discussed, 

The  target  language  is  LISP,  in  particular  the  INTERLiSP  language  flO],  However, 
in  the  dialogue  we  represent  the  programs  in  a fictitious  meta-USP. 


II.  A DIALOGUE 


<a)  INTRODUCTION 


In  this  section  we  wish  to  exhibit  what  wo  consider  to  be  a reasonable  level  of 
understanding  on  the  part  of  a program-understanding  system.  It  is  not  obvious  how 
best  to  present  this  in  a way  that  is  easy  for  the  reader  to  follow,  since  the  synthesis 
process  is  rather  complex.  Wc  hope  that  an  English  language  dialogue  is  adequate.  We 
have  added  to  the  English  several  "snapshots"  of  the  developing  program  that  help  to 
indicate  where  the  system  is  in  the  programrning  process.  These  diagrams  are  similar 
to  the  stepwise  refinements  used  in  structured  programming  [1].  Our  dialogue  may  be 
considered  as  a continuation  of  the  technique  of  presentation  used  by  Floyd  for  a 
program  verifier-synthesizer  [2],  although  our  more  hypothetical  system  has  been 
allowed  to  know  more  about  program  synthesis  for  its  domain  of  discourse. 

In  certain  ways  we  feel  that  the  dialogue  is  not  representative  of  how  a 
program-understanding  system  v/ould  appear  to  the  user  during  the  synthesis  process 


A DIALOGUE 


page  4 


(although  such  a low-level  dialogue  would  at  times  have  its  place),  For  expository 
purposes  the  dialogue  has  certain  choices  and  inferences  made  by  the  machine  and 
Olivers  made  by  the  user.  Depending  upon  the  application,  these  decisions  and 
inferences  could  reasonably  be  re-distributed  between  user  and  machine,  with  some 
made  by  other  automated  "experts",  such  as  an  efficiency  expert,  and  other  decisions 
forced  by  the  context  in  which  the  program  is  written.  For  example,  the  data 
structures  for  this  insertion  sort  might  be  determined  in  advance  if  the  sort  routine 
were  part  of  a larger  system,  and  all  choices  made  by  the  user  could  be  made  instead 
by  rules  calculating  the  efficiency  of  each  branch,  A more  typical  user-machine  dialogue 
would  usually  be  conducted  at  a much  higher  level  and  in  the  words  used  to  talk  about 
the  application  area  for  the  program.  But  to  present  a hypothetical  dialogue  in  which 
the  program  merely  said,  "OK,  Tm  all  finished,"  or,  "I  wrote  a sort  program  as  part  of 
your  operating  system,"  wouldn’t  explicate  very  much  programming  knovdedge. 

The  style  of  the  dialogue  is  not  intended  to  be  a strong  suggestion  about  what 
the  process  of  sf’cafyhis  a program  should  be.  In  fact,  we  feel  that  program 
specificaticn  is  a difficult  problem  in  automatic  programming  research  [4|,  and  we  touch 
on  only  a few  aspects  of  it  here.  However,  some  of  the  techniques  used  in  the 
dialogue  will  probably  find  some,  as  yet  undetermined,  place  in  program-understanding 
systems.  The  obvious  techniques  include  interactive  specification,  natural  language 
communication,  and  the  periodic  presentation  of  summaries  of  the  structure  and  content 
of  the  evolving  program. 

We  note  that  we  have  endowed  our  hypothetical  system  with  various  abilities. 


-■  - ■ ■ 


A DIALOGUE 


page  5 


including  an  inference  capability,  a program  simplification  capability,  and  the  ability  to 
illustrate  and  summarize  where  it  is  in  the  programming  process.  Further,  the  dialogue 
sometimes  takes  on  the  character  of  a decision-tree,  sometimes  of  goal-orientsd 
problem-solving,  and  sometimes  of  step-wise  refinement,  These  all  seem  appropriate 
to  the  task. 

Various  decisions,  such  as  how  large  to  make  a step,  when  to  suppress  or 
explicate  an  inference,  and  when  to  present  a diagram,  are  somewhat  arbitrary,  but 
were  made  primarily  on  the  basis  of  what  seemed  to  be  the  clearest  exposition, 

Before  the  start  of  the  dialogue,  we  wish  to  remind  the  user  that  the  focus  is 
not  on  the  particular  mechanisms  which  might  be  employed  to  produce  the  hypothesized 
behavior,  but  rather  on  the  reasoning  itself. 

(b ) PART  1:  Setting  Up  the  Main  Tasks 

1.  User!  Please  write  me  a sc^rt  program  Use  linked  lists  to  represerit  the  input  and 

output,  which  are  ordered  sets,  The  output  set  should  be  ordered  so  that  each 
element  is  mnnnicnily  greater  than  the  preceding  element.  The  input  set  will  be 
called  INPUT  and  the  output  set  will  be  called  OUTPUT, 

2.  Machine:  As  I understand  it,  a sort  program  produces  as  output  a permutation 

(of  the  input)  that  satisfies  a test.  In  this  case,  the  test  is  that  the  elements  be 
ordered  on  the  basis  of  the  above-mentioned  ordering  relation,  "numerically 
greater  than".  Please  choose  one  of  the  two  known  methods)  for  finding  a 


t The  limitation  to  only  two  "known"  choices  is  arbitrary,  but  it  is  reasonable  to  expect 
a system  to  have  a limited  number  of  choices. 


PART  1:  Setting  Up  the  Main  Tasks  page  6 

permutation  tliat  satisfies  a test: 

(a)  Generate  and  test  permutations  until  the  desired  one  is  found, 
fb)  Carefully  construct  the  desired  permutation. 

3.  User:  Carefully  construct  the  desired  permutation. 

4.  M achine:  Should  the  output  set  be  constructed  in  the  same  list  cells  as  the 

input  set,  or  should  a new  list  be  created? 

5.  User:  A new  list  should  be  created.! 

6.  Machine:  Do  you  want  an  iterative  or  recursive  program'' 

7.  User:  Iterative.  [We  wish  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  distinctions  between 

"user"  and  "machine"  are  somewhat  arbitrary.  Yet  a decision  must  be  made,  so 
we  have  chosen  to  let  our  hypothetical  "user"  make  it.  Furthermore  there  is  no 
reason  to  expect  the  user  to  have  a preference  for  an  iterative  or  recursive 
program.  We  have  our  user  choose  an  iterative  structure  over  what  might  be  a 
more  natural  recursive  structure,  because  there  are  fundamental  aspects  of  the 
algorithm  which  are  more  explicit  in  its  iterative  form.] 

8.  Machine:  Then  the  program  will  be  in  the  form  of  a transfa  which  must 

be  totall  The  program  will  transfer  all  elements  from  the  input  to  positions  in 
the  output,  such  that  the  final  output  is  a permutation  (of  the  input)  which 
satisfies  the  above  ordering  relation,  namely  increasing  by  numerical  value. 


! This  does  not  preclude  overwriting  the  input  sot  during  the  sort.  Overwriting  might  be 
done  in  order  to  indicate  which  elements  have  been  selected  from  the  input. 

? By  "total",  we  mean  that  the  transfer  loop  must  be  repeated  until  all  clerrionts  have 
been  transferred. 


<Lt«tv»->.itfa4tt*wfc'we»»i'«w.«tf'f«-y*«».»g>'*uj^tV<JCT^*q»t;.**.  .in 


PART  1:  Setting  Up  the  Main  Taskr 


page  7 


The  transfer  paradigmit 


transfer  proriratn: 

LOOP  UNTIL  all  elements  of  input  have  been  processed; 
se I cc  tor : 

select  the  next  element  from  input; 
constructor: 

add  this  element  to  output; 

REPEAT, 


9.  Machine:  In  order  to  write  such  a transfer  program,  1 must  achieve  several 
goals: 

(1)  Write  a .u-lcdcr.  On  each  call,  the  selector  will  find  that  element  of 
the  input  which  comes  next  in  the  chosen  transfer  order.  The  selector 
consists  of  two  parts: 

(a)  selector  initializer 

(b)  selector  body 

(2)  Write  a constructor.  On  each  call,  »he  constructor  will  produce  a new 
output  (or  modify  the  old  output),  so  that  the  new  element  is  in  the 
appropriate  position  but  that  otherwise  the  order  of  elements  in  the 
output  is  unchanged.  The  constructor  consists  of  two  parts: 

(a)  constructor  initializer 


t As  illustrated,  the  transfer  program  has  a "selector"  part  and  a "constructor"  part, 
The  selector  produces  the  elements  one  at  a time,  and  the  constructor  builds  the  new 
set.  Either  the  selector  or  the  constructor  may  re-order  the  sot,  i.e.,  the  selector  can 
produce  the  elements  in  an  order  different  from  the  stored  order,  or  the  constructor 
can  build  a set  with  an  ordering  different  from  the  order  of  receipt  of  the  elements. 


I We  will  generally  present  in  our  diagrams  only  those  parts  which  seem  relevant  o 
the  current  coni  t. 


PART  1;  Setting  Up  the  Main  Tasks 


page  8 


(b)  constructor  body 
Before  I can  write  these  parts,  1 must: 

(3)  Select  a transjn  o»(/('»--the  order  in  which  the  variables  will  be 
transferred  from  the  input  to  the  output. 

(4)  Select  a iransfcT  tcrmimuion  meihoil — a test  that  all  elements  have 
been  transfered,  and  a position  in  the  program  appropriate  to  the  type  of 
test  selected. 

(5)  Select  a name  for  the  tmrujn  variable— a variable  which  holds  as  its 
value  the  element  being  transferred. 

After  writing  the  parts,  I must: 

(6)  Combine  the  selector,  constructor  and  transfer  termination  test  into 
a generate  and  [noccss  loop.  This  completes  the  ^inal  program. 


PART  1:  Setting  Up  the  Main  Taokc 


page  8 


(b)  conctructor  body 
Before  I can  write  these  parts,  I must: 

(3)  Select  a :ransfn  ox/a— the  order  in  which  the  variables  will  be 
transferred  from  the  input  to  the  output. 

(4)  Select  a tramjer  tfrmination  method — a test  that  all  elements  have 
been  transfered,  and  a position  in  the  program  appropriate  to  the  type  of 
test  selected. 

(5)  Select  a name  for  the  tiamjer  variabk—st  variable  which  holds  as  its 
value  the  element  being  transferred. 

After  writing  the  parts,  I must: 

(6)  Combine  the  selector,  constructor  and  transfer  termination  test  into 
a genantc  and  process  loop.  This  completes  the  final  program. 


PART  1:  Setlinc  Up  the  Main  Tasks 


page  9 


The  basic  structure  of  the  program  (including  test  position)! 


transfer  ini  t i n I i rf'r : 
se  lector  i n i t i n I i cer : 
constructor  initializer: 
transfer  hocly: 

LOOP  UNTIL  DONE: 


(1)  (a) 

(2)  (a) 


transfer  termination  test: 

[F  all  elements  have  been  transferred 
THEN  DONE: 
selector  hocly: 

select  the  next  element  from  input; 
constructor  body: 

add  (he  plen;ent  to  nutpul; 

DONE:  II A IX 


lA) 


fl)  fb) 
(2) (b) 


10.  Machine:  Should  the  transfer  order  be  linear  with  respect  to  the  initial  order 

or  the  final  order?! 

11.  User:  Linear  with  respect  to  the  initial  order. 

12.  M achine:  Should  the  transfer  order  be  identical  to  the  initial  order  or  the 

converse  of  the  initial  order? 

13.  User:  Identical. 


t Our  syntax  for  iterative  statements  and  exits  is  that  proposed  by  Zahn  [11]  and 
supported  by  Knuth  [G],  Loops  are  exited  upon  encountering  an  err'd,  such  as  DONE  in 
the  above  example.  The  program  exits  to  the  occurrence  of  the  event  iabel  after  the 
body  of  the  loop.  Events  are  declared  after  Lnni’jiNTn-  hrTJ’AT  denotes  the  end  of  the 
loop. 


? We  define  the  "initial"  and  "final"  orders  to  be  the  conventional  list-repi  esentation 
ordering  of  the  input  set  and  of  the  desired  output  set,  respectively.  By  "linear  with 
respect  to  an  order"  we  mean  either  identical  to  that  order  or  the  converse  of  that 
order.  The  user's  choice  of  "linear  with  respect  to  the  initial  order"  amounts  to 
choosing  an  insertion  sort  algorithm,  rather  than  a selection  sort  algorithm.  The  full 
effect  of  this  choice  will  be  seen  when  choosing  the  "construction  re-ordering"  during 
the  synthesis  of  the  constructor. 


PART  1:  Setting  Up  the  Main  Tasks 


page  10 


14.  Machine:  Now  let’s  select  a transfer  terninalian  method.  This  will  consist  of  a 

test  and  a position  for  the  test.  Since  the  transfer  will  be  total,  the  transfer 
termination  test  must  test  whether  all  elements  have  been  transferred.  This  is 
equivalent  to  testing  whether  no  elements  remain  to  be  selected.  This  is  the 
same  test  which  is  used  by  the  selector  to  stop  its  generation  of  elements.  I will 
use  this  test  as  the  transfer  termination  test.  While  writing  the  selector  I will 
thus  have  to  write  a third  part:  the  selector  termination  test.  Since  this  test 
must  precede  a call  to  the  selector  body,  I v;ill  put  the  test  at  the  beginning  of 
the  loop.t 

15.  M achinc:  I will  use  ELEMENT  as  the  transfer  variable.! 


t For  ease  in  presentation  the  preceding  diagram  showed  the  result  of  this  choice  (i.e., 
the  test  appeared  in  the  proper  location),  although  the  choice  had  not  yet  been  made. 
Considering  all  of  the  tests  which  might  have  been  used  and  all  of  the  places  where 
such  a test  might  have  been  put,  one  could  imagine  a great  deal  of  planning  going  into 
making  this  rather  difficult  decision. 


? To  choose  meaningful  variable  names  requires  knowledge  about  comrriunication  with 
the  user  and  is  a difficult  problem. 


PART  2:  Synthesizing  the  Selector 


page  1 1 


(o)  PART  2:  Synthesizing  the  Selector 


We  are  about  to  work  on  the  indicatcdl  parts  of  the  selector 


transfer  initioliner: 

selector  initializer: 
constructor  initializer: 
transfer  bodg: 

LOOP  UNTIL  DONE: 

transfer  termination  test: 

[F  all  elerients  have  been  transferi'ed^ 

'll 

all  elements  huie  been  selected 
TKEh  DONE; 
selector  body: 

select  the  next  element  pom  input; 
constructor  body: 

add  the  element  to  output: 

REPEAT: 

DONE:  HALT. 

Tl 

16.  Machine:  I will  now  choose  a idecdon  re-ordering.  I will  use  the  term  "selection 
re-ordering"  to  refer  to  the  relation  between  (a)  the  order  of  the  elements  in 
the  input  (positional  order)  and  (b)  the  order  in  which  the  elements  are  selected 
by  the  selector  (temporal  order).  Since  the  transfer  order  is  linear  and  Jonoard 


T Throughout  this  dialogue,  we  wiil  use  special  characters  and  type  fonts  to  indicate 
different  sections  of  these  diagrams.  We  present  the  meaning  of  the  fonts  here  in  case 
confusion  arises,  but  the  meaning  should  be  clear  from  the  context. 

areas  not  uncler  cons icier.'it  i on 

(iiith  • • • inclicat'mcj  areas  omitted] 
areas  ciniently  under  eonsideration 
PROGRAM  PART.S  JUST  COMPLETED 
RESERVKn  wnitnn 

BA5IC  LIGI>  rUNCTIOMS 

USER"  OR  MACHINE-DEFINED  LABELS 

=>  the  right  arrow  indicates  a stop  in  the  refinement  process 


! PART  2:  Synlhesizi  nc  the  Selector  pas©  12 

(that  is,  identical  to  the  input  order),  the  selection  re-ordering  must  also  be 
linear  and  forward, 

I 17.  Machine:  A selector  is  a type  of  roicnavf,  a "total"  generator  that  produces 

each  element  of  the  input  once  and  only  once.  Corresponding  to  the  three  parts 
of  a selector,  this  type  of  gunorator  also  has  three  parts:! 

(Da  body  which  actually  produces  the  elements 

(2)  an  initial'zer  which  can  set  up  the  generator  before  it  is  called  the 

! first  lime 

I (3)  a termination  test  (to  be  used  as  the  transfer  termination  test) 

I 

j which  tests  whether  all  elements  have  been  generated 

18.  MachiiicI  I must  now  select  the  s'cte-stuiini;  schnne  by  which  the  generator  will 

I save  its  state  after  each  call.  In  order  to  save  its  state,  the  generator  must 

remembe,'-  how  the  input  sot  is  divided  into  two  sets; 

(D  those  elements  which  have  already  been  generated 

(2)  those  elements  which  arc  yet  to  be  generated 
Recall  that  the  generator  is  moving  Imcoiiy  through  the  input  list  from  first  to 
last  to  find  each  new  eleirn  nt.  Theiefore  ail  elements  before  its  current  position 
in  the  list  have  already  been  generated,  and  all  elements  after  its  current 
position  are  yet  to  be  generated.  To  save  the  state  of  the  generator,  I need 


f Technically,  before  these  parts  can  be  written,  the  production  rc-ordoting  for  the 
generator  must  be  chosen.  In  this  case,  it  is  obviously  the  same  as  the  selection  re- 
ordering, so  vjc  have  omitted  it  from  the  dialogue  in  the  interests  of  clarity.  The 
initializer  is  written  after  the  producer,  since  in  general  the  form  of  an  initializer  is 
dependent  on  the  body  of  the  loop  to  be  inituiiizcd. 


.‘it-. 


PART  2:  Synthesizing  the  Selector 


page  13 


only  save  a marker  for  the  generator’s  current  position  in  the  input  list.  One 
pointer  will  be  adequate  for  this  purpose.  Let  us  call  this  pointer  REST. 

We  are  about  to  work  on  the  indicated  parts  of  the  selector  body 

transfer  initial izer: 

• • • 

transfer  boclii: 

LOOP  UNTIL  DONE; 


selector  hocly: 

select  the  next  cl<‘'ment  from  input=> 

c|cncrate  the  next  element  from  input  = 
produce  element; 
increment  state  of  generator; 


'T1  (2) 
'Tl  (1) 


REPflAT; 

DONE:  KAI.T, 


19.  Mnohine:  Now  I will  synthesize  the  body  of  the  generator.  I need  code  for 
two  pieces: 

(1)  increment  the  state  of  the  generator 

(2)  produce  the  next  element 


9 


PART  2:  Synihesizing  the  Selector 


1 

1 

1 

page  14  1 


20,  Maohine:  To  increment  the  state  of  the  generator,  I will  advance  the  position  1 

pointer  by  one.  Since  the  representation  is  a linked  list,  the  code  for  this  is 
merely: 

REST  - CDR(REST)t 


21.  Machine:  Now  I will  write  the  producer  Since  the  state-saving  scheme  uses  a 
pointer,  REST,  to  separate  those  elements  generated  from  those  not  yet 
generated,  and  since  the  next  element  to  be  generated  is  the  first  element  of 
the  non-generated  set,  then  the  process  of  saving  the  state  will  also  effectively 
mark  the  next  element  to  be  generated,!  To  produce  the  next  element,  then,  I 
need  merely  take  the  first  element  of  the  non-generated  set,  which  is  pointed  to 
by  REVT.f  Since  the  representation  is  linked-lists,  the  subprogram  for  this  is; 

ELEMENT  »-  CAR(REST) 


tv 


22.  Machine:  I now  put  the  pieces  of  the  generator  body  together  into  a block: 

ELEMENT  •-  CAR(REST); 

REST  »-  EDR(REST) 


t Throughout,  we  will  use  the  standard  LISP  terminology; 

CAR(L)  gives  the  first  element  of  L 
CDR(L)  gives  the  remaining  elements  of  L 

CONSfX  L)  creates  a new  list  with  first  element  X and  with  the  rest  of  the 
elements  being  those  of  the  list  L 

NIL  is  the  empty  list  (and  list  terminator) 

f In  a selection  sort,  the  code  to  find  the  next  element  to  be  generated  would  be 
considerably  more  complex  since  it  would  need  to  find  the  largest  of  the  remaining 
elements. 

f There  are  situations  in  which  the  value  of  the  element  or  a pointer  into  the  list  might 
be  returned,  rather  than  the  element  itself, 


PART  2:  Synthesizinc  the  Selector  page  15 


We  have  jupl  finished  the  indicated  parts 


23.  Machine:  I will  now  write  the  generator  initializer  and  the  generator 

termination  test.  Since  I am  using  the  pointer  REST  to  mark  the  elements  not 
generated,  and  since  initially  no  elements  have  been  generated,  I must  initialize  it 
to  the  entire  input  set: 

REST  - INPUT 

24.  Machine:  Now  let’s  write  the  generator  termination  test  (which  will  be  used 

as  the  transfer  termination  test).  To  test  whether  all  elements  have  been 
generated,  I will  test  whether  there  are  no  elements  remaining,  Since  the 
elements  are  being  generated  in  a forward  linear  order,  I simply  test  for  being  at 
the  end  of  the  input  list.  Since  the  representation  is  a linked  list,  this  is  simply  a 
test  for  emptiness: 

REST  . NIL  7 


PART  2:  Synthesizing  the  Selector 


page  16 


We  have  just  finished  the  indicated  parts 


transfer  initinlirer: 

selector  ini  t iai  i zer!:> 

generator  initializer:^ 

REST  «-  INPUT;  'll 

• • • 

transfer  l.iockj: 

LOOP  UNTIL  DONE; 

transfer  termination  lest: 

IF  all  elements  have  hcen  transfcrrec]s> 
all  elements  liave  been  selected^ 

all  elements  have  been  generated^ 
no  elements  remains 

REST  - NIL  'll 

XilFN  DONE; 
selector  body: 

select  the  next  eleiiicnt  from  inputs 

ejenerate  tlie  riext  element  from  inputs 
produce  rlrmrnt=>- 

ELEMENT  CAR(REST); 
increment  state  of  cjcnerator:> 

REST  CDRIREST); 

• « • 

REPEAT; 

DONE:  HALT. 


25.  Machine:  I have  finally  finished  the  generator  which  the  selector  needed.  In 
fact,  that  is  all  there  is  to  the  entire  selector,  so  the  selector  is  finished. 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  1 7 


S 


I 

I 

t 


L 

(> 

■ir_. 

S 

t 


<d)  PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


We  are  now  working  on  the  indicated  parts  of  the  constructor 


transfer  i n i t i a I i zer : 
selector  i n i t i a I i zer : 
constnictoi  initialiTcr: 
transfer  Ijocly: 

LOOP  IJNTII.  DONE: 

transfer  termination  test: 

IF  all  elements  have  been  transferred= 
all  elements  have  been  selected 
THEN  DONE; 
selector  Ijody: 

select  the  next  element  from  input; 
constructor  body: 

add  the  dement  to  output; 

REPEAT; 

DONE:  HALT 


T1 


26.  Machine*.  One  way  to  create  an  output  set  that  is  a permutation  of  the 
elements  received  by  the  constructor  is  to  write  an  inductive  constructor  that 
satisfies  the  following  constraints: 

(1)  The  initial  output  set  must  be  empty. 

(2)  Each  construction  operation  must  be  such  that  the  new  output  set 
consists  of  the  old  set  plus  one  new  element. 1 

(3)  After  each  construction  operation,  the  new  set  must  satisfy  our 
ordering  relation. 

27-  Machine:  To  write  such  a constructor,  two  decisions  must  first  be  made: 

(1)  Choose  a construction  re-ordering. 

t It  is  sometimes  convenient  to  think  of  the  constructor  as  producing  a sequence 
of  output  sets,  and  sometimes  as  successively  modifying  one  output  set. 


4 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor  page  18 

(2)  Choose  a construction  method  for  building  a new  set,  given  the  old 
set,  the  new  element,  and  the  position  where  the  new  element  should 
occur  in  the  set. 

After  these  choices  are  made,  we  will  produce  code  for  the  constructor  body  and 
then  the  constructor  initializer.! 

28.  Machinel  I will  now  choose  a construction  re-ordering.  I will  use  the  term 
"construction  re-ordering"  to  refer  to  the  relation  between  (a)  the  order  in  which 
the  elements  are  received  by  the  constructor  (temporal  order)  and  (b)  the  order 
of  the  elements  in  the  output  (positional  order).  The  re-orderings  may  be  linear 
or  complex,  where  linear  means  same  as  or  converse  of.  Since  the  order  in 
which  the  elements  are  received  (the  transfer  order)  is  the  same  as  the  input 
order,  and  the  desired  output  order  is  not  necessarily  the  same  as  (nor  the 
converse  of)  the  input  order,  the  construction  re-ordering  must  be  complex  (non- 
linear).! This  re-orderin;,  will  be  based  on  the  "numerically  greater  than"  ordering 
relation.  This  means  that  the  correct  position  of  each  element  in  the  output  list 
will  be  such  that  all  preceding  elements  are  less  than  or  equal  to  the  new 
element  and  all  following  elements  are  greater  than  the  new  element.! 


T Note  that  we  have  implicitly  decided  that  the  construction  consists  of  two  steps;  (1) 
finding  the  position;  (2)  adding  the  element  to  the  set.  One  might  imagine  schemes  in 
which  finding  a position  and  modifying  the  set  are  interleaved  operations, 

f This  choice  of  a complex  construction  re-ordering,  along  with  the  choice  of  a linear 
selection  re-ordering,  completes  the  specification  of  an  insertion  sort,  all  of  which 
follow  from  the  user’s  choice  of  a transfer  order  "linear  with  respect  to  the  initial 
order". 

I For  clarity,  we  will  refer  throughout  to  an  element  being  "less  than"  or  "greater  than" 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  19 


29.  Machinel  Now  we  must  select  a construction  method  for  building  a new  set  from 

the  old  one.  The  choices  are: 

(a)  List  insertion:  Modify  the  structure  of  the  old  list  by  inserting  a new 
cell  containing  the  new  element. 

(b)  Shifting:  Allocate  a new  space  at  the  beginning  (or  end)  of  the  set 
and  shift  all  elements  before  (after)  the  new  element  by  one  position. 

Then  put  the  new  element  into  the  vacant  place.! 

(c)  Copying:  Copy  the  old  set  into  a new  space,  one  cell  larger  than  the 
old  space,  with  the  new  element  taking  up  the  extra  position. 

Which  shall  I use? 

30.  User*.  List  insertion. 

31.  Machine:  Now  I will  write  the  body  of  the  constructor.  The  body  consists  of 

two  parts: 

(Da  position  finder,  which  finds  the  position  where  the  new  element 
belongs 

(2)  a list  inserter,  which  inserts  the  element  at  this  position 

32.  Machine:  When  a position  has  been  found,  there  are  several  ways  to  indicate 

that  position.  First  we  must  select  one  of  these  representations  for  a position. 


another  element  and  mean  that  the  first  element  precedes  or  follows  the  second 
element  according  to  the  chosen  ordering  relation. 

t Perhaps,  since  the  "shifting"  operation  is  such  an  unlikely  choice  when  lists  are 
being  used,  it  shouldn't  be  presented  to  the  user.  It  could  be  celled  forth  only 
upon  questioning  or  in  unusual  programming  contexts. 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  20 


We  are  considering  positions  to  be  between  two  elements  in  a list.  Since  the 
construction  meihod  involves  inserting  a new  cell  into  the  list,  we  must  choose  a 
representation  appropriate  to  insertions  into  linked  lists.  I know  about  two  types 
of  such  representations: 

(a)  Use  one  pointer  as  illustrated; 

(pos i I i on) 

1 — 


BEFOnE 


In  using  this  representation,  a special  unique  value  for  BEFORE  must  be  used  if 
the  correct  position  is  at  the  front  of  the  list.  "FRONT"  will  be  used  for  this 
purpose. 


(b)  Use  two  pointers  as  illustrated: 

(post  t i on) 


BEFORE 


AFTER 


In  using  this  representation,  a special  unique  value  for  BEFORE  must  be  used  if 
the  correct  position  is  at  the  front  of  the  list.  "FRONT"  will  be  used  for  this 
purpose.  If  the  correct  position  is  at  the  end  of  the  list,  AFTER  will  point  to  the 
empty  li..t. 


V/hich  shall  I use? 

33.  Uwer:  Please  use  two  pointers.  [This  choice  might  be  based  either  on  looking 
ahead  or  on  knowing  at  this  point  that  the  BEFORE  pointer  is  useful  for  inserting 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  21 


into  the  list  and  the  AFTER  pointer  is  useful  for  incrementing  the  state  of  the 
p-sition  imder  and  for  testing  the  correctness  of  a position.] 

34.  Machine:  1 need  variable  names  for  the  two  pointers.  1 will  use  BEFORE  and 

AFTER. 

We  arc  about  to  work  on  the  position  finder  as  indicated 


transfer  ini  tied  iner: 

• • • 

transfer  body: 

LOOP  UNTII.  DONE: 

• • • 

constructor  body: 

add  the  element  to  output^ 

Jind  the  liosiiion  Joi  (In'  nem  eloncnti 
insert  the  neu  element  into  the  position; 

RF.PFAT; 

DONE;  HAl.T, 


'vl 


36.  Machine:  1 am  now  writing  the  program  that  finds  the  position.  First  we  will 
select  a srard,  sirau-^y  for  searching  the  output  list  to  find  the  correct  position. 
The  only  strategy  which  1 know  about  for  linked  lists  is  a Jorwnul  Ihuar  scan,  so  1 

will  use  that  strategy. 

36.  Machine:  Since  the  saarch  strategy  is  a forward  linear  scan  of  a finite  list,  tl  e 
search  strategy  is  total;  that  is,  all  possible  positions  will  be  considered.  Since 
the  old  output  set  is  well-ordered,  and  since  the  ordering  relation  applies  to  all 
elements  involved,  one  of  these  possible  positions  must  be  correct.  Therefore, 
the  search  for  a correct  position  must  succeed,  and  no  exit  will  be  lequired  for 
the  case  of  not  finding  a correct  position.  So  1 will  use  a loop  which  consists  only 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  22 


of  a test  and  exit  on  the  correctness  of  the  position  and  an  incrementer  The 
incremenler  will  increment  the  state  of  the  search  according  to  the  search 
strategy  and  specify  the  next  position  to  be  considered.  I will  also  need  to 
initialize  the  loop 

37.  Machine:  Since  the  search  strategy  is  forward  linear,  the  correctness  test  and 
the  incrementer  are  independent.  This  means  that  the  next  position  specified  by 
the  incrementer  does  not  depend  on  the  results  of  the  correctness  test.  This 
allows  a simple  non-branching  incrementer.i 

We  are  about  to  work  on  the  indicated  parts  of  the  position  finder 


transfer  initiallrer: 

• • • 

transfer  lioMu: 

LOOP  lINTH.  DONE: 


con' ti  i.c  *nr  Ijotl'i: 

,ir|f|  *n<?  elen'ent  'o  '.  'I'l'iit  » 

I I nrt  the  iio'.tlinn  tor  fiv  ncii  elencnt^ 
iC'Hi  'h  jnulii  .'.v,": 
lOgPJINTIt.  CORKECT  POGiTION  FOUND; 

IF  /(i,/.'/  >1  IS  ifiici/ 

Tllldl  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 
tnitn'ii’i!  shUf  <nxi!  sonify  f>csiticmi 
nrrr/\T, 

CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND: 
insert  the  nen  element  into  the  position; 

REPrAT; 

DONE:  HALT. 


'T|  (3) 


38.  Machine:  Now  let’s  design  the  incrementer  First  we  must  select  a scheme  for 


t If  the  search  strategy  had  been  to  use  a binary  chop,  for  example,  then  the  next 
position  to  be  tested  would  be  ba'cd  on  the  results  of  the  test 


PART  3;  Synthesizing  the  Constructor  pgge  23 

representing  the  state  of  the  search.  The  incrementer  will  increment  this  state 
and  will  also  specify  the  next  position  to  be  considered. 

39.  Machine:  Since  the  search  strategy  is  a forward  linear  scan  of  the  linked  list, 

and  since  the  two-pointer  position  representation  has  been  selected,  the  two 
pointers  (BEFORE  and  AFTER),  which  are  already  being  used  to  represent  the 
position,  are  also  sufficient  to  remember  the  state.! 

40.  Machine:  An  incrementer  for  a forward  linear  scan  using  the  two-pointer 

position  representation  requires  two  pieces  of  code:  one  to  reset  BEFORE  to  the 
value  of  AFTER,  and  one  to  increment  AFTER.  This  is  adequate  both  for  the 
general  case  in  the  interior  of  a linked  list,  and  in  the  special  case  at  the  front  of 
a list,  where  BEFORE  originally  has  the  special  value  "FRONT”  and  is  reset  to  point 
to  the  first  cell  in  the  list.  The  pieces  will  be  put  together  in  that  order. 

41.  Machine:  I am  now  writing  the  code  to  reset  BEFORE  to  the  value  of  AFTER. 

The  code  to  do  that  is: 

BEFORE  *•  AFTER 

4,2.  Machine:  I am  now  writing  the  code  to  increment  AFTER.  Since  the 

representation  is  a linked  list,  the  code  to  do  that  is: 

AFTER  CDR(AFTER) 


f The  position  memory  and  the  state  memory  need  not  always  be  the  same,  For 
example,  if  only  BEFORE  were  used  to  remember  the  position,  a good  choice  of  state- 
memory  would  probably  include  a pointer  playing  the  same  role  as  AFTER. 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  24 


43-  Machine:  Putting  these  two  pieces  together,  we  have  the  following 

incrementer  for  the  position  find.'r: 


BEFORE  - AFTER; 
AFTER  •-  CDR(AFTER) 


44.  Machine!  I will  also  need  a position  initializer  which  initializes  both  the  state 

of  the  position  finder  and  the  position  representation  to  the  first  position 
according  to  the  search  strategy, 

45.  Machine:  Since  the  position  representation  is  also  used  to  represent  the 

state,  we  need  only  initialize  the  position  representation. 

46.  Machine!  Since  the  search  strategy  is  forward  linear  scan,  we  must  initialize 

the  position  representation  to  the  position  at  the  front  of  the  list.  The 
convention  for  representing  the  position  at  the  front  of  the  list  is  that  BEFORE  has 
the  unique  value  "FRONT"  and  that  AFTER  points  to  the  entire  list. 

47.  Machine!  The  code  to  set  BEFORE  to  "FRONT"  is: 

BEFORE  "FRONT" 


48.  Machine!  The  code  to  set  AFTER  to  the  entire  list  is: 
AFTER  ♦-  OUTPUT 


49.  Machine!  Putting  these  two  pieces  together,  the  initializer  for  the  position 
finder  is: 


BEFORE  "FRONT"; 
AFTER  ♦-  OUTPUT 


ttiMiiliiiiliiii 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  25 


We  have  just  finished  the  indicated  parts  of  the  position  finder 


transfer  i n i t i a I i zer : 

• • • 

transfer  hoclij: 
l.GOP  lINTll.  DONE: 

• • • 

constructor  l:ody: 

add  the  element  to  output^ 

find  the  position  for  the  neu  element:* 
initialize  position  finder  loop*- 
BEFORE  *-  “FRONT"; 

AFTER  - OUTPUT; 

LOOP  lINTlI.  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 

[F  position  is  correct 

TllltN  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 
increment  state  and  specify  position* 
BEFORE  - AFTER; 

AFTER  - CDRiAFTER); 

QnPPATi 

CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND: 
insert  the  ncii  clement  into  the  position; 

njLPnATi 
DONE:  HALT, 


•n 

'TJ 


'll 

'll 


50.  Machine:  I will  now  work  on  the  exit  test  for  the  correct  position.  I will  first 


try  to  infer  the  necessary  pieces  of  this  test. 

61.  Machine*.  Sin^u  the  set  is  ordered,  it  follows  from  transitivity  that  the  new 
element  need  not  be  compared  against  all  of  the  elements  of  the  set,  but  merely 
against  the  elements  immediately  adjacent  to  the  position  being  considered, 

52.  Machine:  Since  the  search  strategy  is  forward  linear  scan,  at  any  point  in  the 
search,  all  of  the  elements  occurring  before  the  current  position  in  the  list  have 
already  been  tested  and  found  to  be  less  than  the  new  clement.  This  holds  for 
all  positions  including  the  initial  position  in  which  no  elements  occur  before  the 


v^f3  .'.'j  ■yi.",'  !i,yi ' jp,m  . v ,,  yiy 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor  page  26 

63.  Machine:  Thus,  the  test  for  correctness  of  position  need  only  include  a test 
that  all  elements  occurring  after  the  current  position  in  the  list  are  greater  than 
the  new  element. 

54.  Machine!  To  test  that  all  elements  occurring  after  the  current  position  are 

greater  than  the  new  element,  the  program  must  first  test  whether  there  are  no 
elements  occurring  after  the  current  position.  Then,  if  there  are  such  elements, 
it  must  test  whether  all  such  elements  are  greater  than  the  new  element. 

55.  Machine!  A test  that  there  are  no  elements  occurring  after  the  current 

position  is  simply  a test  whether  the  list  pointed  to  by  the  second  pointer 
(AFTER)  is  empty: 

AFTER  « NIL  ? 

66.  Machine!  As  noted  previously,  the  correctness  test  need  only  consider  the 

immediately  adjacent  elements,  so  that  a lest  that  all  elements  occurring  after 
the  current  position  are  greater  than  the  new  element  is  simply  a test  that  the 
first  element  occurring  after  the  current  position  is  greater  than  the  new 
element.  To  write  such  a tost  I need  code  to  extract  the  first  element  from  the 
list  pointed  to  by  AFTER  and  a test  whether  this  element  is  greater  than  the  new 
element. 

67.  Machine!  The  code  to  extract  the  first  element  from  a list  is; 

CAn(AFTER) 

68.  Machine!  The  code  to  test  whether  this  element  is  greater  than  the  new 

element  is: 

CAn(AFTER)  > ELEMENT  ? 


PART  3;  Synthesizinc  the  Constructor 


60.  Machine;  Given  the  two  partial  tests,  the  complete  correctness  test  is  an 
ordered  Of\t  of  the  two  partial  tests: 

[AFTER  • NIL]  OR  [OAR(AFTER)  > ELEMENT)  ? 


The  indicated  parts  cornploto  the  position  finder 

transfer  i n i t i a i i zer : 

• • • 

transfer  borkj: 

LOOP  UNTIL  DONE; 


constructor  body: 

add  the  element  to  output=> 

find  the  position  for  thr  ncii  element^*- 
initialirf*  posit  iori  finder  loop=* 

BEFORE  "FRONT"; 

AFTER  - OUTPUT; 

LOOP  lINTlI.  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 

IF  position  is  correct^ 

no  elements  occur  after  pop.  ition:> 
AFTER  - NIL 

OR  next  element  is  greateri> 

C AR( AFTER)  > ELEMENT 
HirN  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND: 
i ncromr'nt  state  and  specify  position:*- 
BEFORE  - AFTER; 

AFTER  •-  CDIUAFTER); 

REPEAT; 

CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND: 
insert  the  new  element  into  the  position; 

REPEAT; 

DONE:  HAIJ, 


60.  Machine;  Having  completed  the  position  finder,  we  must  now  write  the  list 


t By  "ordered  nn  we  mean  that  the  second  argument  is  evaluated  only  if  the  first 
argument  is  false. 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  28 


inserter  which  takes  a new  element,  a position  represented  by  the  two-pointer 
schema,  and  the  output  set,  and  produces  a new  output  set  with  the  new 
element  in  the  indicated  position.  The  method  of  inserting  an  element  into  a list 
depends  on  whether  or  not  the  indicated  position  is  at  the  front  of  the  list.  I will 
need  to  write  a test  to  separate  the  "front  of  the  list"  case  from  the  "anywhere 
else"  case,  and  use  a different  method  for  each  case. 


We  are  about  to  work  on  the  indicated  parts  of  the  list  inserter 


transfer  Initialiser: 

... 

transfer  body: 

LOOP  UNTIL  DONE; 

• e e 

constructor  body: 

add  the  elenunt  to  outputs 

find  the  position  for  the  r.eu  element: 
insert  the  non  element  into  the  posit ion» 

IF  l>Pi;tit'n  it  dl pent 

T| 

TJILU  fUm  nt  cnlp  jront 

•'I 

ri.Si;  insot  into  inUrior 

WrPEAT: 

DONE:  IJAI-L 

61.  Machine:  A test  for  being  at  the  front  of  the  list  is  a test  whether  the  value 

of  the  first  pointer  is  "FRONT".  The  code  for  this  is: 

BEFORE  • "FRONT" ? 

62.  Machine:  The  addition  of  the  new  element  in  the  "front  of  the  list"  case 

entails  rK>  replacement  into  the  list,  but  instead  an  addition  to  the  front  of  the 
list.  The  code  to  do  this  is: 


OUTPUT  CONUfELEMtNT  OUTPUT) 


PART  3:  Synthesizine  the  Constructor 


page  29 


i 


! 1 

1 ^ 

63.  Machine:  The  addition  of  the  new  element  anywhere  else  in  the  list  requires  a 
replacement  into  a cell  in  the  list.  The  code  to  do  this  is: 

COnCBEFORE)  - CONStELEMENT  AFTER)! 

The  marked  parts  complete  the  element  adder 

transfer  initialiser; 

• . • 

transfer 

tgnPJINm  DONE: 

t • • 

constructor  body: 

add  the  element  to  output* 

find  the  position  for  the  new  element; 
insert  the  ncii  element  into  the  position* 

IT  position  is  at  front* 

BEFORE  - 'FRONT"  *I| 

TTII’N  add  element  onto  front* 

OUTPUT  - CONS(ELEMENT  OUTPUT)  «ll 

ELGH  insert  into  interior* 

CDR(BEFORE)  - CONS(EL£MENT  AFTER);  *T| 

ncrrATi 

DOI«:  HAI.T, 


64.  Machine:  Having  completed  the  list  inserter  (and  thus  the  constructor  body), 
we  must  now  write  the  constructor  initializer.  Since  we  are  writing  an  inductive 
constructor  that  must  begin  with  an  empty  output  list,  we  simply  set  the  output 
list  to  the  empty  list: 

OUTPUT  •-  NIL 


t LISP  programmers  will  recognize  this  as  rplacd. 


PART  3:  Synthesizing  the  Constructor 


page  30 


The  initializer  completes  the  constructor 


transfer  initializer: 

• • • 

constructor  initializer* 

OUTPUT  - NIL;  TJ 

transfer  body: 

LOOP  UNTII.  DONE: 

• • • 

constructor  body: 

add  the  element  to  output* 

find  the  pocition  for  the  neu  element* 
initial  I zc  pos  i t i on  f i ncier  I oop* 

BEFORE  - "FRONT"; 

AFTER  - OUTPUT; 

LOOP  IIHTII.  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 

IT  position  is  correct* 

no  elements  occur  after  position* 

AFTER  : NIL 

on  next  element  is  yreater* 

CAH(AFTER)  > ELEMENT 
THilN  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 
increment  state  and  specify  position* 

BEFORE  - AFTER; 

AFTER  •-  CDrt(AFTER); 

BEPKAT: 

CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND: 
insert  the  n'■ll  element  into  the  position* 

IF  pci'-ition  is  at  front* 

BEFORE  » "FRONT" 

TJIKN  add  element  onto  front* 

OUTPUT  ► CONStELEMENT  OUTPUT) 
ni.Sn  insert  into  interior* 

CDIKBEFORE)  - CONS(ELEMENT  AFTER); 

DCPrAXi 
OOik:  liALT 


66.  Machine:  We  have  now  finished  the  constructor. 


PART  4:  Completing  the  Program 


page  31 


(e>  PART  4:  Completing  the  Program 


The  final  program 


transfer  initiali:er: 

selector  ini t iai i zer:» 

generator  initializer:* 

REST  •>  INPUT; 

constructor  initializer* 

OUTPUT  *•  NIL; 
transfer  body: 

LOOP  UNTII.  DONE: 

transfer  termination  test: 

IT  al  I elements  have  been  transferred* 
all  elements  have  been  selected* 

all  elements  have  been  generated* 
no  elements  remain* 

REST  ■ NIL 

THFN  DONE: 
selector  body: 

select  the  next  element  from  input* 

generate  the  next  element  from  input* 
produce  element* 

ELEMENT  •-  CAR(REST); 
increment  state  of  generator* 

REST  *•  CDR(REST); 
constructor  body: 

add  the  element  to  output* 

find  the  position  for  the  neu  element* 
initialize  position  finder  loop* 

BEPORE  •-  "FRONT"; 

AFTER  OUTPUT; 

LOOP  UNTIL  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 

IT  position  is  correct* 

no  elements  occur  after  position* 
AFTER  > NIL 

OR  next  element  is  greater* 
CAR(AFTER)  > ELEMENT 
TIIFN  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 
incrrwrnt  state  and  specify  position* 
BEFORE  •-  AFTER; 

AFTER  •-  CDR(AFTER); 

REPliAT; 

CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND: 
insert  the  neu  element  into  the  position* 

[T  position  is  at  front* 

BEFORE  • "FRONT" 

TllliN  add  element  onto  front* 

OUTPUT  ••  CONSIELEMENT  OUTPUT) 
ri5f!  insert  into  interior* 

COR(BEFORE)  •-  CONSIELEMENT  AFTER); 


REPEAT: 
DONE:  HALT. 


PART  4:  Completing  the  Program 


page  32 


66.  Machine".  Having  completed  the  pieces  of  the  Selector  and  the  pieces  of  the 

Constructor,  I can  assemble  the  pieces  into  the  final  program  using  a Generate 
and  Process  paradigm  with  the  termination  test  before  the  generator. 

67.  Machine:  The  final  program,  without  any  meta-code  or  comments,  and  its 

translation  into  LISP  are  given  below: 

[LAMBDA  NIL 


1 (PROG 

NIL 

rest  •-  INPUT; 

1 

(SETQ  OUTPUT  NIL) 

OUTPUT  »-  NIL; 

1 

(SETQ  REST  INPUT) 

LOOP  UNTIL  DONE; 

1 LI 

IF 

i 

(COND 

REST  = NIL 

1 

((NULL  REST) 

THCN  DONE; 

ELEMENT  CAn(REST); 

REST  ♦-  CDn(REST); 

BEFORE  "FRONT"; 

AFTER  OUTPUT; 

LOOP  UNTII.  CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 

l£ 

AFTER  = NIL 

OR  CAR(AFTER)  ) ELEMENT 
THI'.N  correct  position  FOUND; 
BEFORE  - AFTER; 

AFTER  - CDR(AFTER); 

REPEAT; 

CORRECT  POSITION  FOUND; 

IZ 

BEFORE  = "FRONT" 

THEN  OUTPUT  ^ 

CONSfELEMENT  OUTPUT) 

ELSE 

CDR(BEFORE)  »- 
CONS(ELEMENT  AFTER); 

REPEAT; 

DONE:  HALT. 


L3 


(GO  L2))) 

(SETQ  ELEMENT  (CAR  REST)) 
(SETQ  REST  (CDR  REST)) 
(SETQ  BEFORE  "FRONT") 
(SETQ  AFTER  OUTPUT) 


(COND 

((OR  (NULL  AFTER) 

(GREATERP  (CAR  AFTER)  ELEMENT)) 
(GO  L4))) 

(SETQ  BEFORE  AFTER) 

(SETQ  AFTER  (CDR  AFTER)) 

(GO  L3) 


L4 


(COND 

((EQUAL  BEFORE  "FRONT") 

(SETQ  OUTPUT 

(CONS  ELEMENT  OUTPUT))) 

(T 

(RPLACD  BEFORE 

(CONS  ELEMENT  AFTER)))) 

(GO  LI) 

L2  (RETURN  NIL] 


page  33 


III.  TYPES  OP  PROGRAMMING  KNOWLEDGE 


On  reviewing  the  dialogue,  we  can  see  that  there  are  several  types  of 
knowledge  involved.  We  first  note  that  there  is  significant  use  of  a kind  of  strategy  or 
planning  knowledge.  On  one  level,  we  see  this  in  steps  S and  14,  where  the  system 
discusses  what  must  be  done  to  write  a transfer  program.  In  step  9 for  c triple,  the 
sub-steps  3 and  4,  where  the  transfer  order  and  the  transfer  termination  method  are 
chosen,  are  really  a kind  of  strategy  for  determining  the  form  that  the  basic  algorithm 
will  take.  On  a different  level,  we  see  a kind  of  global  optimization  in  steps  21  and  39, 
where  the  system  decides  that  information  structures  designed  for  one  purpose  are 
sufficient  for  another.  In  step  21,  for  example,  the  pointer  originally  chosen  to  save  the 
state  of  the  selector  (by  marking  the  dividing  point  between  those  elements  generated 
and  those  not  yet  generated)  Is  found  to  be  adequate  for  the  purpose  of  Indicating  the 
next  element  to  be  generated.  One  could  imagine,  as  an  alternative  to  this  type  of 
planning,  the  use  of  more  conventional  local  optimization  such  as  post-synthesis  removal 
or  combination  of  redundant  portions. 

We  also  see  that  the  system  maker  considerable  use  of  inference  and 
simplification  knowledge.  Inference  plays  a role  in  the  global  optimization  planning 
mentioned  above,  and  also  appears  in  steps  16  and  28,  where  the  selection  and 
construction  re-orderings  are  determined.  Simplification  and  inference  are  both 
apparent  in  steps  50  through  56,  where  the  test  for  the  correctness  of  the  position 
was  reduced  to  a simple  test  on  the  variable  AFTER.  Simplification  and  inference  are 
also  needed  in  step  36  where  the  system  decides  that  an  error  exit  (for  the  case  of  no 
position  being  found)  is  unnecessary. 


TYPES  OF  PROGRAMMING  KNOWLEDGE  pace  34 

Additionally,  there  arc  types  of  knowledge  which  are  spread  throughout  the 
dialogue.  Relatively  domain-specific  knowledge  (in  this  case,  about  sotting)  is 
particula^'ly  necessary  in  the  earlier  stages.  Language-specific  knowledge  (in  this  case, 
about  LISP)  is  necessary  when  the  final  code  is  being  generated.  General  procrarnming 
knowledge,  such  as  knowledge  about  set  enumeration  and  linked  lists,  is  necessary 
throughout  the  synthesis  process.  Further,  one  could  imagine  significant  use  of 
efficiency  information,  although  it  is  not  present  in  our  particular  dialogue. 

The  variety  of  types  and  amounts  o*  knowledge  used  in  the  dialogue  would  tend 
to  indicate  that  much  more  infoimation  is  required  for  automatic  synthesis  of  sorting 
programs  than  appeared  in  earlier,  computer-implemented,  systems  for  v;riting  sort 
programs  [3,  7,  11].  Ruth  has  developed  a formulation  of  the  knowledge  involved  in 
interchange  and  bubble  sort  programs  [9].  His  formulation  is  aimed  primarily  at  the 
analysis  of  simple  student  programs  in  an  instructional  environment  and  the  analysis  task 
as  defined  does  not  seem  to  require  the  same  depth  and  generality  of  knowledge 
suggested  by  our  dialogue.  Our  intuition  is  that  a significantly  greater  depth  of 
programming  knowledge  would  be  required  to  extend  his  formulation  to  a larger  class  of 
programs.  It  is  also  interesting  to  compare  the  information  involved  in  our  dialogue  to 
that  found  in  non-implemcntcd  (and  not  intended  for  machine  implementation)  human- 
oriented  guides  for  sort-algorithm  selection  and  in  textbooks  on  sorting  Martin  [8] 
gives  methods  for  selecting  a good  algorithm  for  a particular  sorting  problurn  Those 
algorithms  are  much  more  pov/erful  than  those  we  deal  with  and  their  derivation  would 
require  considerably  more  information.  We  note  that  at  the  level  of  algorithm 


I 


. .■^»OiWKii«iWiW»w>wyx*'aiw<t»>t«ft«lfVar«  •»s*te/>^M*i»u6ii»n*>»«JUMijiw»i»'Ji«fc’lK’iWtli  W*fM'in«1l*ttl»»»r3Wt';VVM*!WJJftW<Wl'1>>'.’'’!AWr..  r ' 


CM  t mmtmjH  Mr. •* 


TYPES  OF  PROGRAMMING  KNOWLEDGE 


page  35 


description  presented,  little  explicit  information  is  available  to  allow  pieces  of 
algorithms  to  be  fitted  together  or  to  allow  slight  modification  of  existing  algorithms.  A 
sorting  textbook  such  as  [5],  gives  several  orders  of  magnitude  more  information  on 
sorting  than  is  required  for  our  dialogue. 

Can  we  measure  or  estimate  in  some  way  how  much  knowledge  is  necessary  for 
program-understanding  systems?  The  fact  that  the  dialogue  describing  the  synthesis 
look  some  seventy  steps  (with  some  of  the  steps  rather  complex)  is  an  indication  that 
considerable  information  is  involved.  From  our  experiments,  we  estimate  that  about 
one  or  two  hundred  explicitly  stated  "facts"  or  rules  would  get  r.  synthesis  system 
through  the  underlying  steps  of  this  dialogue.  Furthermore,  it  is  our  guess  that  at  least 
this  much  knowledge  density  will  be  required  for  other  similar  tasks,  in  order  to  have 
the  flexibility  necessary  for  the  many  aspects  of  program  understanding.  Although  we 
are  suggesting  that  such  information  must  be  effectively  available  in  some  form  to  a 
system,  we  are  not  in  a position  to  estimate  how  much  of  this  information  should  be 
stated  explicitly  (as,  say,  rules),  how  much  should  be  derivable  (from,  say,  meta-rules), 
how  much  should  be  learned  from  experience,  or  available  in  any  other  fashion. 


IV.  SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS 


In  this  pap.r  we  have  tried  to  exemplify  and  specify  the  knowledge  appropriate 
for  a program-understanding  system  which  can  synthesize  small  programs,  by  presenting 
a dialogue  between  a hypothetical  version  of  such  a system  and  a user.  Our  conjecture 


SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS 


pace  36 


is  that  unless  a system  is  capable  of  exceeding  the  reasoning  power,  and  even  some  of 
the  communication  abilities,  exemplified  by  the  dialogue,  the  system  will  not  effectively 
"understand"  what  it  is  doing  well  enough  to  synthesize,  analyze,  modify,  and  debug 
programs,  It  appears  that  a system  which  attempts  to  meet  this  standard  must  have 
targe  amounts  of  many  different  kinds  of  knowledge,  Most  such  programming  knowledge 
remains  to  be  codified  into  some  form  of  machine  implementable  theory.  In  ^set,  the 
codification  of  such  knowledge  is  one  of  the  main  research  problems  in  program- 
understanding  systems. 

As  for  our  own  work,  in  the  near  future  we  expect  to  refine  our  experimental 
system  until  it  approaches  fas  closely  as  seems  useful  and  possible)  the  standard 
suggested  by  our  dialogue  (but  without  the  actual  language  interface).  We  hope  then 
to  extend  the  system  to  deal  with  several  different  types  of  sorting  programs.  Perhaps 
then  we  will  be  in  a better  position  to  estimate  the  requirements  of  largu-r  program- 
understanding  systems. 

V.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The  authors  gratefully  acknowledge  the  helpful  suggestions  given  by  Avra  J. 
Cohn,  Brian  P.  McCune,  Richard  J.  Waldinger,  and  Elaine  Kant  after  numerous  readings  of 
earlier  drafts  of  this  paper  Computer  time  for  our  preliminary  tests  was  made 
available  by  the  Artificial  Intelligence  Center  of  the  Stanford  Research  Institute. 


VI.  REFERENCES 


[11  Dahl,  O.J.,  Dijkstra.  E.W.,  and  Hoare,  C.A.R.,Structured  Procrammine  (New 
York:  Academic  Press,  Inc.,  1 972). 

[21  Floyd  Robert  W.,  Toward  Interactive  Design  of  Correct  Programs, 
Computer  Science  report  STAN-CS-7I-235,  (Stanford  University,  September,  1971). 

[31  Green,  C.  Cordell,  The  Application  of  Theorem  Proving  to  Quest ior»- 
Answering  Systems,  Cornpufer  Science  report  STAN-CS-60- 138,  AIM-96, 

AD696394,(Stanford  University,  Au-ust,  1959). 

[41  Green,  C.C  , Walding.  i,  R.J , Barotow,  O R.,  Elschlager,  R , Lenat,  D B,  McCune, 
BP  Shaw  De!  and  Stcmbei:.,  U,  Progress  Report  on  Program-Understanding 
Systems,  Compu’ef  Scienc  report  STAN-CS- 74-444,  (Stanford  University,  August, 

1974). 


[51  <nuth,  Donald  E.,  Sorting  and  Searching,  Tht  Art  of  Com/>i(fir  / toiioimminf,.  vol. 
3 (Reading,  Mass.;  Addison-V7cslry,  1973). 

[61  Knuth,  Donald  E.,  Structured  Programming  with  60  TO  Statements,  Comf>tnig 
Surveys,  vol.  6 (December,  1974),  261-301. 

[71  Kowalski,  R A,  Predicate  logic  as  programming  language.  Memo  no.  70, 
Dept,  of  Computational  Logic,  fUmversity  of  Edinburgh,  November,  1974). 

[81  Martin,  William  A,  Sorting,  r c<rfij<uttr.g  Surveys,  vol  ? (December,  1971),  147- 

174. 

[91  Ruth,  Gregory  R,  Analysis  of  Algorithm  Implementations,  Project  MAC 
report  MAC  TR-130,  (Massaclur.-  tts  institute  of  Technology,  May,  1974). 

[101  Teitelman,  Warren,  INTERLISP  Reference  Manual,  (Xerox  Palo  Alto 
Research  Center  and  Bolt  Ceran''k  X Nc'.vman,  1974). 

(Ill  van  Emden,  MH,  Tirst-ordcr  predicate  logic  as  a high-level  orogran 
language.  Report  MIP-R-IOG,  Dept  of  Machine  Intelligence,  (University  of  Edinburgh, 

May,  1 974) 

(121  Zahn,  Charles  T.,  A Control  Statement  for  Natural  Top-down  Structured 
Programming,  presented  at  Symposium  on  Programming  Languages,  Pans,  v 1 974). 


