DOCUMENT BESOMS 



ED 210 011 

A3TH0B 
TITLE 

INSTITOTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

POB DATE 

GBANT 

NOTE 

EDBS PBICE 
DESCBIPTOBS* 



IDENTIFIERS 



IB 009 7t|'8 " 

Vaughan, W.. s.,, Jr-; Mavor, Anne S* 
Simulation of a Schema Theory-Based Knowledge 
Delivery System for Scientists,, 
W/V Associates, Annapolis, Md» 

National Science Foundation* Washington r D, C, Div. 

Information Science and Technology., 

May 81 

IST-79014896 

136p, 

MF01/PC06 Plus Postage, 

♦Artificial Intelligence; *Cognitive Processes; 
*Computer Oriented Programs; Databases; Delivery 
Systems: Epistemology ; *Information Betrieval; 
Information Seeking; Microbiology; *Models; Online 
Systems; *Besearch Tools; Search Strategies 
Schema Theory 



of 



ABSTBACT 

A future, automated, interactive, knowledge delivery 
system for use by researchers was tested using a manual cognitive 
model. Conceptualized from schema/frame/script theories in cognitive 
psychology and artificial: intelligence, this hypothetical system was 
simulated by two psychologists who interacted with four researchers 
in microbiology to define functional measurements for computer 
applications^ The system worked in real time to proyide knowledge* 
delivery services to real research problems through three phases of 
systems operations--dia gnosis , search^ and product design. Main 
systems elements included research paradigms as procedural scripts, 
information needs as weakly specified frame terminals? and content 
irodels as frames. The system^ schema enables it to generate 
representations of information needs as schemata, to plan and conduct 
targeted searches for relevant information, and to use its inductive 
and deductive inferer.cing capabilities. Appendices include 
interviewing procedures to generate topics and methodological 
paradigms as well as case studies of actual searches. Nineteen 
references are included, (Author/BAA) 



*********************** ^***** ************************************ 

* Be productions supplied by EDBs are the best that can be'made * 

* from the original document* * 
*********** ********* **************** *********************************** 



ERLC 



US. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

CENTER (ERIC) 
$\ The document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organuation 
g \ originating tt. 

Q Mmor changes haie been made to improve 
reproduction Quality. 

• Po»nts of view or opinions stated in this docu- 

Oment do not necessanry represent official NlE 
positon or pobcy. 

r ~| SIMULATION OF A SCHEMA THEORY-BASED 

°^ KNOWLEDGE DELIVERY SYSTEM FOR SCIENTISTS 

i 

W. S. Vaughan, Jr. 
Anne S. Mavor 



Prepared for: 

Division of Information Science and Technology 
Directorate for Biological, Behavioral 
and Social Sciences 
National Science Foundation 
Washington , D . C . 10550 



Prepared by: 

W/V Associates 
422 Sixth Street 
Annapolis, Maryland 21403 




[idd 

Investigator 
University of Maryland 



Technical Report Prepared lender University of Maryland Purchase Order R-264148 
National Science Foundation Grant Number 1ST 7904896 

Q 

^ May 1981 

ERIC 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Dr. Edward C. Weiss, at this time Acting Director, Division 
of Information Science and, Technology, has provided the authors 
with a strong sense of direction and encouragement to persevere 
over the several years required for the present conceptual- 
ization to evolve. 

Dr. Jerry S. Kidd, Professor of Information Science, Univer- 
sity of Maryland, has provided the project with long-term techn- 
ical and administrative support. He has played an important 
role in identifying potential scientist participants, and in 
selecting and guiding graduate assistants who carried out many 
of the information support activities. 

Dr. Rita Colwell, Professor of Marine Microbiology, Univer- 
sity of Maryland/ generously permitted the authors access to 
her graduate students over several years of exploration into 
the feasibility of applying schema-like concepts to researcher- 
information system interaction. 

Finally, we most gratefully acknowledge our appreciation 
of and indebtedness to the microbiologists at Naval Medical 
Research Institute and University of Maryland who patiently 
spent many hours with us in our role as "the system". 



ERIC 



i 

3 



ABSTRACT 

A future , automated, interactive , knowledge-delivery system 
for use by researchers \was conceptualized from schema/frame/ 
sfcript theories in cognitive psychology and artificial intelli- 
gence. This hypothetical system was simulated by two psycholo- 
gists who interacted with four researchers in microbiology 
as a means to define functional requirements for computer appli- 
cations . The 1 manual 1 ( cognitive ) system worked in real time 
to provide knowledge delivery services to real research problems 
through three phases of system operations: Diagnosis, Search, 
and Product Design. 

Main elements of the schema/frame/script-based system in- 
cluded the* following: 

• Research paradigms in a given subfi'eld of science 
are like procedural scripts which a researcher 
follows and which a system can learn. 

• Information needs are like empty or weakly specified 
terminals in a researcher's content model or frame. 

• A system can use 'a semi-structured procedure to 
generate a representation of the researcher 1 s 
information needs as schemata. 

• The- system's schema enables it to plan and conduct 
a targeted search for* relevant information, it 
is not, and need not be, a veridical representation 
of the researcher's schema. 

* • A system with inductive and deductive inferencing 
capabilities can elaborate abstract procedural 
models from the top down arid can construct and 
elaborate content models in • the area of the users 
• information needs. 

• Content models are like frames. They are real- 
world hierarchical structures of known and verifi- 
able facts about content and method in a scientific 
subf ield. 

• Content models can be used to hierarchically struc- 
ture potential knowledge needs in the form of ques- 
tion hierarchies. 



4 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Section 
I 
II 



III 



IV 



V 



INTRODUCTION 

SCHEMA THEORY CONSTRUCTS AND APPLICATION 

A. Schemata, Frames and Scripts 

B. Simulation Rationale arid Procedure 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR MODELS 
a;- Procedural Models 
B'. Content Models 

C . Summary 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR DIAGNOSIS 
A. System Procedure for Diagnosis 



B. Summary 

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR SEARQH 

A. System Procedure for Search 

B. System Requirements for Indexes to 
Bibliographic Databases 

C. System Requirements for Analysis 
of Content 



1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 

6. 



Recognize Usages and Relationships 

Recognize Definitions and Synonyms * 

Recognize Members of A Set 

Recognize Elements of Content Models 

Recognize Elements of Procedural 
Scripts 

Recognize Results, Categories 
of Study Etc. 



System Requirements for Responding 
to Interdependent Questions 

Summary 



Page 

1 

5 
5 
8 

15 
15 
21 
26 

27 
27 



1. 


Step 


1: 


Context for Questions 


27 


2. 


Step 


2: 


Question Sets and Hierarchies 


32 


3. 


Step 


3: 


Context for Answers 


34 



38 

39 
39 

40 

42 
43 
43 
44 
45 

46 

47 

47 
49 



v 



5 



TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued) 



Section 
VI 



VII 



SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCT DESIGN 
AND PRESENTATION 



A. 
B. 



System Procedure for Product Design 

Requirements for Researcher-Controlled 
Output 

1. User-Directed Sequence 

2. User-Directed Formats 



C . Summary 
REFERENCES 
APPENDIX A: 



PROCEDURE FOR GENERATING 
A CONTEXT FOR QUESTIONS 



APPENDIX B: CASE STUDIES 



Page 

51 
51 

52 
52 
53 

56 

61 

A-l 
B-l 



vi 



6 



Figure 



LIST OF FIGURES 

Page 



1 Overview of Procedure for -Simulating 

An Interactive Knowledge Delivery System 

2 Illustration of A Context- for Questions 

3 Organization of Question Sets Representing 
Major Areas of Information Needs 

4 Question Hierarchy Within A Set 

5 . Document Characterization 

6 Document Synopsis-with-Pointers 

7 Document Condensation 



13 
29 

33 
35 
57 
58 
59 



VI l 



7 



Table 



ERIC 



LIST OF TABLES 



Procedural Model for Taxonomy Research: 
Main Phases* and Tasks 

Procedural Model for Vaccine Development 
Research: Main Phases and Tasks 




Vlll 



8 



17 



19 

22 
22 
23 



3 Isolation Methods Model 

4 Secondary Pathogen Disease Model 

5 Virulence Factors Model 

6 An Illustration^f How Content Model 
Elaboration Enabled System to Generate 

A Question Hierarchy 25 

7 Illustrated Procedure for Generating 

A Context for Questions - 30 

8 An Illustration of A Context-for-Answers 

Schema 37 

9 Search Results for Pseudomonas Aeruginosa 43 



SIMULATION OF A SCHEMA THEORY-BASED 
KNOWLEDGE DELIVERY SYSTEM FOR SCIENTISTS 




INTRODUCTION- 



The present state of automation in science information 
applications is represented by computer-based systems for re- 
trieving both primary source and bibliographic information . 
In 1980, approximately 125 bibliographic .databases and a few 
dozen non-bibliographic databases were on-line and commercially 
available (Hoover, 1980) . The bibliographic databases in science 
and engineering tend to be discipline-oriented, i.e., chemistry, 
biology, medicine, toxicology; although special-topic systems 
have N been developed in response to critical problems such as 
energy. Scope .of topical coverage and therefore database size 
vary across systems, but the order of magnitude for coverage 
is thousands of journals and for* size, millions of ' citations . 
The stored material consists of bibliographic citations in 
all tases and may include lists of descriptor words and ab- 
stracts. Only a few systems include an on-line document-ordering 
service and full-text retrieval is currently in an experimental 
stage. 

The bibliographic control systems are currently an important 

resource for libraries and information centers; they have had 

« « 
a major effect on the training requirements of ^brarians and 

on the way libraries collect, retrieve and disseminate informa- 
tion. Their impact on working scientists* ^however, has been 
less visible. Research scientists rarely interact with on- 
lirfS^ systems as information support devices, and when retro- . 
spective searches ar£ required it is typically a librarian 
who conducts the search and not the scientist (Mavor and Vaughan, 
1980). Because the databases are so broad and the librarian- 
intermediary understands the scientist 1 s information needs 
at the level of topic-designating words only, searches tend 
to yield large numbers of citations, many of which are either 



irrelevant or redundant. In overview, the current use of auto- 
mation in science information applications is more to facilitate 
the archival function of libraries than to efficiently meet 
the knowledge needs of the research scientist. 

One avenue of research in science information systems appli- 
cations is toward a future , interactive, computer-based system 
whose commodity is more like knowledge than citations (Weiss, 
1977). The general conceptual outline of a future system in- 
cludes characteristics in sharp contrast to the present state. 
Databases will be more numerous, each covering material in 
narrowly-defined content domains. The content of a given data- 
base will, be information structures representing the current 
state of development in the domains. The definition of domain 
may be quite restrictive, e.g., at the level of subfield within a 
scientific discipline: vaccine development research in micro- 
biology or imagery research in cognitive psychology. System 
terminals will be located in the research laboratories or of- 
fices and the "operators will be the scientists who do research 
in the subfield defined by the system's database. The inter- 
action will be accomplished by a user-directed dialogue whose 
objective is to transfer to the system the researcher's repre- 
sentation of his current needs for new knowledge. The- system 
will store both procedural and content models typical of re- 
search in the subfield and the need-diagnosing process will 
be accomplished by sophisticated software which implements 
current schema/frame theories of cognitive psychology and arti- 
ficial intelligence. $ Search will be directed toward filling 
explicit gaps in the researcher's knowledge schema, and the 
system's output will be new knowledge in the context of the' 
researcher's 'old' knowledge. 

The project described in .this report is viewed as a primi- 
tive first 'step toward uncovering £ome of the functional re- 
quirements of a schema/frame-theory based system as outlined 
above. The authors simulated an 'intelligent system' in inter- 
action with working researchers in an unfamiliar field, and 

2 

10 



kept track, as best they could, of the requirements they had 
to' satisfy in order to provide effective, knowledge- delivery 
services. Part II of this ' report presents the rationale for 
a schema/frame-based system and an overview of the approach. 
Parts III-VI present functional requirements for various system 
operations in diagnosing knowledge needs, searching for answers^ 
and presenting answer-like material to each of four researchers 
in microbiology. 
t" 



I 




II. SCHEMA THEORY CONSTRUCTS AND APPLICATIONS 

A. Schemata, Frames and Scripts 

Modern cognitive psychology has revived an old theoretical 
construct, the schema (Bartlett, 1932), as the basic element 
of 'memory . and the central mediator of cogniti.ve processes; 
particularly recall and comprehension. (For reviews of modern 
schema theory see Norman and Bobrow, 1975; Rumelhart, 1975; 
Rumelhart and Ortony, 1977; Spiro, 1977.) Similarly, and more 
or less" simultaneously, researchers in artificial intelligence 
(AI) have stressed the need for large information structures, 
(frames) which integrate both procedural and content knowledge , 
as context required for computer-based AI systems to 'under- 
stand' instructions and relationships in even very limited 
information domains. ^ (For reviews of frames theory and appli- 
cations see Minsky, 1975; Kuipers, 1975;' Winograd, 1975; Brown 
and Burton, 1975.) Both schema and frame theories tend to 
converge in their conceptualizations cf how information is 
represented in memory and what operations might be performed 
on these representations which explain human comprehension 
and recall phenomena. Where collaborative research is conducted 
by cognitive psychologists and AI researchers' (e.g., Schank 
and Abelson, 1977) computer programs are designed and operated 
as analogues of human cognitive processes. In a sense, computer 
programs are a means for testing psychological theories of 
cognitive structure and function. 

Scripts are generalized event sequences which a person 
develops from repeated experiences with instances of the gen- 
eral event or episode (Schank, 1975a, 1975b). Schank ' s examples 
are from everyday experience and include both situational scripts 
"as illustrated by a child's birthday party,- and procedural 
scripts as 'illustrated by the taking of a .train to the city. 
In general scripts are organizing contexts which enable a person 



9 

ERIC 



12 



to understand what is happening and to set up expectations 
about what will happen next once he recognizes that he is 'in' 
an instance of a particular script • In a sense, a script is 
a time-extended frame/schema ; many of Schank 1 s descriptions 
of script properties match those of frames/schemata. For ex- 
ample , in all three theories the construct serves as a context 
of prior knowledge which is used to interpret or comprehend 
new information; comprehension is defined as a process of search- 
ing memory for an existing structure which makes sense of an 
otherwise novel event • The constructs have both an assimilative 
and reconfiguring capability; the schema/frame/script is used 
f or t comprehending and assimilating new information and is, 
in turn, modified by the new input. Recall is reconstructive 
and involves retrieval of partial schema as modified by in- 
ferences and intervening events. The constructs impart powerful 
inferencing and generalizing power; orice a portion of a schema/ 
frame/script is 'instantiated', all of the remaining parts 
can be inferred to be true. The constructs each have 'special- 
ists', or 'demons' or ' f ramekeepers ' ; they function to search 
out empirical evidence that an inferred event or element can 
be verified. Frames/schemata/scripts have empty 'terminals' 
or 'slots' which represent gaps or weakly held elements which 
may be assigned 'default values' by the inferencing mechanisms. 

In applying schema theory constructs to the development 
of a future, interactive knowledge delivery system for use 
by researchers, we make the following assumptions: 

• Doing research is like following a procedural script. 

We assume that a large part of a researcher's training 
and experience can be represented as the accumulation of pro- 
cedural scripts of the research process as practiced in his 
subfield. We assume that in all of science, the; number of 
Methodological paradigms is far fewer than the number of research 
topics , and that within a given discipline, or subf ield of 



6 

13 



a discipline, classes of methods are sufficiently few in number 
that programs could be constructed which described them all. 
In psychology, for example, the research topics are large rela- 
tive to the major classes of methodological paradigm: experi- 
mental t correlational f psychometrics , psychophysics , clinical 
case study, etc. At some . level of subfield, the assumption 
is capable of implementation: if not all of psychology, perhaps 
all of psychophysics. The point of the assumption, at whatever 
level it can be applied, is that once a researcher has chosen 
to approach a topic with a given methodolpgical paradigm, imple- 
mentation of the method is highly prescribed. There is a series 
of hierarchical, time-ordered steps to be taken which involve 
decisions the researcher must resolve in order to progress. 
Assuming that a computer program 'knows* the researcher's chosen 
script, the system can locate his progress, identify the deci- 
sions which are required now, know that certain prior tasks/ 
steps have already been accomplished, and anticipate next steps. 

* An information need is like an empty or weakly specified 
' terminal ' in the researcher's schema/frame . 

As the research progresses through its various phases, 
the researcher is required to make judgments and resolve deci- 
sions in order to accomplish the required tasks/steps. At 
these junctures, the researcher brings his knowledge to bear 
on the problem. Where he experiences knowledge gaps or uncer- 
tainties he identifies new information requirements. These 
gaps occur in the context of the researcher's already-structured 
schema or complex of interrelated schemata. To the extent 
that the researcher's current knowledge structures can be ap- 
proximated - by the system, the new knowledge requirement can 
be precisely specified. we assume that a diagnostic procedure 
can be developed by which a computer program interrogates a 
researcher to create information structures which approximate 



ERIC 



7 

14 



t 



the researcher's^ schemata, identifies information gaps, and 
specifies the characteristics of information that satisfies 
gaps . 

B. Simulation Rationale and Procedure 

In the present project, a two-person team of scientists 
trained in experimental psychology simulated a future inter- 
active system as- a means to identify functional requirements 
for its design. The strategy was for this team to simulate a 
'smart' software system in conversational interaction with re- 
searchers who had current information needs, and in doing so 
to record the functional requirements the system* had to satisfy 
in order to provide effective information support. This 'system' 
interacted with four researchers in microbiology who were will- 
ing to participate in the interactive sessions for the value 
of the information the system promised to deliver. Three of 
the participants were senior researchers at a Navy laboratory 
involved in vaccine development, each with a different organism 
and at a different stage in the process. The fourth researcher 
was a university Ph. D. candidate doing thesis work on the 
taxonomy of selected marine microorganisms. 

The ' system ' personnel were in no sense a ' tabula rasa ? . 
Both had strong backgrounds in research methods in psychology 
generally and 'experimental methods in particular. Our ability 
to comprehend and model research procedures in vaccine develop- 
ment and taxonomy was due in 1? ie part to the strong methodol- 
ogical analogies of the former to factorial experimental design, 
and of the latter to discriminant function analysis. Both 
team members were less than naive with respect to the content; 
we certainly knew more than the average citizen since the pre- 
vious year had been spent pre-testing parts of the simulation 
idea with graduate students working on various problems in 
marine microbiology. We had not encountered either the taxonomy 
or the vaccine development model, but we .knew an unspecif iably- 
large amount of content relative to a naive system. Our attempts 



8 



ERLC J * 



to specify the procedural and content requirements of a future 
interactive system were almost certainly underestimates in 
both areas; orv the other hand, a 'system 1 with rto schema/frame, 
probably could not have interacted at all . 

The procedure of simulating a computer system by using 
human substitutes might seem peculiar to some readers .because 
contemporary practice in artificial intelligence research is 
to use the computer system to simulate human behavior. However, 
the present procedural orientation has a relatively long and 
fruitful history-. In the early days of computer system develop- 
ment, it was often possible to conceive of a function that 
a computer could potentially fulfill but not have either the 
CPU or memory capacity much less the program to actually perform 
the function. The basic question for research was: Is it 
worthwhile to build the capacity and create the programming? 
Parsons (1972) describes a series of experiments done in l f jf>2 
that followed this approach and successfully distinguished 
between several alternative, functional specifications for a 
computer-aided command and control system. Similar methods 
were employed in a series of studies of decision making in 
complex organizational settings (Kennedy, 1962). The orienta- 
tion in the preseat instance was much the same. The functions 
conceived for an interactive, computer-based information system 
have not yet been translated into working computer programs. 
The intent was to make a preliminary determination of whether 
the effort to formulate such programs could be a worthwhile 
enterprise. 

Our initial plan was to concentrate exclusively on defining 
a future system's functional requirements for information need 
diagnosis: the front-end of a knowledge delivery system. Re- 
quirements for need diagnosis resulting from the project would 
not be tied to the current techniques and mechanisms for inform- 
ation storage and retrieval as would results of follow-on activ- 
ities.' In practice, however, real scientists actively engaged 



in important research are not inclined to stop at having their 
information needs diagnosed, and so the 'system 1 simulated 
remaining phases of searching for and retrieving documents , 
extracting information, from documents and preparing information 
products for evaluation by each researcher. A typical simula- 
tion involved several interactive work sessions interrupted 
by time delays during which the 'system 1 searched and screened 
citation lists, tracked-down journal articles from a library, 
etc.; the time frame covering several weeks. 

The general procedure was as follows: the 'system' and 
researcher held a first meeting to define researcher information 
needs using a semi-structured "procedure. This interaction 
varied considerably on the dimension of dialogue control. The 
system had a prescribed set of information categories to learn 
about as a context for understanding the" researcher's needs, 
and in some cases the interaction was driven by the system 
proceeding through its list of topics, in others the researcher 
took control and the system filled-in appropriate information 
categories. The system reviewed what it had learned from the 
diagnostic interaction and organized the researcher's informa- 
tion needs into sets of questions. A second interactive session 
was held wherein the researcher was asked to review the System's 
conception of his information ne.eds as question sets and to 
provide an approximation of his knowledge structure or schema 
for each question. Next, the system planned a, key word-oriented 
search strategy with appropriate bibliographic systems/ typi- 
cally MEDLINE and BIOSIS, to generate citation lists. The 
system screened these citations for relevance to the researcher's 
questions and selected a small subset (less than 20) of the 
most clearly relevant. The question set/citation list combina- 
tions were reviewed by the researcher in a third interactive 
session during which the researcher confirmed the relevance 
of the system ' s selections and eliminated those with which 
he was already familiar. Then the system located the documents 



10 

17 



0 



for the few remaining citations (usually 6-8), read them, ex- 
tracted information that appeared relevant to the researcher's 
questions and prepared informational materials in a variety 
of formats for presentation to the researcher. These products 
were reviewed by the researcher in a fourth interactive session, 
mainly to evaluate' the informational content of the materials 
and to suggest changes in their format or level of descriptive 
generality/specificity which would better suit the researcher's 
purposes. The document-reading £nd product-design steps were 
recycled for each of the researchers 1 questions so that product 
evaluations for Question #1 led to modifications in product 
design for Question #2. The interactive procedure is illustrated 
in Figure i I 

From the system 1 s . point of view , the simulation / ^of the 
automated knowledge delivery system progressed through three 
main phases: Diagnosis, Search, and Product Design. How we 
did each phase arid what we learned about future system require- 
ments from examining our experiences in doing them are 'described 
3 in the following sections, Ill-vi. Appendix B contains the 
four specific case s^udy reports on which 1 the generalizations 
of these sections are based. 



11 

■ 18 



*7 



^ Interaction #1 




Interaction #2 


System/ researcher 
interactive need- 
diagnosis session 






Researcher reviews 
question~sets, pro- 
vides question-^ 
specific context 


















- — _ f 






System >v . — 





learns some 
procedure and 
some-content as con- 
text for understand- 
ing researcher 
information 
needs. 




Figure 1, Overview of -Procedure for Simulating 
An Interactive Knowledge Delivery System 



t 




Interaction #3 

Researcher screens 
system-generated cita- 
tion lists for relevance 
and awareness* 



ERLC 



20 



System 
obtains docu- 
ments, reads them, 
extracts information 
relevant to 

quest ions . 



Interaction #4 

Researcher eva luates in- 
formation products; gives 
direction for future 
product design. 



System 
produces 
informational 
materials in 
a format, at a 
level of 
detail , 
^etc . 



21 



III. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR MODELS 



Implementation of a schema-theory based approach to an 
automated knowledge delivery system required both procedural 
and content models as context for system-researcher interactions 
during Diagnosis' and for. system-database interactions during 
Search. In the present application, the system initiated diag- 
nostic interactions using a procedural model or Script* ap- 
propriate to the researcher's approach as a framework for at- 
taching content information about the -researcher's' topic. 
As the system-researcher interaction proceeded , th<* system 
expanded the procedural model hierarchically 'dowfiward' to 
the level of specificity of the task or step that defined the 
researcher's current state of progress and developed one or 
more content models to the extent necessary as a context for 
the .system to comprehend the researcher's discussion of his 
knowledge needs. During Search, the system used the elaborated 
content models to recognize relevant information for extraction 
and delivery to the researcher. 

A. Procedural Models 



Two general procedural models were constructed to represent 
two research paradigms in microbiology: taxonomy research 
(Table l)and vaccine development research (Table ?.), „ Each 
model was developed hierarchically from the most general level, 
Phases, to a second level, Tasks within phases. The models 
were intended to describe the operations required to do research 
in taxonomy and in vaccine development; they defined how re- 
search is done without reference to specific organisms of con- 
cern to the research. 



15 



22 



The system successfully used these rather weak procedural 
models as" a point of departure for Diagnosis. Each researcher 
was able to locate his current research activity within the 
Phase/Task structure of the model, and begin the discussion 
of his content problems in context of the task to be performed; 
i.e., the procedural model served as a frame for initial content 
fnodel construction. The system was able to expand its initial 
procedural models in the area where the researcher was working. 
As can be seen from the vaccine development research model 
of Table 2, the system learned least about the task structure 
in the Antigen Test and Evaluation phase; hone jof our researcher 
participants was working at that stage.' Where the information 
needs of the researcher included content about methods, the 
system was able to expand the Phase/Task model in taxonomy 
-research to the level of steps within tasks as shown by taking a 
. section out of Table 1 , • as follows: 

Procedural Model for Taxonomy Research 
Phase 2. -.Strain Selection \ 

» 

Task E. Outline Procedures for Isolating Desired 
Strains 

Step 1. Select An Isolation Method 

Step 2. Select A Recovery Medium 

Step 3. Select or Modify Isolation Apparatus 
for Field Applications 



16 

ERIC . 23 



Table 1. Procedural Model for Taxonomy Research: 
Main Phases and Tasks ^ 



Phase 1. Problem Selection 



Tasks 



A. ^Identify au organism as not classified at the species level, 

B. Determine the importance of studying the organism. 

C. Determine the feasibility of studying the organism. 



Phase 2. Strain Selection 



Tasks 



A. Determine the group or groups from which strains are to be sampled. 

B. Determine where strains should be sampled from and how many strains 
should be used. 

C. Develop a sampling plan. 



D. Out line** procedures for collecting samples. 

E. Outline procedures for isolating strains. 

F. Collect sample. 
G* Isolate strains. 

H. Receive and analyze samples from other investigators. 



Phase 3« "Test Selection 



Tasks 



D. 
E. 



Determine types of tests to be performed: serological, biochemical, 
morphological. 

»* » • 
Identify tests performed by other investigators' or standard tests 
that might be useful. 

Select tests to be performed from existing tests based on informa- 
tion on: 

• Discrimination 

• Precision 

• Reliability 

• Feasibility 

Design/develop new tests to be performed. 

Perform tests to see if they meet criteria of discr iminabi 1 ity , 
et;c. 

Reduce number of -,test s to those that perform required discrimina- 
tions for classification. 



9 

ERLC 



17 



24 



Table 1. Procedural Model for Taxonomy Research: 
Main Phases and Tasks (Continued) 


Phase 4. Test Implementation 


Tasks 


A. 


Outline procedures/methods/equipment requirements of each test. 


B. 


Grow organisms and separate into groups for test applications. 


C. 


Perform tests. 


D. 


Record results. 


Phase 5. Cluster Analysis of Test Results 


Tasks 


A. 


Organize results into a format for computer processing using Numer- * 
ical Taxonomy Program. 


B. 


Input data into computer and obtain printouts of cluster analysis. 


C. 


Input test data on other organisms in the genus which were collected 
•and provided by outside investigators. 


Phase 6. Interpretation of Clusters * 

— — _ ^ ! 


Tasks * 


A. 


Analyze 4 clusters to determine relatedness between test organism 
and other organisms in the data base. /* 


B. 


Determine if relatedness is high enough to consider test organism 
representative of a cluster. 


C. 


If t<*st organism is related to a cluster containing a known species, 
name the organism. 


D. 


If organism .is not related to a known spec ies check other sources , 
use other classification systems, publish description in profes- 
sional ) i terature. 



18 



25 



I 



Table 2. Procedural Model for Vaccine Development -Research: 

Main Phases and Tasks 



Phase 1. Problem Selection 



Tasks 



A. Select organism to study and identify species or strains which ap- 
pear to be disease correlates. 

B. Establish importance of studying the selected organism based on 
types of disease caused, disease severity, and existing treatment 



problems, 



Phase 2. Culture Requirements Determination 



Tasks 



A. Obtain organisms from other laboratories/investigators. 

B. Isolate the organism; deve lop/ learn procedures for identifying and 
isolating organism either from hew* ceils or from the environment. 

C. Grow organisms for experimentation; develop/learn organism's growth 
media requirements, i.e\', the compounds metabolized jy the organism. 



Phase 3. Organism Characterization 



I Tasks 
i " 



| A. Describe the organism's morphological characteristics through elec- 
V tronmicroscopy; determine sizes, chapes; presence of attachment 
i structures, identify and characerize attachment structures, 

i B. Describe organism's biochemical characteristics; deve lop/ 1 earn ap- 
| propriate tests. 

, C. Describe toxic prpducts produced .by t-he organism; develop learn 
assays and tests for determining presence and amount of each se- 
lected toxic product and specify the chemical structure of each 
toxin identified. 

D. Identify strains which produce various combinations of toxic products. 



Phase 4. Virulence Factors Determination 



Tasks 



Examine each toxic product in terms of penetration, attachment, 
destruction of host cells; test strains with varying combination's 
of toxic products on host cells. 

Examine the role, of attachment structures (pili) in establishing 
the, bacteria in a host cell; compare organisms with and without 
pili and measure the level of disease caused in the host cell. 



19 



26 



Table 2. Procedural Model for Vaccine Development Research: 
Main Phases and Tasks (Continued) 



Phase 4. Virulence Factors Determination (continued) 



Tasks 



C. Determine the biochemical characteristics of pili (or any effective 
attachment structure) and identify substances that destroy these 
structures; deve lop/ learn/conduct biochemical analysis. 

D. Select /deve I op animal models for testing impact of various ""toxins 
(singly and in combination). 

E. Determine disease levels and organ damage caused by various combina- 
tions of toxic products; develop experiments testing different dos- 
ages under different conditions with one or more animal models. 

F. Describe organ damage due to presence of organism in human hosts. 



Tasks 

A. Develop antigen(s) which will act against the toxins produced by 
the organism. 

B. Conduct experiments to determine safe but effective dosages of anti- 



Phase 5. Antigen Test and Evaluation 



gen. 




20 



27 



I 

i 

; 

; 

/ 

a 

B. Content Models 

Initial system-researcher interaction in need diagnosis in- 
volved the piecemeal construction of content structures which 
defined the topics of concern to the researcher within a given 
research paradigm. The vaccine development research model, for 
example, was used with, three researchers each studying a dif- 
ferent organism in a different phase. One researcher was ex- 
ploring growth media requirements for Rickettsia, a second 
researcher was determining the enzyme product characteristics of 
Aeromonas, Campylobacter and Yersinia, and a third was doing ex- 
periments to determine virulence factors of Pseudomonas aerugi- 
nosa. The procedural model enabled the system to comprehend what 
the researcher was trying to do (tasks), and content models were 
required for the system to understand the organisms and phenomena 
which were the topics of concern in doing the tasks. The content 
models were required as context for comprehending what the 
researcher knew and needed to know for the purposes of his 
current phase/task/step. The procedural models enabled the sys- 
tern to comprehend reasons why the researcher needed knowledge, 
i.e., its task application; the content models were required 
to specify the area and level of detail of his knowledge needs. 

Three examples of content models are shown as Tables 3, 

4, and 5. Table 3. Isolation Methods Model, was developed 
as a context for identifying the knowledge needs of the re- 
searcher who planned to isolate aquatic strains of streptococcus 
from Chesapeake Bay. Table 4. Secondary Pathogens Disease 
Model, provided a general context for understanding the require- 
ments of two researchers who were working with secondary or 
opportunistic pathogens (pseudomonas and aeromonas). Table 

5. Virulence Factors Model, enabled the system to comprehend 
needs for information about how the enzyme products of bacteria 
contribute to disease development. 



21 

ERIC 2S 



Table 3 ♦ Isolation Methods Model 



• There are several methods for isolating a bacterial genus (e.g., 
streptococcus) from a sample of water; these methods are usually 
called 'tests' and include Membrane Filter Test, Most Probable 
Number Test, etc. 

• All isolation methods include the use of a recovery medium; a 
recovery' medium is a comb inat ion of compounds designed to select 
for the organism; an effective medium recovers only the target 
organisms and rejects all others. 

• Compounds composing the recovery media are in the form of broths 
or agars and ore often labeled by letters which designate the 
ingredients of the compound (e.g., PSE media, PSE broth, PSE agar 
are synonymous). 

• A range of media can be used with a given isolation method; the 
selection depends on the organism to be captured. 

• In addition to selectivity in recovering the target organism, 
other criteria for assessing isolation methods include availabil- 
ity of apparatus and materials, simplicity of application, and 
adaptiveness to in-the-field sampling conditions. 



Table 4. Secondary Pathogen Disease Model 



• Secondary (opportunistic) pathogens are bacteria harmless to 
healthy persons, but which attack seriously ill (cancer, tuber- 
culosis, pneumonia) or traumatized patients (deep wounds, amputees, 
burn victims) . 

• They are common to most environments, but are particularly prev- 
alent in hospitals. 

• They establish a colony in the patient's body (wound, burn, respi- 
ratory system, renal system). 

• They eventually penetrate the patient's bloodstream. This con- 
dition is caTled bacteremia (septicemia, sepsis, blood poisoning). 

t The bacteremic patient may die of sept ic "shock and failure of 
a critical organ (heart, lungs, kidneys, liver). «fc 

•The incidence of bacteremia and the mortality rate « associated 
with bacteremia may vary systematically with the patient's initial 
c linical il lness/ trauma. 



22 

29 



Table 5. Virulence Factors Model 



• Microorganisms have structural characteristics and produce enzymes 
which may have a role in disease development. 

• Pathogenic roles include penetration of the host ceil, attachment 
and damage; each role may be accomplished by one or a combination 
of enzymes or other characteristics of the microorganism. 

• Some microorganisms have pil i ( tentac le-like structures) which 
may enable the organism to attach itself to host ceils. 

• Some enzyme products of microorganisms include protease, elastase, 
hemolysin , endotoxin, exotoxin. 

• Studies with pseudomonas- aeruginosa suggest that protease has 
a role in penetration; exotoxin A, a role 'in cell damage. V 

• How a microorganism accomplishes a given role in disease develop- , v 
ment is called mechanism of action; e.g., exotoxin A from pseudo-/ 
monas aeruginosa appears to damage host cells by preventing the' 
cell from synthesizing protein. . ^ 

• Mechanism of action may be specific to the type of host cel'l under 
attack by the microorganism; e.g., pseudomonas aeruginosa appears 
to penetrate lung tissue by neutralizing the aveolar microphage, 
organisms in lung cells which attack bacteria. 

• Within a bacterial specie there are several subspecies or strains. 
The strains differ in their- enzyme products and in their structural 
characteristics (e.g., presence or absence of pili). Enzyme pro- 
ducts vary in characteristics such as amount , concentration, and 
pyocine type; these variations may b'e related to virulence differ- \ 
ences among bacterial strains. 




23 



30 



^ The three content models ar^ shown in^ Figures 3, 4 and 5 
as lists of facts about each content domain. The content models 
are hierarchical, however, and their structure ertabled the 
system to generate parallel question hierarchies and thereby 
to more precisely specify the researchers needs. For example,-- 
two researchers in vaccine development had information needs 
in , the area of virulence factors; one at a very early' state 
in the procedural script for virulence factor^ determination, 
the other at a more advanced stage in thfe script. . Both ex- 
pressed their information requirements a£ the general level, 
i.e., "I nee.d information about, virulence factors in P. aerugi- 
nosa (A. v hydrophila)" , but the kinds of answers each required 
were at different leyels in the content hierarchy. In order 
to comprehend the differences in their requirements, the system 
constructed a content model for Virulence Factors which revealed 
its hierarchical, structure. Table 6 is an illustration of 
a partial content hierarchy for Virulence Factors 1 and a par- 
allel hierarchy of questions which enabled %he system to more 
precisely specify the nature of the -answers sought by each 
researcher. 



24 

• 31 



Table 6. An Illustration of How Content Model Elaboration 
Enabled System to Generate A Question Hierarchy 





Content ModeT Hierarchy ■ 
for Virulence Factors 


Researcher Question 
Hierarchy * 


Level A: 
Descriptive 


Pathogens have structural fea- 
tures which can be" observed, and 
they produce enzymes that can be 
assayed (measured) . 

• Structures: pili 

• Enzymes: exotoxin 

endotoxin 
protease 
. elastase 
hemolysin 


What features /enzyme 
pi uuu^l d sjl eric organ- 
ism, have been observed/ 
assayed which might 
contribute to disease 
development? 


Level B: 
Relational ; 
Qualitative 


There are three pathogenic roles 
in disease development: cell 
penetration, attachment and 
destruction. 

There is research evidence that 
certain £ eatUres/enzyme products 
accomplish specific roles. 

• Pili accomplish attachment 

• Exotoxin accomplishes cell 
destruction 

• Protease accomplishes cell 
penetration* 


Which features/enzyme 
products of the organ- 
ism contribute to which 
roles in disease develop- 

1I1C 11 L • 

• 


Level C: 
Mechanism of 
Act ion: 
Qua litative 


Exotoxin A from F. aeruginosa acts 
like diphtheria toxin. It de- 
stroys the-host cell by inhibit- 
ing protein synthesis. 

Protease from P. aeruginosa ap- 
pears to penetrate lung cells by 
neutralizing aveoiar microphage. 
Aveolar microphage are organisms 
*in lung cells which attack 
bacteria . 


By what means does the 
pathogen's features/ 
enzyme products accom- 
plish a given pathogenic 
role? 


Level D: 
Mechanism of 
Act ion; 
Quantitative' 


Enzyme products can be assayed for 
several characteristics. 

• Concentration (titre) 

• Pyocine type 

Hemolysin in high concentrations 
is destructive of corneal tissue^; 
hemolysin in low concentrations 
is not. * 


How much of or what 
characteristic of the 
enzyme product accom- 
plishes the pathogenic 
role? , ' 



25 



32 



Procedural models are an effective and efficient means 
to initiate system-researcher interaction in need diagnosis. 
They effectively locate the researcher in a paradigm appropriate 
to his field; they focus diagnostic interaction on those content 
areas which embed the researcher's knowledge needs. 

Procedural models are generalizable over a range of topics. 
Vaccine development research % proceeds through a prescribed 
series of steps regardless of the target organism. 

Both' procedural and content models are hierarchical and 
capable. of both lateral and vertical expansion. 

A knowledge delivery system requires only partial models 
and mechanisms for expanding models in the areas of researcher- 
specified needs. The system can store fragments of content 
models, such as virulence factors, and interactively deyelop 
the partial model according to the specific area and level 
of detail which embeds an individual - researcher 1 s knowledge 
needs . 

A hierarchical content model^ can be used to generate a 
parallel question hierarchy, enabling a system to precisely 
define the level of answers a researcher seeks.- 



o 



26 

33 



IV. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR DIAGNOSIS 

The system's objective in Diagnosis was to specify the 
* researcher's needs for new knowledge as well-defined gaps in 
a schema representation. The process involved the successive 
development of content models to' a level of detail which con- 
tained the researcher 's needs. Since the' system initiated Diag- 
nosis with only general content knowledge, the procedure re- 
quired three steps; these are described and illustrated in the 
following sections. 

A. System Procedure in Diagnosis 

1. Step 1; Context for Questions 

In Step l, the system, used the x phase/task procedural 
model as a vehicle for structuring a system-researcher discourse 
on the content of the researcher's problem. The discourse was 
semi -structured in that the system possessed a series of ques- 
tions (see Appendix A) to ask the researcher which were intended 
to develop the content, but the course of the interaction was 
never that constrained. The system asked the first question 
and the researcher responded to it. What happened next depended 
on how far beyond the first answer the researcher was inclined 
to continue the discourse. In one of the four interactions, 
the system tried to implement a rigidly-systematic, question 
one-answer one protocol; this was possible but not comfortable. 
It^ overly constrained the researcher and interrupted his own 
ideas regarding the logical development of his problem. However,, 
since the system knew the answers it .needed and could recognize 
answers to yet. unasked questions, the semi-structured procedure 
was in all cases successful in eliciting content information 
sufficient for the system to comprehend the researcher's inform- 
ation needs at a gross level. This gross level of comprehen- 
sion could be variously labeled (Topics, Issues, Areas, Problems, 



' 27 

34 



etc.). We arbitarily decided to call this level of representa- 
tion Questions and the purpose of Step 1 as. generating a context 
which permitted their recognition. 

The general outline of the procedure for generating a con- 
text for questions is diagrammed in Figure 2 and illustrated 
~n Table ^7 for the case of the researcher working on taxonomy 
oK^marine streptococcus . \ The categories of information used 
to provide a context for questions are: 

.'• Statement of the Research Topic : name of the organ- 
ism o£ interest; phenomenon of the organism being * 
researched-; importance of the research, justification 
or rationale. , 

• Researcher 's Progress in ' the Procedural Script Ap - 
c plicable to His Work : current phase/task; goal hier- 
archy. 

• Characterization of the Researcher's Experience in 

• the Topic Area : level of sophistication. 

• Characterization of , the Status of Research in the 
Topic Area ( General Background ) : general status 
of the problem; approaches to the problem; current 
obstacles, impediments to progress. 

• Characterization of the Researcher/ s Current Prob -^. 
lem : problem statement; rational^ for research ap^ 
proach; level of implementation of the approach; 
current areas of information needs. 




Researcher' s 
experience with 
the script 
and problem 
o content 



Statement 
. of the 
Research Topic 



Researcher 1 s progress 
in the procedural script 




Description of 
researcher ■ s s 



current 
problem 



Questions 



General status 
. of research 
in the 
problem area 



Pigure 2. Illustration of A Context for Questions 



29 



36 



Table 7. Illustrated Procedure for Generating A Context 

for Questions 



Question 


Answer 


Step 1. Statement of the Research Topic 


1. What is the name of the or- 
ganism(s) of interest? 


• Streptococci and staphylococci. 


2. What is being studied about 
the organism('s)? 


• Isolation and taxonomy of clinical ard 
aquatic strains. 


, 3. What is the importance of 
this research? ^ 

* 


• Streptococci and staphylococci in 
aquatic environment may pose a threat 
to the health of humans and commer- 
cially valuable seafood.* 

• Streptococci and staphylococci may be* 
useful indicators of fecal pollution in 
aquatic environments. 


Step 2. Location of Reseatcher in Appropriate Procedural Script 


1* Which research paradigm are 
you- using to study this 
problem? 


• Taxonomy in clinical microbiology. 


j ? * Do the phases in your re- 
search match the phases 
shown in this taxonomy 

I script? ' 


• Yes 


3. What phase of yo'ir project 
are you currently working 
on? 

/ 


• Phase 6. Cluster Interpretation of 
Clinical Strains 

• Phase 2. Strain Selection for Aquatic 
Strains 


r- 

4. Which of the tasks under 
strain selection are you 
currently working on? 


• Procedures for collecting samples from 
aquatic environment (Phase IL, Task D). 

• Procedures for isolating strains from 
aquatic environment (Phase II, Task E). 


Step 3. Characterizat 
with the Sci 


ion of the » Researcher's Experience 
ript and Problem Content 


1# Have you worked j.n taxon- 
omy research before? 

* 


• Yes. All of my work has been with 
clinical strains. 

• Work has been done on classifying a 
variety of clinical species. 

• The phases and t ; asks of the taxonomy 
paradigm have been performed many times. 



30 

ERIC 




Table 7. Illustrated Procedure -for Generating A Context 
for Questions (Continued) 



Question 



"7 



Answer 



Ste P 4 * Characterization of the General Status of Research in the Area 



What do you know about the 
research that has been 
conducted in this area? 



• „ Classifications of clinical streptococci. 

• Tests for classifying streptococci. 

• Tests for isolating clinical samples. 

• One test, Membrane Filter, for isolating 
streptococci from .aquatic environments; 
this test has drawbacks. 



Step 5. Characterization of the Researchers Current Problem 



Wha^ is your research ap- 
proach? 

\ 



• Use experience with clinical strains as 
an analog for working with aquatic 
strains?. , 

• Use tesjs that maximally discriminate 
clinical strains on aquatic strains. 



What are your current 
problems? 



• Determining an effective, efficient way 
to isolate streptococci and staphylo- 
cocci from an aquatic environment. 



31 

38 



» _2, Step 2.- Question Sets and Hierarchies 

In Step 2, the system analyzed the content information 
* and lists of questions it had acquired in Step 1 for the purpose 
of generating logically-related subsets of questions; i.e., Ques- 
tion Sets. The criterion for this procedure was to create sets 
which were maximally independent of one another,- enabling the 
system to develop independent searches of the literature (data- 
base). We view this process as analogous to the idea of decom- 
posing the problem space into manageable components (Simon, 
1969). The .'analogy to problem-solving strategy required a minor 
modification, for although the researcher has the research prob- 
lem and the information needs, it is the system which does the 
decomposing and ^imposes the criteria for 'manageability '. The 
system eventually will search for answers from its dataoase, 
and so it must generate a representation of the researcher's 
information needs which facilitates/enables the development 
of search strategies. We conceptualize the outcome of Step 
2, Question Sets, as a representation, of the researcher's in- 
formation-need domain which has functional value for directing 
system search activities, and not as a veridical representation 
o* the researcher's 'mental model 1 of his research problem. 
Our representations cannot reproduce the researcher's 'true' 
internal schemata in whose terms he thinks about his work; these 
are assumed to be far too complex to model ai*d probably impossi- 
ble to elicit. Furthermore, veridical representation is un- 
necessary, the system does not need to 'kr^|w' all that the re- 
searcher knows about the problem, and the mapping from the re- 
searcher to the system does not need to satisfy strong require- 
ments; it is only necessary for the system's representation 
to be adequate for a targeted information search. 

In the present simulations of a future system, the Question 
Sets generated during Step 2 were coincident with the content 
models which were outlined in Step 1. The researcher's informa- 
tion needs were understood by. the system as questions embedded 
in one or more content models which the system perceived to 
be independent. Figure 3 illustrates the outcome of Step 2 

32 

ERiC 3D 



Virulence 
Factors 



P. aen 


jginosa 


% s 










i 



Causes 
of Death < ' 
from Infection* 



Animal 
Models 



I 

Taxonomy 
of 

Marine Species 



Streptococcus 






1 — i 



Use As An 
Index of Water 
Pollution 



Methods of 
Isolation from 
Natural Waters 



Any Non-Enteric, Gram-Negative 
Microorganism 



f 

Ornithine, 
Metabolism 



i 

Acetoin 
Metabolism 



1 

Succinate 
Metabolism 



1 

Hematin 
Metabolism 



Figure 3. Organization of Question Sets Representing 
Major Areas of Information Needs 



33 



EMC 



40 



activities for three of the reserachers. In each case the 
Question Sets were more or less independent aspects of an organ- 
ism or class of organisms which encompassed the researcher's 
information needs. 

The system's initial structuring of the Question Sets was 
at the level of lists, which tended to reflect our weak level 
of development of the content models from which the questions 
were derived. As we developed each content model more deeply, 
we were able to comparably develop, the* structure of the ques- 
tions within each Question Set; and since the content models 
were hierarchical, the questions within a set were" hierarchical . 
The parallel development of content" model and question hier- 
archies was illustrated in Table 6 of Section- III -for 'Virulence 
Factors'. The process of hierarchical* expansion occurred in 
stages as the system 'learned' from interacting with the re- 
searcher during Diagnosis and with the database during Search. 
Figure 4 is an illustration of an hierarchy of questions within 
another of the content models: Methods of Isolation from Nat- 
ural Waters. The value of the hierarchical expansion of * Ques- 
tion Sets," of course, was to increase the precision of the 
search for answers. 

3. Step 3. Context for Answers 

The purpose of Step 3 was to produce a knowledge struc- 
ture, i.e., schema representation, for each of the questions 
defining a researcher's information needs. The schema repre- 
sentations were to define knowledge the researeher already 
possessed, ..and to identify gaps he knew needed to be filled. 
Gap def initionXi^as^ to insure relevance, and current knowledge 
definition was to avoid redundancy of materials retrieved in 
searching for answers. 

In practice, the system/researcher interaction was success- 
ful in hierarchically elaborating both the question sets and 



34 



41 



Streptococcus 



1 



I 



Methods of, Isolation 
from Natural Waters 



What are the main methods? 



What are the procedural sveps 
in each method? 



igure 4. Question Hierarchy Within A Set 



What are the 
equipment/apparatus 
requirements? 



What are the recovery 
media that have been 
used? 



Are there special 
problems in aquatic 
applications? 



Are the media 
commercially avail- 
able or experimental? 



How are the media 
composed/prepared? 



35 



■42 



the content models to the "level of the researcher's knowledge 

needs. The interaction was much less successful at specifying 

prior knowledge as a basis for excluding redundant material. 

The system was consistently stronger at defining relevance 

that it was at defining redundancy. Either the researchers 

found it easier to talk about their requirements than at^out 

what they already knew, or the system was weak at recognizing 

when it was important to specify prior knowledge. The former 

may be so"; the latter certainly was. We^ consistently had the 

experience of; reviewing documents that contained information 

we knew for sure was relevant, but were uncertain about redun- 

* 

dancy. In instance after instance we allowed' the researcher 

to tell us he was interested in learning about 'new 1 X's or 

'improved 1 Y's and failed to specify 'old 1 and 'unimproved'. 

For example, one researcher told us a great -deal - about his 

interest in learning about methods for isolating streptococcus 

from natural water samples; Table 8 illustrates our attempt 

at schema representation. He specified one method: Membrane 

Filter Test. Our literature review turned up five isolation 

methods used in combination with sixteen different re'covery » 

» 

media; all of relevance to the question set, but which of it 
was 'n^w' to the researcher? Our solution was to present 
'answers' hierarchically; i.e., first a 'menu' of method names, - 
then details of those selected by the researcher as 'new'. 

A future system will benefit from strong routines which 
recognize requirements for current knowledge definition, and 
then ask the researcher to specify ' old ' before the system 
searches for 'new'. 



36 



Table 8. An Illustration of A Context-f or-Answers Schema 



Phase 2: Strain Selection Question Set: What isolation 

methods have been 

Task E: Outline Procedures for used in aquatic- en- 
Isolating Strains vironments? 


Facts 


Inferences 


Gaps 


One method for iso- 
lating fecal strep- 
tocci is the Membrane 
Filter Test 

The Membrane Filter 
% Test appears unreli- 
able in natural waters. 

Isolation methods in- 
volve a procedure for 
selecting one organ- 
ism and got others 

.Media are used to 
selectively recover 
one organism and 
not others'* 

Media are composed 
of combinations of 
compounds 


Material suspended in 
natural water may pose 
problems for tradi- » 
tionally clinical iso- _ 
lation methods. 

Other methods may be 
better for this appli- 
cation. 


• What studies show the 
value of the Membrane 
Filter Test 

i 

w wiiaL uLiicL mecnoub nave 
been used to isolate 
gram-positive cocci 
from an aquatic en- 
vironment; from sedi- 
ment and debris. 

• How do these methods 
compare with the Mem- 
brane Filter Test 



1 




37 



The system was able to construct schema/f rame-llke content 
models using a semi-structured, interactive procedure. The 
procedure was capable of implementation in both system-control- 
led and researcher-controlled dialogue styles, but the researcher- 
controlled style was strongly preferred. 

Content models encompassed a hierarchical set- of 'questions 
in the area of the researcher's knowledge needs; the development 
of either hierarchy enabled the elaboration of the other. 

The system arbitrarily decomposed the researcher's informa- 
tion need domain into Question Sets according to a pragmatic 
criterion enabling it to plan minimally overlapping searches 
of its bibliographic database. Maximally independent Question 
Sets were structured according to the system' s perception of 
the 'independent' content models which contained them. 

A question schema enabled the system to specify relevant 
answers witl^ great precision, but failed to specify redundant 
answers; the system requires stronger procedures foY specifying 
the researcher's current knowledge at a detailed level. 

- In the absence of strong schema detail about facts known 
to the researcher, the system can present its knowledge -hier- 
archically and sequentially according to researcher selections 7 
of routes he chooses to pursue. 

1 



38 , , 

45 



V. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR SEARCH 

A. System Procedure for Search 

The system's ultimate objective was to provide the researcher 
With information products in appropriate formats which satis- 
fied his knowledge needs; i.e., filled gaps in his schema. 
The purpose of the search phase was to provide the raw materials 
for these products by identifying information from the scien- 
tific literature which -matched the schema representation. 

Starting with the, researcher's question schema the system 
performed the following steps: 

• Select combinations of key terms which best represent 
the question, query the database with these terms 
and obtain citation lists. 

• Review citation lists for relevance to the question. 

• Have a researcher review selected citations for both 
, relevance and prior awareness. 

• Retrieve citations selected by the user, perform 
content analysis ,and select relevant information. 

This procedural sequence was implemented for thirteen question 

schemata. The value of the schema approach to need diagnosis 

was r evidenced by the" 1 fc results of the researchers * review 

of the citation lists compiled by the system. Of 170 citations 

shown to the four researchers , as a c^^ck on relevance, only 

two were judged irrelevant by the researchers; a retrieval 

precision of 99%. 1 

An analysis 6f the processes performed and the problems 
encountered in each search step led* to the identification of 
general requirements for a future system. These requirements 
are in three areas: — ' 

» Indexes to databases. 

•eContent analysis of titles and lines of text. 

• Response to content-interdependent questions. 

The following sections present our findings in each of these 
areas. 

/■ 

39 

0 46 



&; - 



B> System Requirements for Indexes to Bibliographic Databases . 

The controlled vocabulary of automated bibliographic data- 
bases provides a hierarchical subject classification in the 
form of key words and concept codes. This classification in- 
cludes, at the lowest level, 'the name of a specific organism, 
process, product or method and at succeeding levels, sets of 
progressively comprehensive categories • For example, index 
terms could be provided for: 



Bacteria 



Pathogens 
Secondary Pathogens 



Pseudomonas 



Pseudomonas Aeruginosa 

Citations classified at one level 1 " in the hierarchy m'ay or may 

not be classified at other levels; classification tends— to 

be .at the most specific level* Selectidn of terms and term 

cpmbin^tions results in lists, of citations which include these 

terms either in the title or in the abstract. A free text 

* " 
search capability for title worlds is also provided in most 

systems . 

Although the automated systems offer several advantages 
over manual searching of abstracts and indexes, they still 
"provide a number of stumbling blocks to the icieritif ication 
of documents containing relevant information* Our experience 
with the four microbiologists has shown that questions repre- 
senting a knowledge gap in a researcher's schema may be specific, 
naming an organism or a process of interest; may be general, 
looking for elements or members of a more general category 



40 



47 



(e.g., exhaustive lists of members of a set); may be results 
oriented; or may be methodological. Existing systems* are well- 
structured to address # the specific type of question, however, 
they do not 'operate effectively in identifying members of a 
class or in selecting on methodological dimensions. 

In responding to questions which are asking for information 
about members or elements of a set, the system must be able 
to link titles and abstracts containing element ' names with 
the name 'of the set. This requires that , titles and abstracts 
be indexed at -adjacent levels in a subject hierarchy.^ Thus, 
a question asking for the names of animal models would be re- 
sponded to by titles that contained names of specific models 
such as 'rat reflux' or 'burned mouse'. There are several 
questions of this type in the • present study. Some examples 
are listed below: 

• What animal models have been used to study the effects 
of ^secondary pathogens? 

• What extracellular products are produced by aeromonas 
hydrophila? > * 

• What gram-negative bacteria metabolize ornithine? 

The on-line bibliographic databases used to identify titles 
in response to these questions were not effective. The vocabu- 
laries of these systems were hierarchical but titles and ab- 
stracts were generally indexed at only the most specific level. 
As a result, the titles retrieved in response to the question 

4 

on extra-cellular products contained the words 'extra-cellular 
products' but did not contain specific extra-cellular products 
such as endotoxin, hemolysin, elastase, etc. Indexing at multi- 
ple levels in a subject hierarchy may be an extremely complex 
process in a large multi-subject database, however, adjacent- 
category indexing of the database should be feasible in a more 
narrowly -defined content area such as vaccine development. 



41 



48 



Responding to methodological as well as content (result- 
oriented) questions requires that* titles and abstracts be in- 
dexed on methodological as well as content dimensions. There 
were several questions about methods which could not be easily 
answered with current indexing limitations. .One example of 
this type of question is : What isolation methods have been 
used to recover streptococci from an aquatic environment? Ex- 
isting systems were totally ineffective in responding to this 
question. Titles identified from the search did not even con- 
tain the words 'isolation methods 1 . 

C\ System Requirements for Analysis of Content 

Titles resulting from a bibliographic search and lines 
of text in selected articles must be evaluated for relevance 
to questions representing the knowledge' gaps in the researcher's 
schema. The evaluation and selection process required the 
system to make a series of content matches between questions 
and titles and^etween questions and the text. In performing 
these evaluations^ the system applied its knowledge of both 
the questions and /the context-for-answers or schema representa- 
tion for each question. The list of system tasks involved 
in content analysis include: 

• Recognize usages, relationships, intents, actions 7 
-etc., represented in both the question and the poten- 
tial response(s). * 

• Recognize definitions and synonyms as alternative 
ways of expressing key elements of a question. 

• Recognize members of a general set identified in 
the question. 

„ • Recognize the elements of the content model which 

• define the context-for-answers. 

• Recognize key elements in developing an adequate 
description of an experimental sample , or an experi- 
mental method . 

• Recognise research results. 

«i 

• Recognize type of study (e.g.: experimental, theoret- 
ical , etc . ) 



42 



The system requirements in performing each of these tasks 
are described in the following sections.. 
1. Recognize Usages and Relationships 

Key terms in a question, a title, or a section of text 
can be used in a variety of ways. A term can act, interact, 
effect, be acted upon, • be compared with, etc. The system, 
•through the use of syntactical rules, must be able to recognize 
that the question is asking about a specific usage 'of x or 
a specific relationships between x and y and that this desired 
usage or relationship is expressed in the title or text. An 
aid to the system in performing this task is a list of all 
the ways a, specific term could be used. For example, the 
enzyme product exotoxin A can be used in the following ways: 

• It is produced. 

• It is treated. 

• It has antibodies formed against it. 

• It is compared with other toxins. 

• It performs a role in disease development. 
It has ^ mode of actitSa. 

• It interacts with other toxins. 

• It is diagnosed. 

• It is studied, tested, ' assay e V 

It is possible that all of the above descriptions might appear 
somewhere in. the list of titles resulting from a search on 
exotoxin A. • The system must be able to select those matching 
the description/usage called for in the question. 
2. .Recognize Definitions and Synonyms 

•The content of a title or a line of text can match 
the 'meaning' of a question without including the same terms. 
The professional literature is filled with alternative names 
for the same entity, process, procedure, and the system must 
be able to recognize these alternative names as meaning the 
same thing as key words in the question. If a researcher is 



9 

ERIC 



43 



50 



interested in learning about animal models used to study viru- 
lence factors in opportunistic pathogens the. system must know 
that: 

• Virulence factors are also pathogenic, toxic, disease 
causing , disease correlates , extracellular products , 
extracellular enzymes, etc. 

• Animal * models are also animals/hosts which are chal- 
lenged, traumatized, altered, experimentallv-inf ected , 
compromised , etc . 

• Methods are ■ also procedures, tests, assays, treat- 
ments, media, etc. ' r 

• Opportunistic pathogens are also^ secondary pathogens. 

3. Recognize Members of A Set 

Titles and lines of text may include members of a set 
• specified in the question or they may include a more general 
category of which- the set is a member.. ■ In the present appli- 
cation, many of the knowledge needs expressed by researchers 
were concerned with identifying members of a set. 'For example: 

• Which bacteria metabolize ferric pyrophosphate? 

• Which methods have been used to study ornithine meta- 
bolism by. bacteria? 

• Which isolation methods > have been used to recover 
streptococci from the aquatic environment? ~ 

• What are the primary diseases of humans who die from 
pseudomonas infection? 

In order 'to effectively address " these types of questions the 
system must have hierarchical subject lists. It must have 
a list of the specific names for bacteria and know which are 
enteric and which are gram-negative; it must have a list of 
analysis methods lake mass spectrum, protein decomposition, 
and isolation methods like membrane filter, most probable nurrberf- 
and it must know disease names such as cancer, pneumonia ,■ wound , 
etc. Some examples of hierarchical subject lists needed by 
the system in creating products for the four microbiology re- 
searchers were as follows: 



44 



• Gram-negative rods. 

• Granh-positive cocci. 

• Enteric bacteria. 

• Pathogenic roles.. 

• Recovery media for x^ 

• Animal models used in research on x. • 

• Measurable" characteristics of *x. 

In cases where subject hierarchies are incomplete, the system 
must have some mechanisms or rules for inferring that a specific 
entity, process, or product belongs to a particular set. One 
rule is that an unknown element described with a series of 
known elements is probably a member of" the set representing 
the known elements. For example, unknown elements appearing, 
in tables with known, elements can be assumed to be memb§*s 
of the same class. A sequence of words describing an organism 
can be considered as characteristics of that organism. 
4. Recognize Elements of Content Models 

The system needs to be able to recognize terms, state- 
ments, relationships, descriptions in the literature which 
are relevant to the researcher's need but do not directly match 
the terms; or the synonyms for the "terms in the question. Recog- 
nition of what is relevant is assisted by a knowledge of the 
content model that- is being addressed by the question. The 
content model provides the system with a context for recognizing 
. questions which are related to the question that was asked. 
Work with microbiologists in vaccine development led to the 
identification of several content models. One of particular 
interest was the>-content mod3l for Virulence Factors (see. Table 6, 
page 23). One researcher who asked about virulence factors had 
the following question: what role does each product of P. 
aeruginosa play in disease development singly and in combin- 
ation? The model provided the system with knowledge of the 
several roles, lists of potential enzyme products, the fact 



45 



ERIC 



52 



that modes of action may differ and the fact that various strains 
within the species may be more or less virulent. All of this 
information provided the system with a frame for searching 
the literature and identifying relevant statements. That ib, 
the system knowing the content model , could match up the name 
of specific roles- and products, and could search for descrip- 
tions of "modes of % action" and "comparisons between species. 
• 5. Recognize Elements of Procedural .Scripts 

Researchers working on experimental problems usually 
have knowledge gaps which are addressed by information extracted 
or paraphrased from the experimental literature. Many of- the 
questions asked in the present study required brief descriptions 
of the experimental sample and the experimental method as part 
-of the answer. The format of articles reporting on experimental 
work includes separate sections on sampling and methods. In 
order to know or > understand 4 the composition of the sample or 
the key steps in the method, the researchrer needs only selected 
statements not the entire description presented in the tt.xt. 
Effective selection of extracts or preparation of summaries 
required that the syst.em be able to sort out those statements 
which are necessary for understanding. An aid to this sort 
and select step is a procedural script which specifies the 
key elements in sample selection and the key steps in conducting 
experiments. For example sample selection involves: 

• Determining overall sample size. 

• Determining if the sample will be divided into groups 
or subgroups based on some characteristics or set 

< of characteristics. 

• Determining the conditions under which the sample 
will be stored. 

• Determining the original source of the sample (.e.g.: 
water, land, hospital, clinical specimen, etc.). 

In creating a brief description of the experimental sample each 
of the above elements should be included. This can be accom- 
plished by matching the elements of the script against the 
statements in the text. 

46 

53 



6. Recognize Results, Categories of Study, Etc. 

Many questions are concerned with findings or results . 
The researcher wants to know what has been found about a par- 
ticular organism, process, product. In constructing answers^ 
the system needs to be able to recognize a result. Result^ 
recognition caVi be guided and assisted by a list which specifies 
the various ways in which results are presented. For example, 
results may^be in the following forms: 

• Tables, figures, charts. 

• Numbers in the text resulting from statistical computa-' 
tions. 

• Statements about comparisons. 

• Statements about significance. 

Other capabilities of this sort are needed to enable the system 
to recognize the types of studies that are conducted (experi- 
mental, theoretical, review) and the author's rational^ for 
doing the study (e.g.: study effects, make comparisons, examine 
experimental treatments, etc.). 

D. System Requirements for Responding to Interdependent Questions 
Questions are interdependent when* there is overlap in the 
material they cover. Question interdependence was encountered 
in the present study with the two researchers who asked multiple 
questions about one organism. This condition of content overlap 
led to a situation in which combinations of terms selected 
for one question resulted in citations which matched with other 
related questions. In order to effectively handle this v situ- 
ation the system should have the capability of evaluating every 
title against every question. An example of question related- 
ness is shown in Table 9. Here the search was organized around 
various aspects of the organism pseudomonas aeruginosa. 

• Its toxic products: Exotoxin A, protease, elastase, 
hemolysin. 

• How it is studied: animal model. 

• Its role in disease: death by infection. 

47 



The questions or topics covered by these searches overlapped: 
each of the toxic products can be studied using animal models 
or could be involved in infections causing death* Animals 
used as models ■ for study could die from infection caused by 
one ore more toxic products • 



Table 9. Search Results for Pseudomonas Aeruginosa 



Search Terras 



Exotoxin A 

Protease, 
Elastase, 
Hemolysin 

Animal Model 

Death by 
Infection 

Total 



Titles Selected. by System i 

Titles ; ..- , -j \ 

j Identified » Exotoxin • Protease, -Animal 'Death by | 
: A 1 . Etc, Model • Infection I 

23 . 15 ; '3 

; 20 
i 

! 14 

i 

I 

55 
122 



12 



1 
16 

L . 



12 



3 
6 

6 
18 



»- 61 



' 1 
3 

11 
15 



.- i 



1 

J 
i 

J 



Experience in the present project* has also shown that a 
journal article is likely to contain information that is rele- 
vant to a number of questions in addition to the question it 
was selected to answer. In the case where the researcher asks 
multiple, overlapping questions, the ideal system would have 
the capability to review each article as a potential source 
of relevant information for each question. 



ERLC 



48 



E . Summary 

Search procedure and software requirements for conducting 
successful searches in a future schema/frame-based knowledge 
delivery system will depend on how scientific knowledge will 
be stored. Full-text document storage is a possibility; how- 
ever, some extension of the work of Sager (1977) appears more 
efficient and also more compatible with schema/frame concepts 
of information structures in restricted domains of knowledge. 
Sager recognized that researchers in a subfield of science 
speak a .specialized language which has grammatical regularities 
more restrictive than natural discourse. Using a subfield of 
pharmacology research as a context, she has developed a battery 
of computer programs which transform journ'al text into table- 
like information structures which carry the content of a sentence 
or sentence string. The columns of the tables are defined so 
as to preserve the. syntactical relations between the words 
of the sentence; i.e., a paraphrase of v the original text .could 
be reconstructed from the tables. The advantage of the tabular 
format is to.make the information content accessible for further 
computer processing. For example, files of articles on a common 
topic could be queried by computer for compilations of informa- 
tion with respect to particular .categories . 

We view the direction of Sager's (1977) work as organizing 
databases in subfields of science into frame-like information 
structures which potentially match the question schemata char- 
acterizing researcher information needs. Our experiences in 
conducting searches in the" presently-configured database of 
citations ■ and in screening full-text documents for answers 
relevant to researcher's question schemata are summarized as 
a source of system requirements in the direction of this. goal. 

The system was able to successfully search the professional 
literature and identify pieces of information that were relevant 
to the knowledge gaps in the researchers' schemata .^Strong 



guidance in this process was provided by the content and pro- 
cedural models which surrounded the questions. 

The content models provided a hierarchical context for 
selecting answers from the literature; they guided the system 
in identifying questions^ that were related to or hierarchically 
subordinate to the asked question. These 'new 1 questions served 
as an expanded frame for searching the literature. 

The .procedural models were used as aids to the selection 
of key descriptive information about sample selection and exper- 
imental procedure. 

Other knowledge required by the system in performing ef- 
fective seaVch included: 

• The variety of ways in which key terms can be used 
and related to each other. 

• Definitions and synonyms for key words used in ques- 
tions and in the context-for-answers surrounding 
those questions. < 

• The content hierarchies within which the researcher's 
need is embedded. 

• Guides in the form of cues for recognizing research 
findings, study type and author rationale. 



50 

Pr 

O ( 



VI.. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCT DESIGN AND PRESENTATION 

A, System Procedure for Product Development 

The simulation of a future, automated knowledge delivery 
system included a .product design and evaluation phase. ' In 
our concept of this phase, the system was to integrate research 
findings over the set of informational materials identified 
during Search, and present as output , the researcher ' s old 
schema with the gaps filled in. The system was only marginally 
successful in achieving thiQ ideal. At certain levels of ques- 
tion, the required answer was a list of items (e.g. , animal 
models, enzyme products, methods of* isolation, recovery media, 
etc.) and in these .instances the, system could compile from 
multiple sources, items whicft fit the list requirement. The 
system could also manage matrix products, or lists within lists, 
e.g., a list of appropriate media according to selected methods 
of recovery. At the level of integrated experimental " results , 
however, we were unable to compile results on common frameworks. 
Original experimental works varied on too many dimensions for 
us Ipojnanage within the limits of our judgment of a reasonable 
level of effort* 'Animal model' research, for example, included 
variations in species , of animal, type and extent of. trauma, 
various characteristics of injected organisms or enzymes, time 
intervals between trauma and injection, organs examined for 
damage, measure or index of damage, etc. At the level of ex- 
perimental results, the system regressed to preparing, in vari- 
ous ways , products which described single journal articles 
according to the perspective of the system's, understanding 
of the researchers'" question schema. From these experiences 
with product design and presentation we provide general findings 
about system requirements which Enable the researcher to choose 
and direct the sequence of presentation and the format of the 
information to be presented. 

%■ 

51 



53 



B. Requirements for Researcher-Controlled Output 

The system has diagnosed needs, searched the \ literature 
and pulled together relevant material, now how doefs the re- 
searcher want to learn about it? pur simulations suggest that 
a future knowledge delivery system will need to provide for 
user control of its output in at least two ways: the order 
of topical exploration, and the. format characteristics of dis- 
played products. 

1. User-Directed Sequence 

Researcher-system interactions in Diagnosis enabled 
the system to recognize relevant material and gather it together 
according to Question Set^ in Search. The assimilation of 
the new material appeared to be made easy by enabling the re- 
searcher to direct the order of presentation. User control 
over presentation had additional advantages: it compensated 
for the system's lack of specificity abo^at what the researcher 
already knew, and it enabled the researcher to follow-up new 
questions that arose in the presented' material ; i.e., the re- 
searcher recognized questions he did not know he needed to 
ask during Diagnosis. 

For example, the system gathered information about Methods 
for Isolating Streptococcus from, Aquatic Environments. A por- 
tion of the user-controlled presentation proceeded roughly 
as follows: 

R: What can you tell me about Methods other than the Mem- 
brane Filter Test? 
S: System displays a list of 'other methods 1 . 

• Most Probable Number 

• Pour Plate 

• Precipitin 

• Coagglutination 

• Fluorescent Antibody 

R: I forgot to mention it before, but I know a lot about 
MPN and Pour Plate.. The other three are new to me; 
. let's start with Precipitin. 



ERLC 



52 



S: System displays citations and article summaries. 

R:* These articled % are all clinickl cr theoretical, no 

evidence of theirVaase *in aquatic applications. Let/ 

me look at, Coagglutinate and F.A, 
S: System (displays citations and article summaries, 
R: Article 2 looks * promising;" the medium is commercially 

available and the method has been used in natural waters, 

what were the findings? 
S : System displays t tables about organisms recovered , false 

positives, water temperatures and sal'inities. 
R: This table suggests that recovery rates with this method 

may be sensitive to salinity level, I need to learn about 

the salinity variations in Chesapeake Bay. 

* 

2. User-Directed Formats 

In the majority of instances, information products 
provided to the researchers were based on material taken from 
single, documents, usually journal articles. Information from 
the article was selected m by the system as relevant to the re- 
searcher's question schemata; the way in which selected informa- 
tion was presented to the researcher varied along several dimen- 
sions as follows: 

• Use of Headings vs Unstructured Text 

• Lists vs Discourse within Headings 

• Excerpts vs Paraphrase" 

• Text vs Graphics 

These variables were not studied experimentally; i.e, their 
variation was not systematically controlled, but were itera- 
tively varied to conform to a given user 1 s preference . These 
particular system interactions in information presentation- 
developed three types of product designs : document character- 
ization, document synopsis-with-pointers , and document condensa- 
tion . 



53 

60 



a. Do cument Characterization. Document characteri- 
zations best served the purposes of the researcher who was 
at the stage of transitioning from learning how to isolate 
selected genera of organisms to initiating an experimental 
program of virulence factors determination. He wanted informa- 

- tion at the level of a survey of the experimental field with 
respect to these genera- information at the level of what was 
being studied rather than any details about methods or results. 
The product design that suited his needs was a characterization; 
the product described what the article was about. Categories 
of information in the characterization included tyRe of article, 
organisms studied, methods used, phenomena studied, type of 
result reported. Where possible lists were used rather than 
discourse and shorter characterizations were preferred to. longer. 
All characterizations were less than a page in length. A typical 
product of this type is illustrated by the characterization 
in Figure 5. 

b. Document Synopsis-with-Pointers . This class of 
product design was in two parts: first, a brief summary or 
overview of the article which contained parenthetical refer- 
ences (pointers) to sections pr tables in the original document 
which amplified the summary statement; second, a set of excerpts 
from the original document which contained the elaborations 
pointed to in the overview. The system developed this kind 
of product with two of the researchers whose content interests 
were most difficult for the system to comprehend. The synopsis- 
with-pointers product design enabled the researcher to judge 
the relevance of the work from the synopsis, then selectively 
explore details of interest by calling up the appropriate pointed- 
to material. Also, this design strategy enabled the system 
to excerpt blocks, of information At only • weakly understood , 
but could recognize as relevant. 



0 

ERIC 



54 



61 



The synopses were very short / three to eight sentences 
in an unstructured." format, i.e., there' were no headings, but 
each included major topics' of purpose, organism, method, result. 
Figure 6 illustrates typical synopses of journal articles about 
the Most Probable Number Method for isolating gram-positive 
cocci from aquatic environments. Each s pointer 1 in the synopsis 
called up an excerpt from the original text which was reproduced 
on a single page and .presented to the researcher on demand. 
This product design provided a high degree of flexibility for 
the researcher, enablihg him to selectively scan the article 
to whatever level of detail he required and in whatever order 
of topic. 

c. Document Condensation. These were highly-formatted, 
highly focussed, full-document substitutes . They included one 
or two sentences per heading~and the headings paralleled journal 
style with the addition of . two headings which the researcher 
preferred: Kind of Study and Author's Rationale. A fully 
described article included seven headings as follows: 

• Kind of study 

• Author's rationale 

• Ob'jectives/purposes 

• Organisms and phenomena studied 
' • Methods of assay 

• Results \> 

• Author's interpretations/conclusions 

Condensations were 1-3 pages in length which represented a 
significant compression of original articles. With the ex- 
ception of Results , content of the condensations were system- 
generated descriptions which summarized and paraphrased the 
author's work within the main headings. The^ product design 
for the Results heading was for the system to generate a result 
statement and excerpt from the original document one or more 
graphics which supported the result statement. A sample con- 
densation is shown in Figure 7. 




62 



The document condensation suited the needs of the . researcher 
who was ritost advanced in the vaccine development paradigm, 
and needed detailed information from related experimental work- 
against which to compare his results. of the three product 
types, the preparation of article condensations placed "the 
most demanding requirements on 'the system, i.e, required the 
strongest procedural and content models. " They were highly 
satisfying to the user, however. They.were relevant, highly 
focussed, and their content could t^e abs6rbed in a' few minutes 
time. Given the condensation, the researcher expressed no 
need for the original document. 5 * 

C. Summary 



A future knowledge delivery system will need to provide 
for user contro 1 of, its output; enabling the researcher to 
direct the presentation sequence and select from among alterna- 
tive presentation formats. 

Control over presentation sequence enables the researcher 
to pursue topic areas in a preferred order and to desired levels 
of detail. 

Control over format allows the researcher to chose a mode 
of presentation (e.g. , summaries, graphics, text excerpts) 
which best meets his needs. There is" a wide range of potential 
format combinations that could be made available to a researcher; 
the current project made effective use of three: Document 
Characterization, Synopsis-with-Poin€ers , and Document Condensa- 
tion. 



56 



ERIC . 63 



f 



Ev v ans, N. Pathogenic mechanisms in bacterial diarrhoea. Clinics 
in Gastroenterol. , 1979, 8(3), 599-623. 

This is a review article. „ It includes one small section 
bn Campylobacter jejuni which discusses its occurrence as an 
intestinal pathogen and the methods for isolation. Suggested 
mechanisms fox— causing diarrhoea are tissue invasion or cyto- 
toxin. 

Other agents of diarrhoea presented include: enteropatho- 
genic E. coli, enterotoxigenic E. coli, enteroinvasive E. coli, 
cytotoxic E. *coli, salmonella, shigella, vibrios, food poisoning 
bacteria, clostidia and bacteria associated wfth— enterocolitis^ 

Discussion also covers bacterial plasmids of E. coli and 
pathogenic mechanisms as follows: <. 

• Enterotoxins 

♦ 

• Choleragen 

• Heat-labile (LT) and heat stable (ST) toxins of E. coli 
•"Ent plasmids 

• Cytotoxins 

• Bacterial adhesion (mainly E. coli, salmonella and 
"\ shigella), 

• Bacterial invasion 

Also included are host and environmental factors and implications 
for treatment and prevention. 



Figtfre 5. Document Characterization 



57 

64 



0 



Phase 2 : Strain Selection 

Task E: Outline procedures for isolating" desired strains 

Question Set: What isolation methods have been used in aquatic 
environments? 

Specific Question: What methods other than Membrane Filter have 

been used to isolate gram positive cocci from 
an aquatic environment? . 

A* MPN - Most Probable Number 

1. (Mailman, W. L. , and Seligmann, E # B. , 1950) 

Compares four media for detecting streptQeocci in water: 
standard lactose broth, sodium azide broth, SF broth and 
azide dextrose borth (p. 287). The most, probable number 
method was used according to Hoskins' tables. Also, micro- 
scopic determinations were made. Table's 1 and 2 (p. 288) 
compare media irTriver water and in swimming pools. Azide 
dextrose is the best media, however, samples must be checked 
microscopically. SF broth ^ave the lowest indices.. 

2. (Litsky, W.', et al, 19S3) 

Proposes presumptive and confirmatory media for enterococci. 
Azide dextrose brcth (p. 876) and ethyl violet azide broth 
(p. 877). Ethyl violet was added to remove gram-po.sitive 
bacteria other than enterococci. Table 1 (p. 878) compares 
SF broth, a media prepared by Winter and Sandholzer (1946) 
and dextrose azide and ethyl violet azide broth. The DA 
and EVA broth were superior by 100-1000 percent. The MPN 
method was used. 

3. (Kinner, B. A., et al, 1960) 

KF media was developed and tested against BAGG broth and 
DA-EVA. KF media was superior (p. 18, Table 3). Pour plate 
and MF also discussed and compared. Media composition shown 
(p. 16, Table 1). 

Figure 6. Document: Synopses-with-Pointers 



\ 



58 



65 



Al-Dujaili, A. H., v and Harris, * D. M. Pseudomonas-aeruginosa infection 
in hospital: A comparison between infective and environmental 
strains., " J. Hyg. , 1975, 75(2), 195-201. 

Kind of Study 

This is an assay of various strains of P. aeruginosa* taken from 
.hospital patients and : r om the general hospital environment- 

.Study Rationale 

The idep of the study is that strains of P. aeruginosa vary in 
virulence, which explains the sporadic natute of hospital infection- 
Study purpose was to assay the products cf strains assumed to be infective 
and non-infective in order to discover difference; - 

Strains Isolated . 

Fifteen strains of P. aeruginosa were isolated and tested tor pro- 
duction of extra cellular toxins. Samples were taken of 156 patients 
with P. aeruginosa infection and from various environmental sites in 
hospital? sinks, mops, baths. 

Methods of Assay 

Methods of Liu, Abe and Bates, 1961, were used for separating factions 
la and lb (pyocyanin and other pigments) faction II (haemolysin) -and 
faction III (protease, lecithinase and lipase). 

Results 



Results suggest that high haemolytic titre 
factor. (See Table 3) 



may be the virulence 



I 

il aotivii 



Table 3. Biological activity of fractions II and III 
of selected 'infective' and 'environmental 1 strains 
of Ps. aeruginosa 



Reciprocal of t it res 



Strain 


Pyoc ine ; " 




• Ass. 


Haemo- 




/Lec i- 


No. 


serotype 


Source 


infections 


lysin 


Protease 


thinase 


1 


3 


; 6 


Patient 


8 


16 


32 


4 


24 


3 


; 6 


Patient 


8 


32 


32 


16 


23 


3 


; 6 


Patient 


8 


32 


16 


4 


32 


1(c) 


; 8 


Patient 


7 


16 


16 


8 


61 


He) 


; 8 


Patient 


7 


16 


8 


2 


150 


1(a) 


; 5 


Patient 


2 


16 


8 


16 


158 


10 


11 


Patient 


5 


<L 32 


4 


16 


58 


Ka) 


7 


Patient 


2 


8 


8 


h 


157 


uc 


6 


Pat ient 


6 


8 


8 


8 


17 


10 


13 


Environment 


1 


2 


16 


16 


26 


Kg); 


6 


Environment 


0 


4 


4 


2 


15 


uc ; 


na 


Environment 


0 


2 


32 


8 


171 


34 ; 


3 


Environment 


0 


2 


8 


8 



2 
16 

, 2 

< 2 
2 

< 2 

< 2 
4 
2 
8 
2 
2 
2 



Figure 7. Document Condensation 
59 



9 

ERIC 



66 



VII. REFERENCES 



Bartlett, F. C. ' Remembering; A study in experimental and social 
psychology . Cambridge", Gr . Brit. : Cambridge University 
Press, 1932. 

Brown, J. S., and Burton, R. R. Multiple representations of 
knowledge for tutorial reasoning. In D. Bobrow and A. Collins 
( Eds . ) ' Representation and understanding: Studies in cog- 
nitive science. New York": Academic Press, 1975. 

Hoover , R . E . The library and information manager f s guide to 
on-line services. White Plains , N. Y Knowledge Industry 
Publications, Inc. , 1980. 

Kennedy; J. L. The system approach: Organizational develop- 
ment. Human Factors , 196.2 > 4, 25-52. 

Kuipers, B. J. A frame for frames. In D. Bobrow and A. Collins 
( Eds . ) Representation and understanding: Studies in cogni- 
tive science. New York: Academic Press, 1975. 

Mavor, a: S. , and Vaughan, W. S., Jr. An assessment of mechan- 
isms for international exchange of science information. 
Annapolis, Md.: W/V Associates , November * 1980 . 

Minsky, M. A framework for representing knowledge.. In P. H. 
Winston (Ed.) The psychology of computer vision. New York: 
McGraw-Hill , 1975. 

Norman, D. A., and. Bobrow, D. G. On the role of active memory 
processes in perception and cognition. In C. Ni Cofer (Ed.) 
The structure of human memory. New York: Freeman and Co., 
1975. 

Parsons, H. Mc. Man-machine systfem experinlents . Baltimore: 
The Johns Hopkins Press, 1972. 

Rumelhart, D. E. Notes on a schema for stories. In D. Bobrow 
and A. Collins (Eds.) Representation and understanding: 
Studies in cognitive science. New Yorly Academic Press, 
1975. ' 

Rumelhart, D. E. , and Ortony, A. The representation of knowledge 
in memory. In r. C. Anderson, R . J. Spiro, and W. E. Monta- 
gue ( Eds . ) Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge. 
Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Pub. , 
1977. 

Sager, N. Information structures in the language of science. 
In E. C. Weiss (Ed.) The many faces of information science. 
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1G77. 



61 



67 



Schank, R. C. The role of memory in language processing. In 
C.' N. Cofer (Ed,) - The structure of human memory, San Fran- 
cisco: W. H. Freeman and Co, , 1975a, • ■ 

Schank, R% C. The structure of episodes in memory. In D, Bobrow 
and A, Collins (Eds,) Representation and understanding. 
New York: Academic Press, 1975b, 

Schank, R. C, and Abelson, R, Scripts, plans, goals and under - 
standing, Hillsdale, N.J. : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
1977. 

.Simon, H. A. T he sciences of the artificial. Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 1969. 

Spiro-, R. J. Remembering information from text: The state-of- 
schema approach. In R. C. Anderson, R. J. Spiro and W. 
E. Montague (Eds.) Schooling and the acquisition of knowl - 
edge. Hillsdale , N. J . : LaWRENCE Erlbaum Associates , Pub . , 
1977. 

Weiss, E. C. (Ed.) The many faces of information science. 
Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1977 . 

Winograd, T. Frame representations and the declarative/procedure 
controversy. In D. Bobrow and-A. Collins (Eds.) R epresenta - 
tion and understanding: Studies in cognitive sci< ice. New 
York: Academic Press, 1975. 



62.' 

68 



APPENDIX' A 

0 PROCEDURE FOR GENERATING A CONTEXT 
h FOR QUESTIONS ' - 



A-l 



69 



Interview Procedure 

Step It Identify Rese archer's Topic and Methpdolopical Paradigm 

A . Interview Aids 

1 . List of research paradigms - 

2 . List of phases for each paradigm ^list or flow chart) 

B. Questions • » 

1 . What is the tppic/problem area cf your research? 

2 . This is a list of the research paradigms in microbiology. Which research 
fc paradigm/approach- are you using to study this problem? 

• Show researcher the list of research paradigms „ 

3 . This is a model of ,the paradigm you selected/ Do'the phases of your 
research match the phases shown in this list/flow chart? 

* Show researcher a flow chart/list of the phases of the selected 
paradigm . „ 

4 . If your process or planned process does not follow this model, how 
would you change the model to fit your work? Add, eliminate., etc.? 
Please discuss the specific changes . 



C_ 
,i . 
2. 



Products Created by the System 
A research topic . 

A methodological paradigm which matches the researcher's process. 



9 

ERIC 



A- 3 



70 



Step 2: Determine Location of Researcher In Selected Paradigm " 

A. Interview Aids 

1 . A list or flow chart of the research phases of the selected paradigm.' 

B . Questions * 

1 . What phase of your project are you currently working on? Show the 
paradigm as an aia for the researcher in indicating where he is in the 
process. , 

C . Products Created by the System^ --- 

1 . Current phase^and task area or areas . 



Step 3: - Describe Project Decisions that Hav€* Already Been Made 

A. Interview Aids ' 

1 . Research phases of the Selected paradigm. 

2 . A task/activity breakdown or listing for'each completed phase. 

B . Questions * 

1 . Specific questions here will depend on both the selected paradigm and 
the phases that have been completed in that paradigm. 

2. The researcher will be asked to describe decisions, activities, topics 
avoided, ideas explored and discarded for each completed phase. Show 
the reseacher the .list of tasks_ associated wittt each phase and ask him 

* to comment about the deci s ion/a ctivity/outco/te . 

C . Products Created by the System 

1 . An overview of completed phases or task a/eas composed of: 

• Decisions / • Topici deliberately avoided 
8- Methods used • Idea^ already explored and-discarded 

• Results obtained 



A- 4 



er|c 



71 



9 



These descriptions wilPbe generated for each completed phase of the 
research. The descriptions give a context to both the researcher and 
the system. This is where you've been - where do you go from here, 
what. are the problems now? 

Step 4: I dentify Current Problem and Partition It intoVmall, Manageable Units 
A» Interview Aids 

1 . Outline of tasks for current research phase. 

B. Questions 

1 . Here is a list of tasks associated with the current phase of your research 
- ' project. Do these tasks match with your idea about the activities/ 

decisions that occur in this phase? Show the list of tasks . 

2 . 'If not, what tasks would you {Change, eliminate? Are there tasks that 

. have not been included that should„b.e Jisted2_ _ — 

« 

• Changes should be made by the system to reflect the researchers 
response . 

< 

3 . Which of these tasks have you completed? What were the outcomes of 
these tasks? 

4 . What are you doing now on task (the next task) and what is the 

problem you are experiencing? 
5 . What are the specific pieces of the*problem? These may relate to 

steps within tasks . 

* Try to break problem into small manageable units . 

C. Products Created by the System 

1 . A list of the tasks for the current research phase as seen by *he researcher. 

» * * 

2 . Decisions/activities/outputs of tasks completed or partially completed. 

3 . The current problem broken down into small, manageable units. 



9 

ERIC 



A- 5 



/ ■ 



72 



Step 5:* Structure and Describe Researcher's Knowledge State for Each Unit 
. of the Problem 



A. .Interview Aids 

1 . A list of problem units for current task(s) . - 

2. A frame for describing the researcher's existing knowledge s^ate.- 

B, Questions* 

1 . Here is a form which shows the kind of information.needed to describe 
your knowledge needs % , We will start with Task and problem . 

• Fill in task and problem 

* Show researcher the form 

2 . What are the facts you have about this problem? What are the sources 
of these facts? Literature, colleagues, observation /etc.? 

3 . What are the inferences you have made about this problem? What are the 
bases of these inferences ?_ Are. they based on analogy? * 

4 . What are the specific pieces of knowledge you need to proceed to the 
next part of the problem, the next step, the next task? 



C ♦ Products Created by the System 

1. A knowledge schema for each problem unit which includes facts, inferences, 
and gaps. 



V" 



*The same procedure and set of questions will be used to describe the re- 
searcher' s knowledge state for each problem unit. 



ERLC 



A-6 

73 



Step 6: Determine the Characteristics of the Information That Will Fill in 

the Knowledge Gap(s) 
A . Interview Aids 

1 . Knowledge schema for each problem unit constructed in Step 5 . 



B . Questions ' ? 

1 . Here is a- list of the types of information you could be seeking to sub- 
stantiate your inferences and to fill in gaps in your existing knowledge 
Which category best fills each of your needs? 

• Show list of categories 4 

• Needs should' be taken in order. 

C . Products Created by the System 

1 . Th£ form of the information which best matches each knowledge need. 

Note: It may be best to do steps 5 and 6 together for each knowledge 
schema. That is, complete one and then start-the next. 




A-7 



APPENDIX B 
CASE STUDIES 



B-l 



9 

I ERIC 



75 



- * , Dr. Olgerts R. Pavloysk'is 

Medical Microbiology Branch 
Naval Medical Research 
Institute 

• . Bethesda, Maryland 

I . DIAGNOSIS: CONTEXT AEfo QUESTIONS 

A . Context- for Identifying Questions j 1 

.L Statement of the research project : Experimental examination of 

pseudomonas aeruginosa virulence fact6rs and their role in 
. disease. 

2 . Statement of the top ic's importan ce; a justification of the 
research: 

a . During Viet Nam war, significant numbers of military per- 
sonhel died of septic shock following burns, woun<?.3 and 
amputations (sepsis is evidence of pseudomoras activityW* 

b. During peacetime, there is an everage of one burn case per 
day among v boiler-room personnel aboard Navy ships . 

c. Pseudomonas infection is difficult to treat, i.e., has a 
high level of resistance to antibiotics, so preventive 
vaccine is a priority need . 

3 . Statement of the goal structure: to produce vaccine" against 
pseudomonas aeruginosa." 

±2 C haracterization *of the researcher's experience/level of 

sophistication with th e topic 

The researcher has completed a series of experimental 
studies on toxic products of p. aeruginosa using a burned 
mouse animal jnodel . 
5 . Characterization of the status of research on the topic: 

a. iris an opportunistic or secondary pathogen; harmless to 
healthy persons/animals, but pathogenic to traumatized 
patients . 

B-3 



76 



b. It produces a variety of enzymes some of which Have known 
pathogenic roles: 

• Protease - enables organism to establish itself in 
hosts . 

• Exotoxin A - enteres the healthy cell and prevents 
protein synthesis. Acts like diphtheria toxir . 

• Elastase, hemolysin, endotoxin - other enzymes 
whose roles are not well-known. 

c. Three approaches, lines of attack against p. aeruginosa, 
are being explored in vaccine development. 

(1) Attack the organism directly, destroy the cell. 

(2) Attack the organism's pili which are instrumental 
to attachment in the host. 

(3) Neutralize the organism's toxic products. 

d. 'Compromised Host' model is used for experimental work 
in this field. Since p. aeruginosa is only pathogenic to 
traumatized patients, experiments are conducted with 
animals traumatized in some way. His laboratory uses a 
''Burned Mouse Model" for experimentation. Various 
antibodies are tested for effectiveness against p. aeruginosa 
bacteria injected into a burned mouse. 

6.. Statement of excluded topics : 

a. Researcher is interested in one strain of bacteria only, 
I.e., pseudomonas aeruginosa, and no others. 

b. Researcher is interested in the series of links from bacteria 
to toxic products to bacteremia to organ failure and death 
in compromised hosts; not in the genetics, characteristics 
or biochemistry of p. aeruginosa. 



B-4 

77 



7. Characterization of the researcher's current problem: 

The researcher is at the stage of experimental determination 



of actions and interactions of p. aen^inosa toxic products 
as they affect host cells . He has worked extensively with 
one animal model and is looking for others to use. He also 
wanted to link his results to the causes of death in humans. 
B. Questions 

1 . Question Set #1: Virulence Factors of P. Aeruginosa 



Asked 



Unasked 



Unasked 



Question 1. What role does each product of p. aeruginosa 
play in disease development, singly and in various 
combinations? 

Question 1-a . What is the media*, sm by which a given 
enzyme (product) accomplishes its role/function in 
disease development? 

Question 1-b. What differences have been identified in 
enzyme product characteristics between virulent and 
i non-virulent strains of p. aeruginosa? 

The researcher asked for information about roles of p. aeruginosa 
enzyme products in disease development. He gave the fol- 
lowing two examples: protease enables the bacteria to 
establish itself in the^host, and exotoxin A destroys the 
host cell by inhibiting protein synthesis. The mode of 
action of exotoxin A is analogous to that of diphtheria 
toxin . 

The system made the inference i'rom researcher's ex- 
ample about exotoxin A that he was also interested in 
mechanisms or modes of action/ so the system generated 
Question 1-a from the interaction. 




B-5 



tup 



78 



Asked 



Asked 



Asked 



Unasked 



Unasked 



Unasked 



During the process of scanning the retrieved journal 

articles for answers to questions. 1 and 1-a, the system' 

recognized a series of experiments in.which enzyme products 

■ 

of virulent and non-virulent strains of p. aeruginosa were 
compared/contrasted. The system recognized these -studies 
as relevant to the researcher's interest since they-v^re 
attempts to determine 'those characteristics of p. aeruginosa 
enzymes which were disease correlates. So the system • 
generated Question 1-b during the literature review pro- ~~ 
cedure . 

Question Set #2: Death from P. Aeruginosa Infection 
Question 1 . What is the cause of death in patients who die 

of septic shock attributable to P. aeruginosa? 
Question 1-a. What organs are damaged by P. aeruginosa 

(e.g., heart, iiver, lung)? 
Question 1-b. Where in the victim's body were P. aeruginosa 

found (e.g., respiratory system, renal system, 

wounds) ? 

Question 1-c. What were the principal illnesses (diag- 
nostic categories) of the bacteremic patients who died 
vs those who survived? 

Question 1-d. What is the frequency of occurrence of 
bacteremia in hospitalized patients? 

Question l-d(l) . What is the mortality rate among bacteremic 
p~. lents? 




erJc 



B-i5 



79 



Unasked Question l-d(l)(a). What are the historical trends in both 
frequency of occurrence and mortality rate? 
The researcher indicated a lack of knowledge about the 
ultimate cause of death in hospital patients where septic 
shock from P. aeruginosa Infection was a contributing cause. 
He asked t^ree questions, one general and two more spe- 
cific questions which elaborate the general question. He 
directed us to look for articles where autopsies had been 
performed . 

Several information products were prepared by the sys- 
tem which provided information relevant to these three question 
but the researcher needed more than we gave him. He wanted 
to know about the primary illness of the victims and about 
statistical trends in frequency of occurrence and mortality 
rates. The latter topics helped to document the importance 
of the researcher's work, justified research on the problem 
of vaccine development . 

3. Question Set #3: Animal Models Used in Experimental 
Research with Opportunistic Pathogens 

Asked Question- 1 . What animal models are being used in research 

on experimental infection by opportunistic pathogens? 

Unasked Question 1-a. What are the procedures required to imple- 
ment each animal mode: 

Una sked Question l-a(l) . What are the equipment and instrument- 
ation requirements of each animal model? 

The researcher had instructed the system about the 'animal 
model' paradigm for experimental research with opportunistic 
pathogens. His own laboratory used a 'Burned-Mouse' model. 



B-7 



J 



He expressed a need for information about the various animal 
models which were in use (Question 1) . The system identified 
some citations, retrieved articles and prepared information 
products at the level of 'what models 1 . The system then learned 
that the researcher wanted to know about the specific laboratory 
procedures (Question 1-a) and the instrumentation/equipment 
requirements (Question l-a(l)) of the various models to that he 
could judge whether or not the identified models could be imple- 
mented in his laboratory. 

C. Question-Specific Context (Knowledge Structures Required for 
Answer-Seeking) 

1 . Question Set #1: Virulence Factors 

Question 1. About roles of P. aeruginosa products in disease 
development. 

R * a. P. aerucinpsa is a bacteria that produces a variety of 

enzymes . 

R b. Enzyme products of P. aeruginosa include the following: 

• £&b*oxin A 

• Protease 

• Elastase 

• Hemolysin 

• Endotoxin 

R c. To bring about disease in a host, the bacteria must 

accomplish three functions (roles). 

• Penetrate the host cell 

• Attach itself to the host cell 

• Damage the host cell 

R d. There is evidence that exotoxin A destroys host cells 

by protein synthesis inhibition. 
R e. There is evidence that protease facilitates either the 

penetration or the attachment function (role) . 

B-8 



ERIC 



/ 



ERIC 



Question 1-a. About mechanisms or modes of action 
SL* a . There are a variety of ways by which an enzyme product 

of P. aeruginosa can accomplish a given function. 
SL b. The mechanism may vary with class of host cell under 

attack, i.e., lung tissue vs kidney tissue, etc. 

Example : Hemolysin may contribute to lung cell 
penetration by reducing the effectiveness of alveolar 
macrophage. Alveolar macrophage attack bacterial 
cf>lls. Hemolysin attacks alveolar macrophage. - 
Alveoli are lung tissue cells. 

'kit 

R c The mode of action may£e understood oy analogy to the 

action of other bacteria produce toxins. 

Example: Exotoxin A from P. aeruginosa destroys host 
cells by the same mode of action as does diphtheria 
toxin, i.e., 'by inhibiting protein synthesis. 

Question 1-b. About enzyme differences between know.n virulent 

and non-virulent strains of P. aeruginosa. 

R a. P. aeruginosa is the name of a genus and species of 

bacteria of which there are many strains. 

R b. Some strains ol P. aeruginosa are more virulent than 

others • 

R c. Virulence is a function of enzyme characteristics and 

strains differ in the specific combination of enzymes 
they produce. 

R d. P. aeruginosa is a very common bacteria, can be found 

most anywhere. 

SL e. One method for determining enzyme correlates of 

virulence is to contrast the enzyme characteristics of 
bacteria taken from persons known to be suffering 
P. aeruginosa infection with bacteria taken from the 
general environment. 



*SL - System Learning 
**R - Researcher 



B-9 



82 



- f . Ehzyme characteristics that can be measured and 
therefore used to contrast virulent vs non -virulent 
- bacterial strains include: 
• Pyocine type 
#. Concentration (titre) 
q • Amount 1 
Some of the information in the above structures was provided by 
the researcher during the diagnostic interaction (R) olher inform- 
ation was learned by the system during the process of reviewing 
the retrieved journal articles (SL) . ' 
2 , Question Set #2: Death from Infection 

r- . - - 

Question 1 . About cause of death in patients who died of septic 
shock atLributable to P. aeruginosa 

a. p. aeruginosa is a secondary or opportunistic pathogen; 
harmless to. heaJthy persons/ animals but pathogenic to very 
ill or traumatized patients. 

b. -Septic shock is a consequence of bacteria in the bloodstream. 

c. The penetration/invasion of the blood by bacteria is designated 
by a variety of labels; 

• Sepsis 

• Bacteremia 

• Septicemia . 

d. P. Aeruginosa is a common bacteria, found everywhere, 
particularly prevalent in hospital environments. 

e. P. aeruginosa must establish itself in the patient before it 
invades the bloodstream (e.g., in a wound or burn, in the 
respiratory system, urinary system, etc.) . 



83 



f . The series of events leading to death with P. aeruginosa 
as a component is as follows: 

• A very ill or traumatized patient in a hospital . 

• P. Aeruginosa in the general hospital environment. 

• P. aeruginosa established in the. patient's wound, or 
system . ' ; 

„ • P. aeruginosa penetration of the patient's blood 
stream (bacteremia) 

• Eventual failure of a major organ (e.g. , heart, liver, 
lungs) 

Question 1-a. About organ failure * 

a . The ultimate cause of death is the failure of a major organ; * 
i.e., heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, etc. 

b. Major organs are examined and assessed as partpf an 
autopsy. 

Question 1-b. About source of P. aeruginosa in the patient's body 

a. P. aeruginosa must first establish itself in the host's body 
prior to penetration of and colonization in the bloodstream. 

b. Main possibilities are the respiratory system, renal system, 
wounds and burns. 

Question 1-c. About main diagnostic categories of bacteremic 
patients 

a. Hospitalized patients are described by diagnostic categories. 

b. The route of P. aeruginosa colonization of hospitalized 
patients as well as the outcomes may vary systematically 
wlth'the principal diagnostic category. 



/ 

/ 

i, 

I 

t 



Question 1-d . Afc^ut frequency of occurrence and mortality from 
P. aeruginosa bacteremia in hospitalized patients 

a. Hospitals keep yearly^records of bacteremia in patients, so 
thajt historial trends can be plotted. 

b. Increase in number of bacteremia occurrences and mortality 
rates is an index of the importance of this problem for 
research. 

3, Question Set #3: Animal Models 

Question 1 . About animal models used at other laboratories 

a. Since P. aeruginosa is only pathogenic to already-ill persons/ 
experimental research is conducted using animals which are 
made ill in some way, i.e, . the animal is a simulation of an 
ill person . 

b. An experimentally-made-ill animal is^palled an 'animal model' . 
There are a vari.ety of synonyms for 'animal model'; these 
include: 

• Compromised animal/host 

• Challenged animal/host 
^ • Alt^recT animal/host 

• Experimentally -infected anim^/host 

c. The research literature tends to label the animal model by 
the type of illness or traum$ followed by the animal 
traumatized. For example: 

• Burned-mouse ^model 

© Reflux-challehged rat model 

d. P. aeruginosa is not the only opportunistic pathogen; others 
have generic" names that include: * 

• ^Veromonas 

• Yersini~ 

• Campylobacter 



Question 1-a. About laboratory procedures for implementing 
an animal model •* 

a. The end-product of an animal model is an ill, burned or 
wounded animal; the specific technique by which the animal 
is weakened is of interest to the researcher; 

b. Recent research literature will typically refer to an animal 
f itiodel by its name only, and refer to an older amcle.for 
details of the procedure by which it is implemented. 

Question l-a(l). About the instrumentation, equipment and 

facility requirements of an animal model 
a. Procedures for implementing a given animal model specify 

the facilities, equipments, and instruments involved. 



B-13 

86 I 



II, SEARCH STATEGY AND IMPLEMENTATION 

Two data bases were selected- to. address the questions relating to 
Dr. Pavlovskiy' research with pseudomonas aeruginosa: BIOSIS and 
MEDLINE. BIOSIS* was selected because it indexes the literature on 
bacteria; MEDLINE was chosen because it indexes the literature on the 
clinical effects or aspects of bacteria. Dr. Pavlovskis is interested in 
the toxic products (enzymes) of a bacteria (pseudomonas aeruginosa), 
the animal models used to study these enzymes, and the effects .of these 
enzymes on humans. 
A. Virulence Factors * 

The researcher named several toxic products (enzymes) of pseudomona 
• aeruginosa . They included: . - - 

4 • Exotoxin A % 

• Proteose 

• Elastase -* Ji * t C3 

• Hemolysin 

There were three questions: what role do these products play in 
- disease* how do these products work and jyhat are the enzyme dif- 
ferences between virulent and non-virulent strains. 

The first strategy was'to combine all of the enzyme names wjth 
pseudomonas and aeruginosa .* BIOSIS included all of these index 
terms. The result was 185 citations. The system judged this set to 
be too large and chose to pursue exotoxin A separately. Exotoxin A 
" was singled ouFBecause .th^researcher had said~that~£t wa s of primary 
interest . The combination of exotoxin A and pseudomonas aeruginosa 
resulted in 86 citations. This set was also judged as too large; the 

*In BIOSIS pseudomonas aeruginosa is not a term. It is necessary to enter 
each word as a separate term*. 

B-14 

87 



• system elected to printout the most recefrt 20 . In MEDLINE a similar 
procedure was used by linking the organVsm with exotoxin A, This 
led to nine citations. There ware six citations which were common 
to both data bases; overall 23 unique title* were identified. 

Of the 2'3 identified citations, 16 were\selected by the system 

as being relevant to the researcher's questions . The system's ob- 

I 

jective was J:o be as targeted as possible - to select only those 
citations wftich directly address the researcher's questions. The 
seven citations that were not chosen were rejected because they, ap- 
peared to deal with antibodies to the toxin or the genetics of the 
toxin rather than the toxins role, mode of action or the degree of 
virulence of selected strains. An example of a rejected title is, 
"Enzyme linked immuno sorbent assay for the measurement of ipouse 
and human antibodies to pseudomonas-aeruginosa exotoxin A." 

The sixteen selected citations fell into one of the following 
four categories: 

• The role of exotoxin A in disease (4) . All these titles em- 
ploy the effects of toxin on the host or host cell. 

"Roles of exotoxin and protease as possible virulence 
, factors in experimental infections with pseudomonas 
aeruginosa" 

- "Toxicity of pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A for 
human macrophages" 

- "Toxic products of pseudomonas aeruginosa production by 
isolates from cystic fibrosis patients and effects on human 
cells in -vitro" 

"Experimental studies of the pathogenesis of infections 
due to pseudomonas aeruginosa" ! 

? 

/ 



B-15 



• The structure or mode of action of exotoxin A (8) . Some 
examples are: 



- "Structure-activity relationships in dlphtherlk v toxln and 
exotoxin A from pseudomonas aeruginosa" v 

- "Mechanims of action of pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A 
In experimental mouse Infections: adeno-sine diphosphate 
ribosylation of elongation factor 2" 

- "Enzymically active fragment of pseudomonas aeruginosa 
exotoxin A" 

- "Modes of action of diphtheria toxin and exotoxin A from 
pseudomonas aeruginosa" 

• Comparisons of virulent land non-virulent strains (1) 

- "Production of exotoxin, protease and elastase of 
pseudomonas aeruginosa strains isolated from patients 
and environmental specimens" 

• Methods of study - ways of examining exotoxin A. This was 
not a question asked by the researcher. It appeared tc the 
system that methods of analysis (especially if new) would/ 
could be of use to the researcher (3) . 

- "Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for pseudomonas 
aeruginosa exotoxin A" 

- "Exotoxin A of pseudomonas aeruginosa, the secretion 
and isolation of membrane bound toxin" 

The search for other citations on toxic enzymes was conducted 

using the following term combinations: 



BIOSIS 



MEDLINE 



Pseudomonas and 



Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 



Aeruginosa and 



Hemolysins or 



Protease or 



Peptide hydropases or 

Pancreatopeptidase and 
Disease(s) 



Elastase or 



Hemo(w)lysin-and 



Disease or 



Infection 



The BI03IS search resulted in 17 citations (3 were on earlier print- 
outs); the MEDLINE search provided 10 citations (6 were on earlier 
printouts). There was one article in common from the two searches. 
Thus, 17 new citations were identified; 14 of these were selected as 
relevant to the user's questions on toxic enzymes . The rejected 
art'cles were on antibodies, antitoxins and antigens. For example: 

"IgE antibody production to exoenzymes in common antigen 
(OEP) of pseudomonas aeruginosa in mice 11 

Th§ selected titles were almost all directed toward the role of toxic ' 
enzymes in disease (9) . x Some examples follow: 

n The role of hemolysin in corneal infections with pseudomonas 
aeruginosa" 

"The effect of protease production by pseudomonas- 
aeruginosa on growth in burned mouse skin extract" 

"Toxic activity against alveolar macrophages of products 
of pseudomonas-aeruginbsa isolated frQm respiratory and 
non-respiratory sites" * 

There was two citations on mode of action: 

"Protease and elastase of pseudomonas aeruginosa: In 
activation of human plasma alpha 1 -proteinase inhibitor" 

"Study of mechanisms of pathogenicity of pseudomonas 
aeruginosa experimental infection of the mouse" 

And one citation on strain comparisons: 

"Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in hospital: A com- 
parison between -infective and environmental strains" 

There were two other citations that were selected . Or.e was chosen 

becausl it dealt with mouse burn infection and Dr. Pavlovskis is 

working with a burned mouse model. 

"Effects of somatic component of pseudomonas-aeruginosa 
. on protective immunity in experimental mouse burn 
infection" 



B-17 



B. 



The other dealt generally with infection and a method of diagnosis: 

"Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection and its sens diagnosis" 
Death by Infection ^ 



The search terms used for BIOSIS and MEDLINE are listed below. 
These terms were selected to relfect the major concerns of the 
researcher: the cause of death in patients who die of septic shock 
attributable to pseudomonas aeruginosa, the organs damaged,' the 
location of the bacteria, the principal illness of the patient and the 
frequency of occurrence in hospital patients. 



MEDLINE 

Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 

Death" or 

Mortality or 

Lethal or 

Fatal 



BIOSIS 

Pseudomonas and 
Aeruginosa and 
Infection and 
Death or 
Dead or 
Fatal or 
Kill or 
Lethal or 
Mortality 

Neither system had index terms for organ damage or rr\ortality 
trends. The BIOSIS search terms identified 33 articles; the MEDLINE 
search terms identified 24. Discounting overlap there were approxi- 
mately 55 new titles identified. Careful screening of the printouts 
led to the selection of 11 articles as being relevant to the researcher 1 
questions on death, infection and pseudomonas aeruginosa. Six of 
the articles in this printout. were more relevant to animal models and 
two were directly concerned with virulance factors . Those citations 
that were judged as not relevant fell into the following categories. 



B-18 

9 1 . 



• The article appeared to be about prevention or treatment (e.g.): 

- "Pseudomonas aeruginosa: prevention better than cure" 

- "Treatment of patients with pseudomonas endo carditis 
with high does amino glycoside and carbonicillen 
therapy" 

• The article appeared to be abdtyt methods of identification or 
purification (e.g.): 

- "Rapid identification of gram-negative rods from blood 
cultures using direct inoculation of the API-20C system" 

- "Purification and characterization of leucocidin from 
pseudomonas aeruginosa" 

• The article appeared to be ^bout the source of the bacteria 
(e.g.): 

Si 

- "Bacteremia: the significance of outside vs inside hospital 
origin" 

The selected titles addressed four question areas: causes of death, 
organs damaged, frequency of occurrence in hospitals, and trends 
over several years . 

• Anexample of titles related to causes of death is: 

- "Fatal bronchopneumonia and dermatitis caused by 
pseudomonas aeruginosa in an Atlantic bottle-nosed 
dolphin". 

• An example of titles relaxed to organ damage is:* 

- Septicemia and bilary tract obstruction" 

• An example in the frequency of occurrence category is: 

- "The incidence of pseudomonas aeruginosa infections , 
from an open burn ward" / 

• An example in the trend category is: 

- "Bacteremia at Boston City Hospital, Mass, USA: 
Occurrence and mortality during 1-2 selected years: 
1935-1972 with special reference to hospital acquired 
cases" 

*System needs to know all things considered to be organs. 



ERLC 



B-19 

92 



C. Anlmal'Models 

There were three questions on animal models: what animal models 
are being used in research on experimental infection by opportunistic 
pathogens; what procedures are used to implement each model; what 
are the equipment and instrumentation requirements of each model? 
The search was done at the level of animal models as the BIOSIS and 
MEDLINE data bases are not indexed to retrieve procedures and 
instrumentation. The search terms used in each data base are: 

BIOSIS MEDLINE 

Pseudomonas. or - Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 

Aeromonas or Animal model 

Opportunistic (w) pathogen or 
Secondary (w) pathogen and 
Animal (f) model 

The BIOSIS search resulted in five citations. The initial MEDLINE 
search included combinations of secondary or opportunistic pathogens 
with animal models, however, this combination resulted in irrelevant 
citations (.e.g.): 

• Heat-stable somatic antigens of <a group of unclassified 
fluorescent pseudomonads (UPF) . 

None of these referred to animal models or the use of animal models 

with secondary pathogens. For this reason, the final search only 

used pseudomonas aeruginosa and 'animal models as key words. This 

search identified nine citations. The total number of citations from 

both searches was 14; six of these were selected as relevant. In 

addition, citations on animal models resulted from previous searches 

on exotoxin A (3) and death by infection (6) . The rejected citations 



B-20 



S3 



were more about death by infection than about the use of animal 

models : That is, they did not mention animal model or a specific 

animal, Som'e examples were: 

"Pseudomonas aeruginosa vasculitis and bacteremia 
following conjunctivitis: A simple model of fatal 
pseudomonas infection in neutropenia" 

"Antibiotic therapy and prophylaxis of experimental endo 
carditis" 

Those articles selected as relevant included the words "Animal Model 

or "Compromised Host" or "Altered Host" or "Challenged Host" or the 

name of a specific animal. Some examples are: 

"Rheological studies of coagulation change in an animal 
model of pseudomonas aeruginosa sepsia and pulmonary 
edema " 

"Renal infection in the rat after reflux challenge with 
pseudomonas aeruginosa" 

"Comparative response of various mouse strains to intra 
corneal challenge with pseudomonas aeruginosa" 

It is important for the system to understand all of the researcher's 

questions when doing each search. In many cases, titles relevant 

to one question will be found while searching on another question. 

These relevant titles are not necessarily found in response to the 

question they address. For example /articles on animal models 

which were found with the "Exotoxin A" search were not found with 

the "Animal Model" search. 

Current systems are much more accurate when specific names 

are used: exotoxin, pseudomonas, etc., than when concepts are 

used: animal model, death, infection, etc. 



B-21 



HI. PRODUCT PREPARATION AND EVALUATION 

A, Virulence of Exotoxin A 

1 » Relevance, Of t&ree retrieved articles only one was judged 
highly relevant by the system. The article reviewed a 10-year 
history of research on both diphtheria toxin and exotoxin A from 
P. aeruginosa covering three topics of interest: mechanisms of 
entry, attachment, and action. 

2. Product format/content. The information product had a 4-part 
format as follows: ^ 

• A statement about the kind of article ,it was (review) the 
organisms compared , and the topics of the comparison. 

• The author's abstract . 

• Diagram excerpted from the text comparing diphtheria 
toxin and endotoxin A from P. aeruginosa in activation 
(one page) . 

• Two-paragraph statement excerpted from the text which 
suggested differences betweeri the two pathogens in entry 
mechanism; similarity between the two in method of 
action, i.e., inhibition of protein synthesis. 

3 « User evaluations of product. Researcher's evaluation of the 

product was to praise the first section 0 He liked the gross 

characterization of the article, i.e., 

• A review article v 

• Comparing x and y 

• On topics a, b ; c. 

B. Virulence of Protease, Zlastase and Hemoly sin 

1 . Relevance . The syctem judged three articles to be of very high 
relevance . Each of the three provided supporting experimental 
evidence that a high titer of hemolysin was characteristics of 
virulent strains of P. aeruginosa.- ( 



B-22 



2. Product format and conte nt. Format of the products was a six- 
part outline: 

• Kind of study - e.g., experimental, animal cells 

• Rationale - why the author did the study 

• Strains of P. aeruginosa and enzyme products studied 
- a list. 

• Methods of assay - names of methods used or details of 
unlabeled methods. 

• Results - written statement of main findings with selected 
tables and graphs which support each result . 

• Conclusions - author's conclusion or its paraphrase <, 

3 . User evaluations of products . Researcher was most interested 
in the rationale section of each product. He wanted to know why 
the author did the study, what were the ideas that led the author 
to do the study? 

Researcher also liked the Results format. A statement of 
a result accompanied by a table or figure on which the statement 
was based . 

Hesearcher stated that given the products he would not 
need th$ full texts . " 
Death fr om Infection 

1 . Relevance . The system judged one article ! very high 1 , two 

articles ! high f ,one article 'borderline 1 and two articles of 'low 1 
relevance. The 'very high' judgment was based on the good fit 
between researchers stated interests , (i.e., sub-questions) 
and material presented in the article, 

• Described the primary illness of patients. 

• Described the sources of bacteria found in the hosts 
prior to bacteremia . 

• Described autopsy report on those patients who died 
with bacteremia. 

B-23 

■98 

■ ' > 



The two 'high 1 relevance judgments were articles of less than 
complete fit to the user's sub-questions . The 'borderline 1 
article was in French and it was difficult to determine whether 
the 'host' was an animal or a tissue culture. The 'low 1 article 
was statistical and historical and did not tell about 'why they 
died' . Researcher evaluated the statistical study as 'very high' 
on the basis of problem importance; article helps justify research 
on the problem. 

The second 'low 1 relevance article told about hospital pro- 
cedures to reduce likelihood of infection by secondary pathogens . 

2. Prod uct format and content . Format of these products was a page 
synopsis with 'pointers' to supporting material in the text. 
Back-up pages to the synopsis"contained^tFe n material-pointed- 

.to' excerpted from the text. 

3 . User evaluation of products . Products were judged valuable as 

a screening device, i.e., researcher could use the synopsis and 
excerpts to decide whether or not he wanted to see the full text. 
This format did not substitute for the article but enabled the 
researcher to do ^ selective follow-up. 
D« Animal Models 

1 . Relevance . 'System 1 judged three articles of 'very high' relevance 



since ^ach named an animal model or -specified a compromise 
procedure used with an experimental animal. It would have 
helped had 'system' gotten from researcher a list of those - 
animal models he knew about so 'system' could recognize a 
'new 1 model. 

One article was judged 'moderate' by the system since an 
animal model was suggested but not specified and article was 




B-24 



a? 



2 . Product format and content . The format of the products for 

Animal Models was the same as for Death from Infection* A 
one-page synopsis of the study was written by a reviewer who 
selected the points to be included in the synopsis . Mostly a 
general overview of what was done, how and with what result. 
The synopses were not excerpts or paraphrasings of Xhe authors 
writings but the reviewers digest of the article. They were 
highly individualistic and unstructured products . 

Each synopsis was followed by pages of results excerpted 
from the article. Some with written descriptions and graphics; 
others with the graphics only 0 

3 . User evaluations of products . The three specific animal models 

discussed in the 'very high* relevance articles were new to him, 
he wanted to learn more about each and wanted citations to prior 
work of the author's wherein the procedure had been descy^ed. 
The 'system' could have made these prescriptions available had 
it known in advance that the researcher was not familiar -.with 
the models named in the articles retrieved . Researcher needed 
to know details of the procedure for each model in order to 
decide whether or not it would be feasible to perform in his 
laboratory. 



B-25 



98 



Dr. James Coolbaugh 
Medical Microbiology Branch 
Naval Medical Research 

Institute 
Bethesda, Maryland 

DIAGNOSIS: CONTEXT AND QUESTIONS ' 

A. Context for Identifying Questions 

-L — Statement of the resea rch topic. The microbial hazards of polluted 
waters; specifically the virulence factors in three newly identified 
genera of enteric microorganisms: aeromonas, Campylobacter 
and yersinia . 

• 

— Statement of the topi c's importance; a justification of the research: 

Navy divers work in polluted waters and may be at risk from the 

presence of these organisms. 

3 . Statement of the goal structure: 

• • The development of an antidote for or an immunizing 
vaccine against the above three enteric pathogens. 

• The identification and explication of virulence factors , 
i.e., how do these organisms cause diarrheal disease. 

4. Characte rization of the researcher's experience/level of 

sophistic ation on the topic: Researcher has been sampling - 
polluted waters, looking for the organisms, and identifying them 
in these samples. He has not begun to work on their character- 
istics (enzyme product Characteristics) or to experiment with them 
to determine virulence factors . 

5 . Characterization of the status of research on the topic 
a . Some facts about the content. 

• The three genera are newly-recognized enteric 
pathogens . 

• Species and subspecies known to be pathogenic 
to humans are as follows: 

- Aeromonas 

• hydrophila 

• sobria 

B-27 



- Campylobacter fetus (subspecies) 

jejuni 

• intestlnalis 

- Yersinia 

• enterocolitica 

• They have been detected in polluted waterways: 
Norfolk Harbor, New York Harbor, Anacostia River* 

• They cause diarrhea, colitus and cholera-like 
disease symptoms . 

• They produce enzymes which are in some way re- 
sponsible for their virulence/pa thogenicity. Their 
enzyme products include: 

- Hemolysin 

- Protease 

- Elastase 

- Cyto toxin, 

- Enterotoxin 

b. Some facts about method of study 

• Most of the work has been clinical case studies 
and therefore descriptive. Very little experi- 
mental work with the organisms . 

• Enzyme products have been tested with sheep and 
rabbits . 

• The 'ileal loop 1 test using rabbits is a particularly 
unreliable, inefficient, and procedurally messy 
.test for enzyme effects . ' 

6 . . Statement of excluded topics 

• Campylobacter fetus, Subspecies fetus pathogenic to 
animals only; is not a hazard to divers and, therefore, . 
not of interest to the research . 

7« Characterization of researcner's current problem 

It has been established clinically that these organisms cause 

diarrheal disease but there is very little evidence about how ' 

they do this, i.e., what are the virulence factors? 

B-28 ^ 

/Of) 



B. Questions 

The system had recently encountered the 'virulence factors' model 
with Dr. Pavlovskis and proceeded to structure the questions 
according to the matrix model of roles-by-enzymes for each genus 
of microorganism . 
1 . Virulence factors in aeromonas 

a* How is aeromonas transmitted from polluted water to the 
diver's body? 

• Where has aeromonas been found in divers? 

b. How does the organism attach itself to host cells? 

• Are pili instrumental to attachment? 

c Which enzymes produce the symptoms? 

> • By what mechanism (mode of action) of the enzyme 
does disease come about? 

o What concentration -(infectious dosage level) of the 
enzyme is required to produce toxic effects? 

d. What tests, besides 'ileal loop', have been used to detect 

and measure toxic effects? 

2 . Virulence factors in Campylobacter 

a . How is Campylobacter transmitted from polluted water to 
the diver's body? 

• Where has Campylobacter been found in divers? 

b. How does the organism attach itself to host cells? 

c. Does Campylobacter produce any enzymes other than those 
known to be produced by aeromonas? 

• Which^enzymes cause disease? 

• By what mechanism or mode of action? 

• What defines an infectious dosage? 

d. Whattestg are used to detect and measure toxic effects? 

i ^ * 

B-29 



-3 . Virulence factors In yersinia 

a. How is yersinia transmitted from polluted water to the 
diver's body? 

c 

• Where has yersinia been found in divers? 



c. Does yersinia produce any enzymes other than those known 
to be produced by aeromonas? 

• Which enzymes cause disease? 

• By what mechanism or mode of action? 

• What ^defines an infectious dosage? 

d. What tests are used to detect and measure toxic effects? 



£Lz Question-Specific Context (Knowledge Structures Required for 



1 . About virulence factors in aeromonas 

• Aeromonas have been found in polluted waters 

• Some strains of aeromonas have pili, others do not. 

• Pili have been related to attachment >in other organisms. 

• Aeromonas produces the following enzymes: 

• hemolysin 

• protease 

• elastase 

• cytptoxin 

• enterotoxin 



• A test for enterotoxin is the 1 ileal loop 1 test used with 



b. 



How does the organism attach itself to host cells? 



Answer-Seeking) 




rabbits . 



Various toxins have been tested with'fuiman, rabbit 
and sheep cell cultures. 




B-30 



102 



mc 



2 . Abou t virulence factors in Campylobacter 

, • Campylobacter is difficult .to grow (culture), requires 
high temperature . 

• Campylobacter has not been found in natural water 
environments , only clinical samples. 

• Campylobacter causes diarrhea ,^d acute colitis, 
but mechanisms are unknown. -^J 

m Enzyme products of Campylobacter are not well specified. 
3 . About virulence factors in yersinia 

• Yersinia is difficult to grow (culture) 

• Yersinia can cause diarrhea and colitis. 




B-31 

103* 



II. SEARCH STRATEGY FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION 



Dr.,Coolbaugh was interested in finding out about the toxic products 
(enzymes) produced by five bacterial species , the pathogenic effects of 
these products, and the tests and procedures used to study them. He 
also wanted to know how the five bacteria attach to the host cells. 
The five bacteria were: 

• Aeromonas: species hydrophila and sobria 

• Campylobacter: subspecies jejuni and intestinalis (both 
species fetus) 

• Yersinia: species enterocolitica 

The search strategy was to pair each bacteria with a list of toxic products 
and a list of words related to attachment. Dr. Coolbaugh mentioned the 
following toxic products: cytotoxin ,~entero toxin, hemolytic toxin, 
protease, elastase. Two data bases were used: BIOSIS and MEDLINE . 
BIOSIS was selected because it indexes articles on bacteria; MEDLINE 
was chosen because of the clinical effects of the selected organisms on 
humans • 

A. Aeromonas Hydrophila; Aeromonas Sobria 

The first search wak on aeromonas hydrophila and sobria and attach- 
ment. The search terms are as follows: 



BIOSIS 

Aeromonas hydrophila or 
Aeromonas sobria and 
Attach or 
Hold or 
Pili 



MEDLINE 

Aeromonas hydrophila or 

Aeromonas sobria and 

Attach or 

Adhere or 

Hold or * 

Pili 



B-32 

104 



The BIOSIS search led to one article which was written by Dr. 
Coolbaugh. The MEDLINE search identified one article which, was 
about the association of the ciliate epistylis of large-mouth bass 
and aeromonas hydrophila. This article was not selected as the title 

said nothing about attachment or adherence to cells. 

v 

/ The second search was on aeromonas hydrophila and sobria and 
the toxic products mentioned by Dr. Coolbaugh. No specific 
searches were done on methods of study as the data bases are not 
indexed to obtain this information. The search terms were as follows 

/ 



MEDLINE 

Aeromonas hydrophila or 
Aeromonas sobria and 
Hemolysins or 
Cyt'o toxins or 
Pancreatopeptidase 



MIOSIS 

^ Aeromonas hydrophila or 
Aeromonas sobria- and 
Entero (w) toxin or 
Hemo (w) lysin or 
Protease or 
Elastase or 
Cyto (w) toxin 

The BI03IS search resulted in 23 citations; MEDLINE identified 
seven . Three articles were identified by both data bases . There 
were 27 new citations altogether. The system selected 20 of these 
as being relevant. Citations were rejected for the*following reasons: 

# They were on general methods: "Methods of enzymology, 
. Vol. XLV. Proteolytic enzymes" 

# They were about antigens: "A stud'/ of the antigenic structure 

of non-agglutinating vibrios and bacteria oLthe genus aeromonas 11 

Selected citations either mentioned "extra cellular enzymes", a 
specific enzyme, or pathogenic products. Some examples are: 

# "Characterization of 3 aeromonas-spp and 9 pseudomonas- 
spp by extracellular enzymes and hemolysins" 



B-33 



105 



• "Entero toxins of enteric bacteria: A review" (Note: 
Aeromonas are enteric bacteria) 

• "Cyto toxic entero toxin produced by aeromonas hydrophila: 
Relationship of toxigenic isolates to diarrheal disease" * 

B. Campylobacter Tejunl, Intestlnalis (Species Fetus) 

Very little has been published on Campylobacter Tejunl or Intestlnalis: 
BIOSIS showed 4 articles. These were all printed out. Although none 
was exactly on the topic, we selected all 4 as potentially useful. 
The system judged that' the articles might contain something about 
the products of these bacteria. Next in BIOSIS the system tried 
Campylobacter Fetus - 'this gave 113 citations. 

• Campylobacter fetus and attach or hold or adhere or pili re- 
sulted in 0 . 

• Camplyobacter fetus and extoxijn or hemolysin, etc., re- 
sulted in 2 citations , both of which looked like general 
reviews (e.g.): "Mechanism of Bacterial Diarrheas" 

They both were selected for further review. 

MEDLINE identified/27 citations on Campylobacter fetus and one 

/ 

specifically on toxic products . Twenty citations were selected . 
These citations had one of the following characteristics: 

• Included jejuni or intestlnalis 

• Indicated Campylobacter as a factor in some human disease. 
Some examples are: 

• "Acute colitis caused by Campylobacter fetus ss jejuni" 

• "Campylobacter entretis: A common cause of adult diarrohoea" 
m "Acute colitis and bacteremia due to Campylobacter fetus" 

C. Yersinia Entero colit lea 

Searches were the same as for aeromonas. In BlOSiS, no articles 
were^feiind on attachment; in MEDLINE, two were identified. One 
>^vas about serum antibodies, the other was on plasm id-mediated 



B-34 • 



106 



tissue invasivesness . Neither citation mentioned anything about 
attachment; both were rejected. 

The searches on toxic products resulted in 12 citations from 
BIOSIS and 9 from MEDLINE; 5 of these citations were the same 
giving a total of 17 new citations ♦ Ten citations were selected . 
Selected citations had the following characteristics: 
0 Included a toxin name 

• Related yersinia to other bacteria 

• Included the word "pathogenesis" 
General Comments 

Dr. Coolbaugh's questions were similar to those raised by Dr. Pavlovskis 
about virulence factors and theirs effects . The search results, however, 
show a large difference'in the level of work that has been accomplished. 
The work in pseudomonas aeruginosa is much more detailed and is further 
down the line in examining characteristic^oHhe toxic products (e .g .: 
how chey work, what they are made up of , etc J The articles on aermonas 
and toxic products are all at the level of determining which products are 
produced . The citations about Campylobacter and yersinia' showed 
even less progress. Mach of the work with Campylobacter described the 
organism; work with yersinia was to link the organism with a specific 
disease. 



B-35 



107 



J 



Uh PRODUCT PREPARATIO N AND 5WUJATIQN 
A. Aeromonas 

1 • Relevance^ 

The system prepared five products from articles about aeromonas 
hydrophila . Each article addressed either the issue of attach- 
ment or the characteristics of the enzyme products of aeromonas 
hydrophila. The system made no. distinctions among the articles 
on degree of relevance . 

'Ls. Product format and content 

Each of the five products was prepared as compressed substitutes 
forthe original document. Headings were used which followed 
standard journal format, i.e.., 

• Problem 

• Strains of organism studied 
* • Methods 

• Results 

The problem statement paraphrased the article, strains 
were listed, methods were mostly excerpts and results wire 
statements of main findings supported by tables/graphs excerpted 
from the article. 
3 » User evaluation 



The researcher found these products too detailed for his present 
state of progress on- the research topic. He was just beginning 
to shift from in-the-field sampling for aeromonas to planning, 
laboratory experiments with the .organisms . 
• • The system had noted this difference in state of progress 
between Coolbaugh and Paviovskis but failed to account for' its 
effect on product requirements . The system prepared products 



B-36 

i OS 



as though they were to be used by Pavlovskis, used a format/ 
content strategy which had been successful with Pavlovskis 
(i.e., a miniature of the original document) . 

Coolbaugh found the products telling him things he was not 
ready to absorb/make use of; maybe later they will have an 
impact oh his work but not now. Very detailed excerpts from 
the articles did not connect with any specific problem he has 
as yet. Now, at the initial planning stage of experimental 
research with aeromonas, Coolbaugh wanted an overview of 
what was being done with aeromonas, i.e., the status of ex- 
perimental work and not how it was being conducted . He sug- 
gested to the system formats/contents more appropriate to his 
needs at this stage of progress. 

• Give the author's rationale in a short statement. Why 
did this researcher do this work? ' 

* 

• List the topics treated in the paper. 

• List the results; do not reproduce the results in 
excerpted tables, etc., but state, like a list, what 
the tables tell. 

• Limit the product to a single page . 

The resulting products should serve two functions for the 
researcher: 

a . Enable him to acquire an overview (at the level of what ) 
of the status of experimental research with aeromonas; 
who's doing what, experimentally with aeromonas. 

b. Provide him with a means to selectively access details of 
the studies 'at a later time . 

The researcher suggested that the idea of the product is to 
go beyond the 3 x 5 citation card so as to have available an 
overview of the article in the form of lists . 



B-37 



' 109 



B« Aeromonas and Campylobacter 

The system prepared products from five articles: two about aeromonas 
and three about Campylobacter. 
1 . Relevance 

System judged the five articles using a three-category scale: 
high/medium/low. The high rated articles dealt with attach- 
ment or enzyme products or methods of testing for toxicity of a 
given enzyme product. The lower rated articles were about the 
organism but dealt with its morphology or taxonomy. The re- 
searcher was in general agreement with the system's ratings 
except for those Campylobacter articles rated low by the system. 
The researcher knows so little about Campylobacter that even 
articles about taxonomy/morphology were judged highly relevant. 
2 . Product format and content 

All articles were paraphrased not excerpted-. All were of a 
page in length. All were unstructured in format, i.e., no 
headings, but contained structured information. 

Products contained a statement of purpose/rationale, a list 
of organisms studied, lists of methods used, lists of topics 
addressed in the results. 

Products contained no excerpts, no tables, graphs or 
figures 
3 . User evaluation 

The researcher, having specified the format, content and style 
which he preferred, was most pleased with these products. 

Perhaps our system should provide the user with a 'menu 1 of 
formats, etc., to choose from, as a way to help the system pro- 
vide acceptable products . 



9 

ERLC 



B-38 



Dr. Emilio Weiss 

Medical Microbiology Branch 

Naval Medical Research 

Institute 
Bethesda, Maryland 



I. DIAGNOSIS: CONTEXT AND QUESTIONS 
A . Context for Identifying Questions 

X? Statement of the research topic: the problem of developing a 

non-cell growth medium for rickettsia . 

2 . Statement of the topic's Importance; a justification 'of the 
research: rickettsia is a genus of microorganisms which causes 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever and epidemic typhus. 

3 . Statement of the goal structure : 

••• To develop an immunizing vaccine against rickettsia. 

• • To develop a non-cell growth medium so that rickettsia 
can be easily grown in large numbers for experimentation. 

• To identify compounds which rickettsia can use for 
energy (can metabolize) . 

4. Characterization of the researcher's experience/level of 
sophistication with the topic : Dr. Weiss is an expert in 
research on the family of microorganisms which includes the 
genus rickettsia . 

5 . Characterization of the status on the topic: 
a . Some facts about the content - 

• Rickettsia can only > grown in a host-cell 
medium; they are difficult to grow and slow to 
multiply. This slows the rate of experimentation 
with the organism. 

• The family rickettsiaceae includes three genera: 
rickettsia, coxiella and rochalimaea. 

• Rochalimaea has a DNA structure similar to rickettsia. 

• Rochalimaea can be grown in a cell-free medium. 



B-39 



hi 



b. Some facts about methods/approaches: 

• Prior work toward identifying compounds which 
rickettsia can metabolize has been of a shotgun 
character, and has been unsuccessful, 

6 » Statement of excluded topics % * 

• The researcher is not interested in legionella . 

» The researcher is not interested in enteric bacteria or 
in gram-positive cocci. 1 

7, Characterization of the researcher's current problem 

m. Use rochalimaea, which are plentiful, as a simulation 
of rickettsia . Try a selected set of four biochemical 
reactions with rochalimaea • If rochalimaea tests 
positive to any of these reactions, then try them (it) 
with rickettsia . 

• Dr. Weiss has selected three strains of rochalimaea 
as the experimental organisms , and four biochemical 
reactions as tests for positive indication of metabolism 
by the experimental organisms: 

- Ornithine Metabolism 

- Voges-Proskauer Reaction i 

- Malonate Inhibition of Succinate Metabolism 

- HemathKMetabolism 

Dr. Weiss 1 expectation is that the experimental organisms will 
% 

test positive to one or more of these biochemical, reactions . 
B> Questions 

Before implementing his planned series of tests , the researcher de- 
cided to check the literature for recent evidence of positive reactions 
. to these foxir 'tests* , for any improvements in technique for studying 
each 'test' and for information about current indices/measures used to 
detect and quantify the biochemical reaction. The system organized 
these information requirements into four question sets as follows: 



ERIC 



B-40 

112 



1 . Question Set #1. About Ornithine Metabolism 

a. What is the evidence of positive reaction'for ornithine 

metabolism by any gram -negative, non-enteric, micro- 
organism? 

b. What are the procedures for studying ornithine metabolism? 
~c. What are the indices/measures used to detect and quantify 

ornithine metabolism reaction? 
2 . Question Set #2 . About Voges-Proskauer 

a . What is the evidence of positive reaction for Voges- 
Proskauer by any gram -negative, non-enteric, micro- ' 
organism? 

b. What are the procedures for studying Voges-Proskauer? 

c. What are the indices/measures u?ed to detect and quantify 
Voges-Proskauer reaction? 

3 . Question Set #3 . About Malonate~Inhibition 

a. What is the evidence of positive reaction to malonate 
inhibition of succinate metabolism by any gram -negative, 
non-enteric microorganism ? 

b. What are the procedures for studying malonate inhibition of 
succinate metabolism? 

c. What are the indices/measures used to detect and quantify 
m malonate inhibition of succinate metabolism ? 

4 . Question Set #4 . About Hematin Metabolism 

• Is there any evidence that any microorganism metabolizes, 
soluable ferric pyrophosphate? 




B-41 

113 



C. Question-Specific Context (Knowledge Structures Required for 
Answer Seeking) 

1 . About Ornithine Metabolism 

a . Ornithine is an amine; an intermediate product in the break- 
down pathway between amino acid and urea, 

b. Other compounds in this breakdown pathway include 
alanine, proline, carbamoyl phosphate, citrulline and 
arginine . 

c~ The family of microorganisms of interest (Ridcettsieae) 
are gram-xte^ative, non-enteric microorganisms, 

d . Evidence of positive ornithine metabolism by any gram- 
negative non-enteric microorganism' would be of interest.- 

2 . About Voqes-Proskauer 

a . The primary breakdown pathway is the conversion of 
glucose to pyruvate to acetoin. 

b. The index of a positive Voges-Proskauer reaction is the 
presence of acetoin. 

c. Acetoin is also called aceylmethylcarbonyl; also 3-hydrpxy, 
2-butanone 

3 . About Malonate Inhibition 

a . Malonate is a compound known to inhibit the ability of an 

organism to metabolize succinate, 
b. Succinate may be an important metabolite for rickettsia. 

4 . About Hematln Metabolism 

a . Hematln is an organic iron compound found in blood 
hemoglobin . 

b. Most microorganisms metabolize hematin and rickettsia 
requires an Iron compound for growth. 

c. Ferric pyrophosphate is a non-organic iron compound. 



B-42 



9 

ERIC 



114 



Ferric pyrophosphate was detected in blood samples from 
victims of Legionnaire^ disease. 

Legionnaire's disease may have been caused by a micro- 
organism of the rickettsiaceae family. 
Rickettsia may be able to metabolize pyrophosphate as a 
substitute for hematin. 



B-43 



us 



II. SEARCH STRATEGY FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION 

Dr. Weiss is studying rochalimaea as a model for rickettsia. He is 
interested in determining what compounds rickettsia metabolizes. He 
'has four compounds in mind: 

• Ornithine f 

• Acetoin (other words are pyruvate, Voges Proskauer, acetyl- 
methyl-carbinol, and 3-hydroxy-2-butanone) 

• Malonate inhibition of Succinate 

• Hematin, ferric pyrophosphate. 

He had three questions about each of these^ compounds: 

• What gram negative, non-enteric bacteria have had positive 
reactions to the compound and what was the reaction? 

• What new methods/techniques have been used to study re- 
actions to the compound? 

• What are the-current indicies used to measure each reaction? 

The search strategy was to combine non-enteric , gram-negative 
bacteria with metabolic processes arid with each compound. Both * 
BIOSIS and MEDLINE were searched. BIOSIS indexes citations on 
bacteria names; MEDLINE indexes clinical literature on bacteria names. 
In the current search, MEDLINE identified more relevant articles than 
BIOSIS. Terms on methods of measurements were not used as they are 
not very useful in identifying articles on methodology. The idea was that 
method would be identified through a review of the articles. 
A, Ornithine Metabolism 

Search terms were selected for classes of bacteria which were gram- 
negative and non-enteric. There may have been some problems with 
this as the system did not know all of the types of bacteria which 
are both gram-negative and non-enteric. The present structure-of 
the data base does not allow/ provide for sorts of gram-negative or 
non-enteric . 

V 

. * 



The second set of search terms were those codes, which deal 
with processes like metabolism. - There are other processes contained 
in these same codes. It is not possible to get just articles on 
metabolism. This creates a problem when reviewing titles for 
relevance. -If the concept of metabolism is not in the title there is 
no way of knowing if It is in the article as opposed to some other 
process under that code. In these cases the system must review 
abstracts and descriptors. 

The third descriptor was the compound name: ornithine. All 
three descriptor sets were combined with ands for both BIOSIS and 
wIEDLINE. In BIOSIS/ two articles were identified, in MEDLINE six 
articles were found. Six of the eight articles were selected by the 
system as being relevant. Selection decision was based on whether 
the title included the word ornithine or any compound in the ornithine 
pathway (e.g.: arginine, citrulline, etc.) . The rejected titles did 
not contain any of these compound names. Some examples of 
selected titles were: 

• "Poising of the arginine pool and control of bio-luminescence 
in Berieckea-harveyi" 

• "Arginine biosynthesis in Neisseria gonorrhoeae: enzymes 
catalyzing the formation of ornithine and citrulline 11 

It was not clear to the system whether these articles were on target 
(e.g.: were about metabolism, were about non-enteric, gram- 
negative bacteria . 
B . Malonate/Succinate 

In order to retrieve articles on the inhibition of succinate metabolism 
by malonate the system asked for all articles which included: 

• Malonate 

• Succinate 

• Codes for non-enteric, gram-negative bacteria 

. ' B-45 

117 - • 



This combination led to no ancles* The system broadened the 

search by leaving out succinate but no articles were identified. 

Finally succinate with bacteria was tried: four citations resulted. 

Two citations were selected as relevant because they included the 

word succinate and the titles impled inhibition. One of the citations 

included the word malonate . An example of a rejected title is: 

"Treatment of otitis media caused by halmophilus- 
Jtnfluenzae: Evaluation of three anti-microbial regimens" 

The selected titles were: 

» "Synthesis of alpha keto glutarate by reductive carbonylation 
of succinate in veillanella selenomonas and bacteroides 
species" 

• "Reversallpf succinate-mediated catabolite repression of 
alkyloulfatase in pseudomonas aeruginosa by*2, 4- 
dinitrophenal by sodium malonate" 

C ♦ Pyruvate/Acetoin 

The search terms included the following combinations: 

• Voges Proskauer (this is the name of a reaction that 
changes pyruvate to acetoin) and non-enteric , gram- 
negative bacteria . 

• Pyruvate or acetoin and gram-negative , non-enteric 
bacteria . 

In BIOSIS, Voges Proskauer and bacteria led to no citations. In 
MEDLINE 10 were identified. Pyruvate or acetoin and bacteria re- N 
suited in 18 citations from BIOSIS and 12 from MEDLINE. Fourteen 
citations were selected as relevant. All those listed under Voges 
Proskauer were selected . Others were chosen because they contained 
one of the following words: 

• Pyruvate 

• Acetoin 

• Acetyl-methyl-carbinol 

• 3-hydroxy-2-butanone 

B-46 



lis 



Still others were chosen because they implied cellular uptake rather 
than metabolic produces (the latter were rejected) . Some examples 
of selected titles are: 

"The pathway of formation of acetate and succinate from 
pyruvate by bacteroides succinogenes" 

"Preliminary crystallographlc study of omega-amino acid: 
pyruvate amino-transfer are from pseudomonas sp. F 126" 

"Rapid test for acetyl-methyl-carbinol formation entero- 
bacteriaceae 1 ' 

D; Hematin, Ferric Pyrophosphate 

There were no articles on ferric pyrophosphate and bacteria. In this 

search all bacteria were included. Next, iron or pyrophosphate and 

bacteria was tried. In BI03IS, one citation was identified: 

"A chemically defined medium for growth of legipnella- 
pneumophila" 

This citation was not selected as Dr.. Weiss said he knew all about 
legibnella. In MEDLINE, 19 citations were Identified . The MEDLINE 
search also included the term enterochelin . This term was given to 
the system by Dr. Weiss. Sixteen of the 19 citations were selected 
as possibly relevant. All of these citations contained the word iron 
or some synonym (e.g.: Fe, ferric, enterochelin, cytochrome, 

sider) . Some selected titles are: 

«? 

• "Enzymatic hydrolysis of enterochelin and its iron complex 
in escherichia coli K-12" 

• "Feasibility of enterochelin as an iron-chelating drug: 
studies with human serum and a mouse model system" 

• "Enterochelin (enterobactin): virulence factor for salmonella 
typhimurium" 

The system was unable to judge from the titles whether the articles 
were about metabolism . 



ERLC 



J-47 



119 



/ 



General Comments 

The system did not have an adequate frame for interpreting the computer 
output and determining its relevance to the questions. 

The system needed more content context than a few key words for 
each question, 

• All the synonyms for the compounds, processes and bacteria 
under question* 

• What the question really meant —e.g., what is metabolism, 
what is pyruvate, what are the contexts in which pyruvate is 
used which are not of interest, which are of interest, etc.? 

Another problem encountered further down in the analysis process is that 

the system had no criteria for determining whether a method was a new 

method or an old method (one he already knew about) . We did not know 

enough about what he knew to enable us to recognize new knowledge. 

The system should have gotten more question-specific context so 

it could distinguish known from unknown, and so it could recognize 

relevant citations . ^ 

• Name some "gram -negative, non-enteric organisms 11 . 

• Specify the tests' for/evidehce of 'positive reaction 1 . 



B-48 . 



120. 



Ill* PRODUCT PREPARATION -AND EVALUATION 
A . Ornithine Metabolism ■ 

1 . Relevance . Six articles were retrieved and reviewed. All " 
appehred relevant In that some microorganism was Identified as 
having some effect on a breakdown pathway that included 
ornithine. For example, the first article'tells about how a 
microorganism (agrobacterium radiobacter) of a certain char- 
acteristic (having a nopaline ti-plasmid) degrades arginine via 
ornithine to generate a carbon which enables bacterial growth . Five 
of the six articles included complex figures which appeared to 
describe the breakdown sequence in chemical structure notation. 
During the review, the system learned' the chemical structure of 
ornithine, arginine and other words that the researcher had 
talked of. For example, ornithine is also 

H 2 N - (CH 2 ) 3 - CH - COOH 
I 

NH 2 

The system could not discriminate levels of relevance 
among the six articles. ^ " 

2. Product format/content. All products had synopsis-plus-backup- 
detail format. The synopses were very short; a few sentences 
which gave the sense of the article. For example, "this article 
presents evidence that x organism contains y enzyme which 
converts A to B . " The backup material consisted entirely of 
excerpts from the original article. Any pathway diagram was 
included; also results tables/figures, in one case the entire 
Methods section where this was the main contribution of the 
article, i.e., methods of assay for detection and quantification 
of ornithine metabolism . 

B-49 



3 . User evaluation of products . The researcher first reviewed the 
list of six citations selected by the system as relevant to 
ornithine metabolism. He judged five of the six as relevant; 
one was judged to be irrelevant as the title suggested 'an 
emphasis on physical chemistry rather than biochemistry. 

Next the researcher reviewed the synopsis and excerpted 
material and decided that the five were clearly relevant and of 
interest, and confirmed that the sixth was physical chemistry 
and irrelevant. He was most pleased to see the biochemical 
breakdown pathways excerpted in the products. 

The researcher was then given the full documents which he 
briefly scanned. His evaluation of the overall procedure was 
that the synopses and excerpts were of marginal benefit as long 
as the full text was available." He judged that he could scan 
the document as easily as he could the excerpts. 

Remaining information products were reviewed in the same 
way and with the same outcome. 



B-50 



Bruce Gunn 

. * ~ Marine Microbiology Lab 

University of Maryland 

I, DIAGNOSIS: CONTEXT AND QUESTIONS- 
A-. Context for Identifying Questions 

1 . Statement of the' research topic: ' 
; . ,The speciation of streptococcus and staphylococcus isolates from 

At \ » 

aquatic environments; comparisons with clinical species. 

Statement of the topic's Importance; 3 justification of "the research 

Sf rep" and staph in aquatic environments may. -pose a threat to the 
V health of humans .and to commercially valuable marine organisms 

(oysters, clams , crah£, fish, etc.) 

Stcains/species of strep*and staph' may be useful as indi- 
cators of fecal. pollution in aquatid environments,. 
3 - Characterization -of researcher's experience/level of sophlsicatlon 
on ft e *^ pic: Th ® Researcher is an expert in taxonomy of clinical 
species of strep. He has conducted all phases of work in^the 
. taxonomy research paradigm for clinical isolates. However, he 
is new to the* field of aquatig microbiology. 
4 . Statement of excluded top ics; ' 

• Researcher is not interested in clinical strains of staphylo- 
cocci and streptococci . 

• Researcher is ndt interested ir?'fresh water strain sZ ^ 

. • Researcher is not interestedjn streptocci from animal 
feces . - * v 

r ^ \ 
5 . Characterlcatlon of the researcher's current problem: • * fc 

« , • 

He has essentially finished that half of the. project which will 
yield clusters of clinical strains of strep for comparison with 
aquatic strains . ^ 
He is just beginning the aquatic half of the problem, i.e.% 
Problem Selection in the research paradigm. i 



B-51 



B. Questions 



Asked 



Asked 
Asked 



Asked 
Asked 



Unasked 
Unasked 



1 . Question Set #1: About the current status of taxonomy studies 
with aquatic strep or staph, 

• What species or strains have been identified in natural 
bodies of water, particularly Chesapeake Bay? 

2. Question Set #2: About the use of strep or staph as indicatory 
of fecal pollution . 

• Is, there evidence of the use of strep or staph as an indi- 
cator of fecal pollution? 

• Can human vs animal sources of fecal pollution be dis- 
criminated in terms of species of strains of strep/staph? 

3 . Question \Set #3 : About isolation methods used with aquatic 
samples • 

• What is the evidence for the value of the membrane filter 
test for fecal strep? 

• Are there other methods in use for isolating strep/staph 
from aquatic samples, and how do they compare with 
Membrane Filter Test in effectiveness re: isolating 
strep or staph? 

(Name) oo What isolation media are used? 

(Description °°° What is the composition. of the medium? 
of compounds)* 



(Preparation oooo What is the procedure for preparing the 
procedure) medium? 



Unasked 

C . Question-Specific Context for Recognizing Answers 



SL 



1 . Question Set #1: A bout taxonomy of aquatic strep or" staph 
• fakxbnomy is sorting organisms into hierarchical sets. 



R 



• Faitiily 

• • Genus 

• • • Species/strain 

• Strep and staph are genus names 



B-52 

124 



• Streptococcus is K also known by the following: . 

• Gram -positive cocci 

- Enterococci 

• Subgroups of streptococci of- interest to the researcher are: 

- Group D 

- Viridans 

• Facales 

• Staphylococcus is also known as micrococci 

• Staphylococcus is a genus of the family Micrococcacae 

• Aquatic in v .his case means saline water as in Chesapeake 
Bay; not fresh water as in lakes . 

2. Ques tion Set #2. About strep/staph as indices of fecal pollution 

• Strep/staph are gram-positive cocci. 

• The typical index of fecal pollution is some gram-negative 
, rod such as E. coli. 

3 . Question Set #3 . About -isolation methods. 

9 The Membrane Filter Test is a method for isolating- strep ' 
from a sample of water polluted by feces . 

• The Membrane Filter Test is not reliable, tends to yield 
varying results . 

• Other criteria for assessing isolation methods (in addition 
to reliability) include: 

- Simplicity/ease of application 

- Availability of materials and equipment requirements. 

ft/ There are other methods for isolating strep or staph (re- 
searcher knew two others, but system failed to ask for 
specification) . 

• All methods of isolation include a medium of compounds de- 
signed to select for the organism to be isolated. These are 
called 'recovery media* or •selective media* . 

• A selective medium is composed of compounds which ±he 
organism uses for energy (metabolizes,) . 

• A medium is sometimes called •agar*, or 'broth* , i.e., 
PSE media is the same as PSE agar and PSE broth. 



B-53 

125 



Effectiveness of a medium is the extent to which it 
captures the organism of interest and no others . 



Different recovery media (agars) can be used with the 
Membrane Filter Test, 

Different recovery media (broths) can be used with the 
most probable number test (MPN) . 



B-54 



126 



IK SEARCH STRATEGY FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION 



The researcher was working on the taxonomy of streptococci from brackish 
and sea water. He had three major question areas: 

• What taxoftomy has been done on streptococci and staphylococci 
in an aquatic environment? 

• What is, the significance of gram-positive cocci in the aquatic 

. environment as indicators of feqal pollution? Do human feces - 
contain different species than animal feces? 

• What isolation metfrods for streptococci have been used in 
aquatic environments other than the membrane filter test? Who 
started the membrane filter test and how effective is it? 

The search strategy was to pair up all the names for streptococci with 

the key words in each question set.. The BIOSIS data base was used as 

it indexes most of the literature on bacteria , particularly environmental 

strains of bacteria . 

A« ..Taxonomy 

The search on taxonomy of aquatic streptococci contained the fallow- 
ing terms: 

• Streptococci 

• Staphylococci 

• Enterococci 

• Micrococci 

• Peptococci 

• Oceanography 

• Limnology 

• Taxonomy - bacteriology general 

• Taxonomy nomenclature 

Overall 51 citations were identified; 15 of these were selected as 
relevant"; ~Mflf3t selected-titles (l-3-of-l-5)-included-<some^word. which, 
implied classification: taxonomy, speciation,. characteristics, 



the organism 



— aquatic environment 



B-55 



127 



differentiation of species, identification by some test. Air selected 
titles included streptococci. . One title > not using classification 
'terms, identifies a specific characteristic of streptococcus: 

"Pyruvate fermentation by streptococcus facalis" 
The system recognized "pyruvate fermentation" as a characteristic 
and then inferred that if a characteristic were mentioned then some 
classification/taxonomy would be involved. Taxonomy is based on 
characteristics. " Fermentation ?l was recognized as a process that 
the organism does - thus, a characteristic of the organism. 

The other title (without classification Words) was "Group D 
Streptococci" . The system reasoned that a title which only stated 
the name of a group of organisms would be about the characteristics 
of that group of organisms . Since group D was mentioned by the 
researcher, this article was selected. 

Examples of other selected titles are; * 

"Indicator organisms - A review. I. Taxonomy of the 
fecal streptococci" 

"Characterization of two new isolates of beta hemolytic 
, streptococci from Amazon fresh water dolphins inia- 
geoffrensis" ! 

"Species differentia tion of group D streptococci" 

"Presumptive speciation of streptococcus bovis and other, 
group D streptococci from human sources by using 
arginine and pyruvate tests" 

The titles that were not selected either did not imply classification 

or did not specifically mention streptococci. Additionally, in many 

cases, the source of the bacteria was from^animal waste. The 

researcher was mainly interested in streptococci associated with 

humans . Spme examples of rejected titles are: 



B-56 

123 . , 



"Effects of upgrading a municipal waste water effluence 
on pollution indicator and other microorganisms in river 
water" 

"A study of bacterial flora isolated from marine algae" 

"The incidence of enteric bacteria in the sediment of a 
bird sanctuary pond" , 

" "Microbial investigation of the high mountain vevcani 
lake" 

B. Significance of Streptococci In. the Water 

The search terms for the significance of fecal streptococci in aquatic 
environments were: - * 

m Streptococci 

• Staphylococci 

• Enterococci ' f - the organism 

• Micrococci 

• Peptdcocci 

• Oceanography . 

y — aquatic environment 

• Limnology 

• Fecal m \ 
m Feces 

Twenty of the -most recent articles were printed out • Of these nine 
were selected as having relevance to the question. Selected titles 
contained the following words. 

• Indicators of contamination, pollution 

• -Distribution of fecal bacteria 
m Persistence, survival of fecal bacteria 

• Sanitary significance of streptococci 

• Bacterial, microbial water quality 




B-57 



1.29 



-Titles implie'd the possible presence of streptococci from human 

sources in natural waters (e.g.: sea water, rivers and streams, 

specific bodies of water) . Some examples of selected titles are: 

"Fecal bacterial contamination of trout hatchery water 
effluent" 

. "Survival of fecal streptococci in sea water" 

"Pollution indicators and other microorganisms in river 
sediment" 

"Types and sanitary significance of fecal streptococci 
isolated from feces, sewage and water" 

Twenty additional articles on the significance of streptococci Iji the 

water were identified through the review ; ;qf bibliographies in the 

selected articles . / 

Rejected citations were on analyses of water supplies or on the 

impact of birds and animals on the level of bacteria in the water . 

C . Methods of Isolation: The Membrane Filter Test 

This search included all the terms for streptococci and water as well 

as microbial ultra structure, membrane filter, isolation. Ten articles 

were identified and one was selected as useful/relevant. This * 

article was: 

"Membrane filter technique for enumeration of enterococci 
in marine waters" 

Rejected articles were mainly about isolating other organisms 

, (pseudomonas, salmonella), or about isolating bacteria from fish 

or from aquarium plants. Examples are: 

"Isolation of -salmonellae and other potential organism s fe > 
from the fresh water aquarium snail ampullaria" 

"In vitro studies on drug resistance with microorganisms 
isolated from marine plants" 



B-58 



Nineteen additional articles were selected by starting with the 
biblipgraphy of the relevant article and working backwards . All 
selected articles had one or more of the following terms: 

• Media 
Test t. 

• Detection 

• Isolation 

• Name of a particular method . 

Name& of additional methods, beyond membrane filter", were identified 
through reading selected sarticles. These method names were used 
to do further searching . ' • - 



B-59 

131 



ERiC 



HI. PRODUCT PREPARATION AND EVALUATION „ 

Products were prepared for Question Set #3, Isolation Methods . There 
were two separate packages:* one about the Membrane Filter Test, and a 
second about other methods . 
A, Membrane Filter Test 

1 . 'Relevance, Documents were obtained for ten citations and all 
were judged relevant by the system. All had to d^with the use 
of various recovery media with the Membrane Filter Test; all 
included streptococcus as, a target organism; all inclu^edr 
natural water samples*. 

2 . Format and content. Each article was reduced to a short 
synopsis of 4-8 sentences prepared by a reviewer. The synopses 
were not excerpts from the article. The synopsis characterized* 
the article, i.e., told what it was about., and included ■pointers 1 
to amplifying information. For example: "Composition of a new 
medium, ME agar, is described (p. 591) The paragraph 
describing media composition was excerpted from the original 
and included as a back-up sheet to the synopsis . A typical 
product included the synopsis and back-up sheets containing 
one or two paragraphs and one or two tables f pointed to 1 in the 
synopsis . 

3 . Procedure and user Evaluation 

a ; The researcher was shown a list of the 10 citations which 
the system had selected as relevant. The researcher 
scanned the list and made three responses. 

• He was overjoyed to tf see 10 rather than 100 citations 
more typical of computer search results. 

• " He judged all 10 to be highly relevant. 

• He selected citation #8 as the article he would 
read/review first since the title suggested that eight 

_ . media procedures were_ compared .for effectiveness;- 

also the date of this citation was the most recent of the' 10. 

B-60 

132 



b. Next the researcher read each synopsis and accompanying 
back-up material as prepared by the system and made the 
following judgments: 

• Citation #9 provided no new information. If he had 
the other documents, he could ignore this one. 

• The^ remaining citations were valuable to his work 
and he wanted full documents in order to follow-up 
details not provided by the synopsis-with-pointers- 
to-excerpts . 

Some of the detailed information he desired but were not 
in the prepared products were as follows: 

• What did they do to avoid "clogging the filter with 
debris?' 

• What procedural problems are there in using the 
method in the field vs in the laboratory? 

• What compound in the medium selected for strep? 

• Why did the technique/medium produce false 
positives, i.e., recover organisms other than 
those of interest? 

The researcher found the synopses and attached excerpts valuable 
for determining which articles he should follow-up. The system 
provided answers to questions it knew about, but the researchej had 
more detailed questions which he did not tell the system about in the 
earlier interaction. As the researcher reviewed materials prepared 
by the system these questions surfaced. In a real-time interactive 
mode, the system could have 'comprehended 1 those questions and 
elaborated upon the products . 

Also, not all thg questions the researcher needs to ask can be 
asked by him in an initial need-diagnosing interaction. For example, 
in this case the researcher came,across a recovery medium unknown 
to him, DSE, named in one of the synopses. Now the researcher had 

> 

* i 

B-61 

# 

« 

133 



detailed questions about DSE which had not been previously expressed 
The system perhaps could have had the researcher specify ail the 
media known ttrhim in the beginning , then instructed itself to answer 
detailed questions about any medium it encountered which was not 
on this list* 
B. Other Isolation Methods 

1 . Relevance . The system had identified citations which discussed 
five isolation methods in addition to Membrane Filter Test. 

All were used to isolate streptococuccus from water samples . 

2. Format and content. The first product answered the 'what other 
methods' question at the level of name only. 

The second product was a list of citations, by publication 
year, for each of the methods. 

The third product consisted of synopsis with-pointers-to- 
excerpts for each article within each method-type subset. 
These products Wera modeled after those prepared for articles 
about the Membrane Filter Test. A six-sentence synopsis with 
pointers to paragraphs, tables, figures, etc., which were 
excerpted from the full-text document and appended to the 
synopsis . 
3 . Procedure and user evaluation 

,a . First the research reviewed Product 1 , a list of 5 names 

as follows: 

A. Most Probable Number (MPN) 

B. Pour Plate 

C . Precipition Test 

D . Coagglutination Method • 

E . Fluorescent-antibody technique (FA) 



B-G2 



134 



The researcher used this product to .direct the order of priority 
of further searching on the basis of those methods he knew 
least about; in this case N the reverse of the order of pre- * 
sentation. The researcher knew least about methods E and 
D, some of C, more of B and most about A, 
Next the researcher reviewed the citations listed for Method E 
and the synopsis with pointers for the articles cited. There 
were three synopses and researcher decided that two would 
not be useful as there werfe no applications of the method, 
only descriptions . The third he would follow-up since the 
synopsis suggested that the method had been tried out with 
some success and that the materials required were com- 
mercially available . 

Next he reviewed the citation list and synopsis-with- 

pointers for Method D. The one article was of no further 

interest since it was not a standardized or proven test for 

use in the field, only in the laboratory. 

Next he reviewed the citation list and synopsis set for the 

articles about Method C and came to the same conclusion: 

the method was not adapted to field use. 

Now the researcher went ba„ck to methods he knew well to 

look for new developments . : 

Those articles which suggested lack of new develop- 
ments he rejected for future follow-up; those which included 
aspects of interest to his application he noted for future 
follow-up. 'Good 1 articles were those' which were applicable 
to aquatic sampling in some way. For example: 



. B-63 



135 



• Included water salinity ranges as a factor in re- 
covery. Researcher expressed concern about whether 
or not MPN could be used in saline waters like 
Cheseoeake Bay. 



• Discussed problems in use of method in the field. 4 

o 

• An early paper in MPN of historical, significance for 
. m use in an INTRODUCTION . 



B-64 

EM; ' 136 



