AO-A103  926  MASSACHUSETTS  INST  OF  TECH  CAMBRIDGE  ARTIFICIAL  INTE— ETC  F/G  5/10 
COLOR  VISION  AND  IMAGE  INTENSITIES:  WHEN  ARE  CHANGES  MATERIAL? <U> 

MAY  01  J  M  RUBIN*  W  A  RICHARDS  N00014-SO-C-0505 

UNCLASSIFIED  AI-M-631  _ _ HL _ 


ADA103926 


Jj 

O 


// 
;  / 


UNCLASS  II 


[D 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  Qf  THIS  PACE  (Whon  Data  Enlmimd) 


ft. 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PACE 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 


I.  REPORT  NUMBER 


AIM  #  631 


/ 


[2.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO.I  J-  RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 


4.  TITLE  f*nd  Subtitle) 


d !Ln4 


Col  or.  J/  i  sion  and  Jmage.  ^ptens  i  ti  es : 
tlhen  are  Changes  Material? 

_  -ir.  -  3  .  _ _  .  — ' 


7.  AUTHORf»> 


!?■ 


John  Rubin 


9.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  name  and  address 


Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
5^5  Technology  Square 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts  02139 


y  TT"r  ***  Hgpn"T  *  aass  covered 

-^'Memorandum 

s.’*p*ERroHlllMl.ijRU.'RepeRTM>Ai»ER 
contract  or  grant  number?#? 

NCTpr01 4-8^-C-^jOB^^ 


yWOSTTATV  CL  EMEN  T.-PROMECT.  TASK 
AREA  k  WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 


it.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  ANO  AOORESS 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
1A00  Wilson  Blvd  O 

Arlington,  Virginia  22209 


■■  repurt-ornb  ~t 

May  BS1  _y 


is.  number  o f  pages 

31 


i*.  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  a  ADDRESS (It  dtlloronl  /ram  Control  Unj  Ot  ) 

Office  of  Naval  Research  ■  ■  ■■■  l/i 

Information  Systems  I  FpI1Tm\\ 

Arlington,  Virginia  22217  ' 


-f  1  / 

/ 


iV 


18.  SECURITY  CLASS,  {ottMo report/ 

UNCLASSIFIED 


IS*.  DECLASSIFICATION/ DOWNGRADING 
SCHEDULE 


V6.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ot  thta  Report) 

Distribution  of  this  document  is  unlimited. 


■orcy 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ot  the  abstract  entered  In  Bloc*  20,  It  different  from  Roport) 


18.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

None 


SEP 

— ~^4 


5^ 


T9.  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  reeotee  mldm  H  neceaemry  and  Identity  by  block  number) 


vision 

edge  detection 
crosspoint  operators 
color  vision 


material  changes 


20  ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  reeeree  aide  It  nocoamaiy  and  Identity  by  block  number) 

Marr  has  emphasized  the  difficulty  in  understanding  a  biological  system  or  its 
components  without  some  idea  of  its  goals.  In  this  paper,  a  preliminary  goal 
for  color  vision  is  proposed  and  analyzed.  That  goal  is  to  determine  where 
changes-of  material  occur  in  a  scene  (using  only  spectral  information).  This 
goal  is  challenging  for  two  reasons.  First,  the'effects  of  many  processes 
(shadowing,  shading  from  surface  orientation  changes,  highlights,  variations 
in  pigment  density)  are  confounded  with  the  effects  of  material  changes  in  the 
available  image  intensities.  Second,  material  changes  are  essentially 


DD  ,'STn  1473 

W'H  tf 


EDITION  OF  •  NOV  «S  IS  OBSOLETE 
t/H  0  10I-IM4-  ««OI  | . .  • 


8  luNClQs,F,fe»  jj  1  T  O 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAG*  (Whin  Doll  5 «*WI 


20.  arbitrary.  We  are  consequently  led  to  a  strategy  of  rejecting  the 
presence  of  such  confounding  processes.  We  show  there  is  a  unique 
condition,  the  spectral  crosspoint,  that  allows  rejection  of  the  hypothesis 
that  measured  image  intensities  arise  from  one  of  the  confounding  processes. 

(If  plots  are  made  of  image  intensity  versus  wavelength  from  two  imaqe  regions, 
and  the  plots  intersect,  we  say  that  there  is  a  spectral  crosspoint.) 

We  restrict  our  attention  to  image  intensities  measured  from  regions  on 
opposite  sides  of  an  edge  because  material  changes  almost  always  causes  edges. 
Also,  by  restricting  our  attention  to  luminance  discontinuties,  we  can 
avoid  peculiar  conspiracies  of  confounding  processes  that  might  mimic  a 
material  change.  Our  crosspoint  conjecture  is  that  biological  visual  systems 
interpret  spectral  crosspoints  across  edges  as  Material  changes.  A 
circularly  symmetric  operator  is  designed  to  detect  crosspoints;  it  turns 
out  to  resemble  the  double-opponent  cell  which  is  commonplace  in  biological 
color  vision  systems. 


MASSACHUSETTS  INSTITUTE  OF  TECHNOLOGY 
ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  LABORATORY 


A.I.  Memo  No.  631 


May.  1981 


Color  Vision  and  Image  Intensities: 
When  are  Changes  Material? 

John  M.  Rubin  &  W.  A.  Richards 


ABSTRACT 

"“Marr  has  emphasized  the  difficulty  in  understanding  a  biological  system  or  its  components  without 
some  idea  of  its  goals.  In  this  paper,  a  preliminary  goal  for  color  \  ision  is  proposed  and  analyzed.  That 
goal  is  to  determine  where  changes  of  material  occur  in  a  scene  (using  only  spectral  information).  This 
goal  is  challenging  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  effects  of  many  processes  (shadowing,  shading  from  sur¬ 
face  orientation  changes,  highlights,  variations  in  pigment  density)  are  confounded  with  the  effects  of 
material  changes  in  the  available  image  intensities.  Second,  material  changes  are  essentially  arbitrary. 
We  arc  consequently  led  to  a  strategy  of  rejecting  the  presence  of  such  confounding  processes.  We 
show  there  is  a  unique  condition,  the  spectral  crosspoint ,  that  allows  rejection  of  the  hypothesis  that 
measured  image  intensities  arise  from  one  of  the  confounding  processes.  (If  plots  arc  made  of  image 
intensity  versus  wavelength  from  two  image  regions,  and  the  plots  intersect,  we  say  that  there  is  a 
spectral  crosspoint.)  We  restrict  our  attention  to  image  intensities  measured  from  regions  on  opposite 
sides  of  an  edge  because  material  changes  almost  always  cause  edges.  Also,  by  restricting  our  attention 
to  luminance  discontinuities,  we  can  avoid  peculiar  conspiracies  of  confounding  processes  that  might 
mimic  a  material  chage.  Our  crosspoint  conjecture  is  that  biological  visual  systems  interpret  spectral 
crosspoints  across  edges  as  material  changes.  A  circularly  symmetric  operator  is  designed  to  detect 
crosspoints;  it  turns  out  to  resemble  the  double-opponent  cell  which  is  commonplace  in  biological 
color  vision  systems. 

r 


Acknowledgement:  This  report  describes  research  done  at  the  Artificial 
Intelligence  Laboratory  and  Psychology  Department  under  a  program  in 
Natural  Computation  funded  by  AFOSR  and  NSF  (MCS  79-23110),  and  by  ARPA 
under  an  ONR  contract  (N00014-80-C-0505) .  J.M.  Rubin  was  supported  by  an 
NSF  graduate  fellowship.  The  helpful  comments  of  Alex  Pentland,  Shimon 
Ullmand,  and  D.D.  Hoffman  are  appreciated,  as  well  as  the  technical  assistance 
of  J.  Sandell . 


RUBIN  a  RICHARDS 


1 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


1  introduction:  Why  Color  Vision? 

Color  vision,  perhaps  because  of  its  profound  aesthetic  value,  has  been  one  of  the  most  intensely 
studied  sensory  processes.  Consequently,  a  great  deal  is  known  about  the  transduction  and  low-level 
neural  processing  of  spectral  information.  Yet  there  seems  to  be  a  dearth  of  insight  into  the  biological 
value  of  color  vision.  Why  has  that  capacity  evolved  independently  in  species  of  fish,  birds,  and 
mammals  (Walls,  1942)?  Color  vision  apparently  affords  some  advantage  to  organisms  in  almost  every 
(photopic)  environment.  What  is  the  nature  of  that  advantage? 

As  Marr  (1982)  points  out,  without  some  idea  of  the  usefulness  of  color  vision,  wc  cannot  fully 
understand  and  appreciate  the  structure  of  color  vision  systems.  The  design  of  a  system  will  change 
according  to  its  goal.  Consider  a  spectrophotometer,  for  example.  It  has  an  ambitious  goal,  but  faces 
a  simple  problem.  The  purpose  of  the  device  is  to  describe  the  ratio  of  reflected  light  to  incident  light 
on  an  object  as  completely  as  possible  over  a  range  of  wavelengths.  The  problem  is  relatively  simple 
because  illumination  and  surface  orientation  are  carefully  controlled.  Humans  (and  other  organisms), 
in  contrast,  must  deal  with  more  complicated  situations:  in  general,  nothing  is  known  about  the 
illuminant  and  the  orientation  of  surfaces.  Furthermore,  shadows  and  highlights  appear  haphazardly 
in  images.  Given  the  complexities  of  natural  images,  achieving  the  goal  of  the  spectrophotometer 
seems  a  herculean  task. 

Granted,  it  is  commonly  assumed  that  the  goal  of  human  color  vision  is  to  extract  aspects  of  the 
spectral  character  of  surfaces  in  order  to  identify  objects  such  as  ripened  fruits,  moldy  bread,  rare 
roast  beef,  and  so  on.  This  goal  is  extremely  ambitious  in  light  of  the  confounding  factors  of  shadow 
and  highlight,  surface  orientation,  and  the  special  composition  of  the  illuminant.  It  would  be  more 
appropriate  to  propose  and  to  explore  an  easier  objective  for  biological  color  vision,  at  least  as  a 
beginning.  To  start  our  analysis,  we  will  consider  the  modest  goal  of  using  spectral  information  in  the 
image  to  find  where  changes  in  surface  material  occur.  A  change  of  material  is  just  where  one  sort 
of  stuff  ends  and  another  begins.  Where  the  yolk  stops  and  white  begins  in  a  sunnysidc-up  egg  is  an 
example  of  a  material  change.  Although  this  objective  appears  limited,  it  should  be  attainable  if  more 
complicated  goals  can  be  reached.  Analysis  of  this  simpler  goal  will  lead  to  die  derivation  of  a  unique 
minimal  spectral-spatial  condition  that  is  reliably  associated  with  material  changes. 

Wc  therefore  propose  as  our  starting  point: 

An  early  goal  of  biological  color  vision  is  to  determine  where  changes  of  material  in  cur  in  a  scene, 
using  only  sjtectral  information  in  the  image. 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


2 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


Figure  1.  Notation.  A)  X  and  Y  are  two  regions  in  an  image.  B)  The  available 
information  is  continuous  functions  of  image  intensity  versus  wavelength,  /*(\)  and 
/y(K),  from  regions  X  and  Y  respectively.  C)  Discrete  representation  of  this  information 
is  possible  by  taking  a  number  (here,  three)  of  spectral  samples  (narrowband  in  this 
illustration,  at  wavelengths  Xt,  X2.  and  h3). 


Our  goal  is  thus  similar  to  the  one  first  proposed  by  Land  (1977),  but  more  modest  Land  was 
concerned,  as  we  are,  with  computing  information  about  surface  properties  of  materials  in  a  scene. 
His  objective  was  to  determine  the  reflectance  of  regions  using  only  the  available  intensity  informa¬ 
tion.  Land  reached  his  objective  by  assuming  a  greatly  simplified  Mondrian  world — a  flat,  shadowlcss 
world  composed  of  regions  of  uniform  reflectance.  We  prefer  to  deal  with  the  natural  world  in  its 
entirety  without  unnecessary  simplification,  and  instead  limit  our  objectives.  In  this  way  we  can 
exploit  the  regularities  in  the  world  as  assumptions  or  constraints  in  the  solution  of  our  problem.  The 
simple  goal  we  will  analyze,  to  reiterate,  is  just  to  determine  when  changes  in  an  image  arise  from 
one  material's  bordering  (or  occluding)  another  in  a  scene.  We  shall  sec  below  dial  die  problem  to  be 
solved  in  achieving  our  modest  goal  is  still  formidable. 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


GLOSSARVOF  SYMBOLS 

LFMOMt 
jSf— auBriil  duoflB 

5—  Aadow  (point  mite) 

A— *ijU(*h(or|to« 

6—  dua|e  in  airihn  orisauikm 
F— duo|C  la  pWnent  Amity 

fludow- with  penumbra  (encoded  min) 

0,1^,— monoionic  chute  la  turfme  orioution 
II.  Qf dthi  tnurH  h  Itgt 

/*{X)— <ht  continuous  Aiocuon  of  urupr  kienrity  renu*  wndentib  matured  In  •  region  X  In  *n 
Imtte. 

f,x — <  discrete  spectral  sample  at  wirdrsplli  V 
111  CmOmtm  Set*  VufaMo 
p(X)-tbe  albedo  or  spectral  reflectance  Amction  of  a  material. 

Hj(X)-tbe  difliite  component  of  the  Uumtaation. 

£s{k)— the  synthetic  component  of  the  ■uminadou. 

E(X>— the  lUumlnam  taken  at  a  whole  (when  components  me  inetevant). 

a— the  penumbra  constant 

■jx— the  thickness  or  pigmentation  in  ration  X. 

IV.  Useless  Setae  VarMlet 

If  <?r(X)  is  tome  Ainction  of  aaedeagfli  In  regioe  X,  flstn  Q,x  Is  a  thscttte  sample  of  that 
Auction,  at  wavelength  X<,  ftntn  region  X. 

Tatis  I.  A  glostary  of  symbols. 


Table  I.  A  glossary  of  symbols. 

2  The  Scope  of  the  Problem 

The  problem  in  achieving  the  proposed  goai  of  finding  changes  of  material  (hereafter  denoted  by 
the  symbol  Ml  )  is  that  any  given  image  intensity  can  arise  in  many  different  ways,  depending  on 
the  particular  processes  in  effect.  Thus  given  a  single  intensity  value  in  the  image,  it  is  generally  not 
possible  to  decide  which  of  the  many  possible  events  in  the  world  produced  it.  It  can  be  said  that  the 
act  of  imaging  a  scene,  or  projecting  it  into  two  dimensions,  confounds  the  effects  of  material  changes, 
our  interest  here,  with  the  effects  of  other  processes.  These  confounding  events  include  shadows, 
surface  orientation  changes,  highlights,  and  variations  in  pigment  density.  Furthermore,  the  quest 
for  recovering  M  (material)  changes  from  image  intensities  must  succeed  under  a  range  of  spectrally 
different  illuminants.  A  system  that  only  worked  properly  given  an  illuminant  having  the  spectral 
composition  of  the  mid-day  sun  would  be  very  limited.  At  dawn  and  dusk,  when  sunlight  reddens,  the 
system  might  fail. 

1  Uic  circumflex  accciH  is  used  in  Ibis  paper  lo  denote  abstincl  processes  it  ts  intended  lo  keep  discussion  about  processes 
distinct  from  talk  about  simple  variables  or  functions 


RUBIN  *  RICHARDS 


4 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


We  can  now  summarize  the  problem  that  early  color  vision  faces,  if  its  goal  is  to  discover  material 

changes: 

The  problem  in  determining  where  changes  of  material  occur  in  a  scene  is  that  in  the  available  image 
intensity  values,  the  effects  of  many  processes  may  be  confounded 

In  the  remainder  of  section  2,  a  notational  scheme  will  be  developed.  In  section  3,  a  general  outline 
of  the  solution  will  be  presented. 

Notation.  A  notational  scheme  is  shown  in  figure  1.  Regions  in  the  static  image  will  be  denoted  by 
X  and  Y.  (The  time  variable  will  be  ignored.)  These  letters  will  also  be  used  to  refer  to  regions  in  a 
scene  which  are  the  inverse  projections  of  the  image  regions.  The  context  will  make  clear  the  correct 
referent.  The  image  intensity  measurable  in  region  X  (or  Y),  say,  as  a  function  of  wavelength,  will  be 
denoted  by  the  function  J*(X)  (or  7>(X)).  Note  that  7v(X)  (or  Iy(\))  represents  all  the  information 
available  from  region  X:  it  is  the  continuous  spectral  distribution  of  image  intensity  from  X  (or  Y),  as 
shown  in  the  middle  graph  in  figure  1.  In  section  5,  we  will  refer  to  discrete  approximations  of  7x(X), 
which  can  be  generated  by  sampling  the  image  intensity  from  X  at  spectral  points  (Xj, . . . ,  X„),  as 
shown  in  the  bottom  graphs  in  figure  1.  In  discrete  computations,  Ijx  will  denote  the  image  intensity 
measured  from  region  X  at  Xj. 

Since  many  symbols  arc  used  in  this  discussion,  a  glossary  is  presented  in  table  1. 

3  The  Theme  of  the  Solution:  A  Negative  View 

3.1  The  Strategy 

Given  two  spectral  energy  distributions  /y(X)  and  />  (X),  how  might  we  determine  whether  they 
arise  from  an  M  (material)  change?  Little  can  be  said  about  the  spectral  nature  of  M  changes;  they 
arc  essentially  arbitrary.  No  simple  equations  can  relate  image  intensities  from  two  regions  composed 
of  different  materials.  The  major  confounding  processes— shadows  (hereafter  denoted  S),  highlights 
(ft),  surface  orientation  changes  (£>),  and  changes  in  pigment  density  (P)— however,  produce  lawful 
changes  in  the  image.  Simple  equations  can  capture  this  lawfulness,  as  will  be  seen  in  section  4. 
Suppose  that  by  examining  image  intensities  from  two  regions  we  could  eliminate  the  possibility  that 
they  arose  from  cither  an  5,  ft,  O,  or  P  change.  Since  wc  arc  assuming  the  illuminam  to  he  spectrally 
invariant  in  a  neighborhood,  we  would  like  to  conclude  that  the  change  was  due  to  a  material  change. 


RUBIN  ft  RICHAROS 


5 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


A  preliminary  conjecture  is  thus  proposed: 

When  a  difference  between  the  image  intensities  /.v{X)  and  />  (X)  (taken  from  two  image  regions  X 
and  Y )  does  not  arise  from  one  of  the  confounding  processes  S,  H,  O,  or  P,  then  this  difference  between 
X  and  Y  is  due  to  a  difference  in  materials,  or  M. 

The  conjecture  above  suggests  a  computational  strategy  of  attempting  to  reject  measurements  of 
image  intensities  as  arising  solely  from  shadow  (S),  highlight  (H),  surface  orientation  change  (0),  or 
pigment  density  change  (P),  the  lawful  confounding  processes  in  a  scene.  Our  rejection  strategy  will 
be  correct  only  if  there  arc  no  confounding  processes  other  than  the  ones  mentioned.  But,  as  will  be 
discussed  later,  if  in  the  course  of  rejecting  the  presence  of  S,  H,  0,  and  P,  we  also  reject  the  presence 
of  any  of  a  large  class  of  other  possible  confounding  processes,  the  strategy  will  be  a  powerful  one  and 
the  conjecture  will  be  useful  for  practical  purposes. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  rejecting  the  presence  of  a  lawful  process  is  often  much  easier  than  ac¬ 
cepting  it.  As  mentioned  above,  lawful  processes  are  associated  with  equations.  These  equations  relate 
quantities  measurable  in  the  image  (constants  in  the  equations)  to  scene  properties  (variables  in  the 
equations)  which  arc  not  directly  measurable.  Typically,  these  scene  property  variables  (reflectances, 
for  example)  arc  constrained  to  take  values  within  a  certain  interval.  As  will  be  seen  below,  rather 
than  attempting  to  solve  a  system  of  equations  (subject  to  constraints  on  the  values  of  variables),  it 
is  often  computationally  simpler  to  determine  whether  the  system  (with  constraints)  can  be  solved. 
In  this  sense,  rejecting  a  solution  (process)  is  easier  than  accepting  one.  By  analogy,  disproving  a 
conjecture  about  number  theory  (some  universally  quantified  equation  or  inequality)  with  a  single 
counterexample  is  simpler  than  demonstrating  the  theoremhood  of  the  conjecture.2 

Here’s  a  simple  example.  Consider  the  equations  Ii  =  JK  and  h  —  JK<  where  J  and  K  are 

variables,  and  1\  and  h  arc  constants.  If  the  variables  J  and  K  arc  constrained  to  have  values  greater 

than  unity,  then  a  simple  test  can  be  made  that  might  determine  that  the  system  has  no  solution. 

Specifically,  if  min(/|,  Ij)  <  1,  then  there  is  no  solution  that  obeys  the  constraints3  .  Intuitively, 

JOf  course,  rejecting  (he  occurrence  of  a  process  or  eveni  is  logically  equivalent  to  accepting  the  occurrence  of  its 
negation  But  usually  either  a  process  or  its  complement,  and  not  both,  can  be  characterized  mathematically.  So  the 
logical  equivalence  breaks  down  in  favor  of  practical  considerations,  such  as  dcscribability  Intuitively,  rejecting  the 
presence  of  a  shadow  is  child's  play  compared  to  accepting  the  presence  of  a  nonshadow  How  could  the  class  of  all 
(visually  interesting)  events-that-are-not-shadows  possibly  be  ch.iractcn/cd1  Ihat  class  is  certainly  a  peculiar  collection 
of  odds  and  ends,  including  such  diverse  members  as  paths  of  fireflies  and  holes  in  the  ground.  Visual  systems  "don't 
care"  if  they're  accepting  processes  or  rejecting  negations  of  processes;  it  only  matters  to  us  when  we  characterize  what 
we  think  the  system  might  be  doing 

'( Icarly  the  product  of  two  numbers  each  greater  than  unity  is  greater  than  unm  And  a  number  greater  than  unity 
raised  to  a  power  greater  than  unity  is  also  greater  than  unite  I  he  rejection  condition  niin(  ,  /,|  <:  I  is  just  the 
contrapositive  of  the  two  statements  above 


RUBIN  *  RICHARDS  6  FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 

this  decision  about  unsolvability  is  computationally  easier  than  actually  finding  a  solution. 

3.2  Tha  Strategy  Applied  to  some  Confounding  Processes 

Figure  2  illustrates  intuitively  how  the  rejection  strategy  will  be  applied.  Each  of  the  first  three 
panels  (O,  //,  P)  show  the  effects  (in  a  graph  of  image  intensity  versus  wavelength)  of  a  surface 
orientation  change,  a  highlight,  or  a  change  in  pigment  density  in  a  planar  patch  of  a  single  material. 
(Shadow  changes  5  are  similar  to  highlights.)  As  will  be  shown  below,  the  effect  of  a  surface  orien¬ 
tation  change  is  to  cut  down  the  direct  illumination  by  a  constant  fraction.  Highlight  or  gloss  is  a 
situation  of  increased  image  intensity  at  all  wavelength.  (A  shadow  is  the  opposite.)  Finally,  pigment 
density  changes,  such  as  the  variations  seen  in  the  grain  of  wood,  can  be  characterized  as  several  light¬ 
absorbing  filters  in  sequence.  The  effect  of  a  stack  of  filters  is  to  reduce  the  available  light  according 
to  a  power  relation.  (The  concentration  of  a  dye  dispersed  in  liquid  affects  transmitted  light  according 
to  a  power  law  more  precisely.)  What  all  these  natural  processes  have  in  common  is  that  they  act 
to  increase  or  decrease  image  intensities  across  wavelength.  Violation  of  those  sorts  of  displacements 
can  be  used  to  reject  the  presence  of  shadow,  orientation  change,  gloss  or  highlight,  or  change  in 
pigment  density.  Therefore,  if  two  spectral  functions  of  image  intensities  arc  not  related  by  one  always 
lying  above  the  other,  then  the  functions  come  from  two  regions  that  might  be  composed  of  different 
materials.  The  lower  right  portion  of  figure  2  illustrates  such  a  situation,  which  is  a  candidate  for  a 
material  change. 

In  the  next  section  we  examine  simple  models  of  the  confounding  processes.  In  section  5,  we 
address  the  problems:  How  many  channels  docs  a  visual  system  require  in  order  to  reject  the  presence 
of  particular  processes  in  a  scene?  What  sort  of  computations  with  available  image  intensities  allow 
rejection  of  confounding  processes? 

4  The  Physics  Behind  the  Scenes 

4.1  Tha  Image  Intensity  Equation 


When  light  is  reflected  from  a  surface  into  the  eye,  the  image  intensity  /( X)  depends  on  several 
factors,  lhc  surface  properties  of  the  object  interact  with  the  geometry  of  tire  viewing  situation  and 


RUBIN  a  RICHARDS 


7 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


0- MULTIPLICATIVE  RELATION  ft-  AUGMENTATIVE  RELATION 


WAVELENGTH 

A 

P-  ROWER  RELATION  M  -  UNCONSTRAINED 


WAVELENGTH 


Figure  Z  Throe  different  relations  are  illustrated  that  can  hold  between  two  spectral  functions  of  images 
intensities  from  regions  X  and  Y.  At  top  (left),  a  multiplicative  relation  (surface  orientation  change)  is 
illustrated  At  right  is  depicted  an  augmentative  relation  (highlight  for  example)  Bottom  (left)  is  a  power 
relation,  typical  of  pigment  density  changes.  At  right  is  a  change  that  is  not  an  increase  or  decrease  or  intensity 
across  wavelength.  Such  a  situation  is  a  possible  material  change. 


the  spectral  nature  of  the  light  source  to  produce  image  intensity.4  In  the  case  of  a  matte  surface5  , 
these  effects  combine  multiplicativcly  to  yield  the  following  image  intensity  equation: 


7(A)  =  p(X}£(A)(N  L]K(*,*)  (1) 

where  p(A)  is  ihc  reflectance  or  albedo  of  the  surface,  R[0,  <t>)  is  the  bidirectional  reflectance  distribu¬ 
tion  function  (see  Horn  &  Sjobcrg,  1979)  which  describes  properties  of  the  surface  dependent  on  its 
orientation  with  respect  to  viewer  (<£)  and  light  source  (0),  and  [N  ■  L]  is  the  angular  relation  between 
the  surface  normal,  N,  and  the  illuminant  direction  L.  Any  collection  of  multiple  light  sources  is 

^technically,  /( K )  for  a  point  r.y  on  ihe  surface  is  called  image  Irradiate  Image  intensity  lakes  into  account  other 
factors  such  as  pupil  sire  and  luminance  constants  these  details  arc  no)  important  lo  ihc  argument  here,  and  will  be 
omitted 

'Tor  specular  surfaces,  a  differem  image  intensity  equation  holds  Sec  Appendix  I 


RUBIN  £  RICHARDS 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


Figure  3.  How  shadow-with-pcnumbra  is  cast.  A)  Between  the  lull  lit  and  Hilly  shadowed  regions,  some 
proportion  of  the  source  can  reach  the  object  B)  An  (achromatic)  image  intensity  profile  is  shown  for  the 
surface 


equivalent  to  a  single  source  (called  here  the  "synthetic  source”)  on  unshadowed  portions  of  surfaces 
(Silver.  1980),  so  regardless  of  the  complexity  of  the  illumination,  a  single  function  together 
with  directions  0  and  <j> .  will  characterize  the  direction  and  spectral  nature  of  the  illuminant  for 
unshadowed  surfaces. 

The  effect  of  many  natural  processes  that  affect  images  can  usually  be  characterized  simply  as  ac¬ 
ting  on  one  or  more  of  the  multiplicative  factors  in  equation  (1).  For  example,  a  shadow  corresponds 
principally  to  a  reduction  of  the  illuminant  £(X).  Surface  orientation  changes  correspond  to  to 
changes  in  the  [N  L]  term,  and  pigment  density  changes  affect  only  the  p{\)  term.  (Highlight  or  gloss 
requires  that  a  specular  term  be  added  to  equation  (l).)  All  of  the  processes  discussed  above  can  occui 
in  a  region  of  a  single  material. 

We  now  proceed  to  examine  how  common  natural  processes  other  than  material  changes  will  affect 
the  image  intensity  equation,  and  what  these  confounding  processes  have  in  common  dial  allows  theii 
rejection  en  masse. 


RUBIN  a  RICHARDS 


9 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


4.2  Shadows 

Suppose  a  shadow  (5)  falls  on  a  surface  composed  of  a  single  material,  and  furthermore,  suppose 
that  the  only  changes  across  the  surface  are  these  due  to  shadow.  (Specifically,  there  will  be  no 
changes  in  surface  orientation  or  variations  in  pigment  density  on  the  surface.)  Then  the  shadow  can 
be  described  by  the  following  equations: 

/t.t(X)  =  [Es(X)  +  En(X)]p(X) 

W(X)  =  £y(X)p(X) 

where  p(\)  is  the  albedo  of  the  material.  The  image  intensities,  as  functions  of  wavelength,  from  the 
lit  and  shadowed  regions  are  /jtt(X)  and  /,hadf(X).  respectively.  E/>(X)  represents  a  diffuse  component 
of  illumination  striking  both  lit  and  shadowed  regions,  andEs(X)  is  some  additional  synthetic  source 
striking  only  the  lit  region.6 

If  the  illuminant  is  an  extended  source,  like  the  sun,  there  will  be  pcnumbrac  (sec  figure  3),  and  a 
third  equation  must  be  included: 


/pen(X)  =  (aEs(X)  -f  Eo(X)]p(\)  (2b) 

where  a  is  a  constant  betw  een  0  and  1,  and  /pen(X)  is  the  image  intensity  (as  a  function  of  wavelength) 
in  some  region  in  the  penumbra.  (The  symbol  Spe„  will  denote  shadows  with  penumbrae.) 


4.3  Surface  Orientation  Changes 

Suppose  that  two  image  regions  X  and  Y  differ  only  in  their  surface  orientations.  That  is,  assume 

that  X  and  Y  receive  the  same  illumination  (no  self-shading)  and  are  composed  of  the  same  material. 

This  process  as  been  dentoed  by  the  symbol  O.  The  patches  X  and  Y  that  differ  only  in  surface 

orientation  have  respective  surface  normals  N,v  and  N>  which  form  angles  0\  and  6y  with  the 

®lf  light  is  available  from  the  shadowed  region,  it  arises  from  some  collection  of  sources  According  to  Silver  (1980).  a 
collection  of  sources  is  equivalent  to  a  single  source  provided  that  they  all  illuminate  die  same  surface  patch  We  call 
this  synthetic  source  A'/;(X)  Furthermore,  this  diffuse  synthetic  source  acts  as  if  it  lies  in  the  direction  of  the  viewer's 
eye  (Horn.  1975)  Next  consider  the  lit  region  Again,  by  Silver's  proof,  there  is  a  single  source  that  is  equivalent  to  the 
illumination  reaching  the  lit  region  let’s  call  this  source  /TS»(A),  and  its  dirccuon  Ls-  Since  we  can  see  the  lit  region, 
we  know  that  thcie  is  some  component  of  Lv<  in  the  direction  of  the  viewer  So  we  can  perform  a  simple  vector 
decomposition  of  the  synthetic  illuminant  for  the  lit  region  inio  a  component  in  the  viewers  direction  (so  this  component 
is  identical  to  the  synthetic  diffuse  illuminant  A) >( X )  above),  and  some  ofhrr  component  A\(X)  with  a  new  direction 
Ls  So  in  equations  (2a)  /.) >(X)  abbreviates  a  product  of  a  tcim  representing  the  specir.il  Huv  of  Ore  illuminant.  a 
hitliicclional  reflecl.ince  term  and  a  surl.icc  orientation  term,  with  the  illiiniin.ini  dilation  L  in  the  viewci’s  direction 
likewise  AV,(X)  stands  for  the  product  of  of  the  same  three  terms  3bovc.  but  in  some  synthetic  direction  Ls 


ik 


RUBIN  *  RICHARD8 


10 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


(synthetic)  light  source  direction  L,  and  angles  4>x  and  <t>y  with  the  viewer  direction  V.  Using  the 
image  intensity  equation  (1),  the  expected  image  intensities  from  regions  X  and  Y  differing  only  in 
surface  orientation  are: 

7x(X)  =  p(X)£(X)|Nx  •  L]7?(*x,  4>x)  .  , 

MX)  =  ^)£(X)|NrL)fi(«,(^)  l°J 

where  again  7x(X)  and  7y(X)  are  the  image  intensities  from  regions  X  and  Y  as  functions  of 
wavelength. 

Both  equations  of  (3a)  have  a  pair  of  multiplicative  terms  not  involving  wavelength.  Let  Px  = 
[Nx  •  L]/Z(0x.  tx).  and  let  py  be  similarly  defined.  Equations  (3a)  can  now  be  simplified  with  this 
consolidation  of  constant  factors: 


/x(X)  =  /?xp(X)£(X) 
7>(X)  =  /MX)£(X) 


4.4  Changes  in  Pigment  Density 

The  reflectance  of  materials  is  determined  primarily  by  the  density  of  a  pigment  in  some  embed¬ 
ding  layer  of  the  material,  and  the  thickness  of  the  pigment  layer.  The  embedding  layer  in  leaves, 
for  example,  is  cellulose,  and  the  usual  pigment  is  chlorophyll.  Some  surfaces  may  be  unevenly 
pigmented.  The  grain  of  a  wooden  table  provides  a  good  example  of  a  change  in  pigment  density 
across  a  surface.  This  sort  of  change  will  be  labeled  P? 

Several  different  laws  relate  changes  in  pigment  density  to  changes  in  reflectance.  (See  Judd  & 

Wyszccki,  1963.)  Kubclka  and  Munk  (1931)  formulated  a  law  that  deals  with  the  thickness  and 

density  of  pigment  on  a  solid  background.  Beer’s  law  describes  the  effect  of  concentration  of  a  dye 

dispersed  in  a  liquid  on  the  transmittance  of  the  liquid,  or  equivalently,  the  thickness  of  a  scries  of 

transmitting  filters.  The  laws  all  differ  in  their  details,  yet  there  are  some  themes  common  to  both. 

The  pigmentation  laws  describe  a  smooth  transition  from  an  unpigmented  state  to  a  state  of  saturated 

pigmentation.  (Often,  the  unpigmented  materials  arc  white  or  grey,  and  darken  as  pigment  density 

increases.  Caucasians  are  usually  pale  in  the  winter,  and  darken  gradually  during  the  summer  if 

allowed  to  frequent  the  beach.)  More  can  be  said  about  the  smooth  transition.  Loosely  speaking, 

Tlhc  difference  between  pigment  density  changes  and  changes  of  material  is  important  /’  changes  arc  changes  in  the 
density  of  a  single  pigment  in  a  single  sort  of  embedding  material:  ,U  changes  are  changes  between  two  dillerent 
pigments  and  (or)  two  different  embedding  materials 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


11 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


the  shape  of  the  albedo  Junction  is  preserved  by  the  pigment  density  change.  Two  properties  of  the 
change  of  the  albedo  function  make  the  notion  above  more  precise.  First,  for  a  material  characterized 
by  Kubelka-Munk  analysis  or  Beer's  law,  a  change  in  pigment  density  affects  the  albedo  function  by 
either  strictly  increasing  or  decreasing  its  value  at  all  wavelengths.  Second,  two  albedo  functions  of 
the  same  material  (but  having  different  pigment  densities)  are  related  monotonically8  .  The  conditions 
above  will  be  called  the  normal  pigmentation  conditions,  and  pigmentation  processes  which  obey  them 
will  be  called  normal. 

Beer's  law  (Wyszecki  &  Stiles,  1973)  will  serve  as  an  example  of  a  pigmentation  law.  Suppose  X 
and  Y  arc  two  regions  that  transmit  light  through  stacks  of  identical  filters.  Suppose  further,  that  X 
and  Y  have  the  same  surface  orientation,  and  differ  only  in  the  number  of  fillers  in  the  stack.  Then  the 
image  intensities  /x(M  and  7y(X)  that  we  could  expect  to  measure  are: 

MM  =[p(x)P*e*(x)  , 

MM  =[p(X)]^’(X) 

where  p(\)  is  the  transmittance  ofa  thin  filter,  and  ix  and  arc  the  number  of  such  filters  in  regions 
X  and  Y,  respectively.  Since  the  viewer-object-illuminant  geometry  is  identical  in  X  and  Y,  the 
two  multiplicative  terms  of  the  image  intensity  equation  (1)  that  deal  with  scene  geometry  and  do  not 
appear  in  (4)  can  be  considered  "absorbed"  as  a  constant  factor  in  E*(\). 

Two  facts  about  equations  (4)  warrant  attention.  First,  a  power  relation  is  described  between  the 
reflectances  of  two  regions  of  different  pigment  thicknesses.  This  is  the  simplest  such  pigment  relation, 
and  can  be  considered  as  a  base  from  which  more  complex  laws  develop.  Second,  note  that  regardless 
of  the  function  p(X),  the  first  normal  pigmentation  condition  holds.  That  is,  [p(X)]'rx  >  (p(X)]',v. 
for  all  X,  or  vice  versa.  Since  the  illuminant  and  scene  geometry  are  identical  in  regions  X  and 
Y,  the  normal  pigmentation  condition  above  is  preserved  in  the  available  image  intensities.  Similar 
relationships  between  pairs  of  albcdocs  will  hold  for  more  complicated  pigmentation  laws  (Kubclka  & 
Munk,  1931),  because  such  laws  require  monotonicity. 

4.5  Highlights 

The  image  intensity  equation  (1)  only  applies  to  matte  surfaces.  Highlight  or  specularity,  a  condi¬ 
tion  when  a  surface  acts  as  a  partial  mirror,  is  a  common  confounding  process.  In  a  highlighted  region 

H  lwo  single-valued  funciinns  /  and  p  arc  nitnrd  monoiomaih  if  /(.»■)  >  /(«)  implies  w(  r)  >  (/(«)  In  particular.  two 
monotonically  related  functions  have  their  local  minima  and  maxima  al  the  same  values  in  their  domain 


RUBIN  •  RICHARDS 


12 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


image  intensities  are  due  to  both  a  reflection  of  the  light  source,  and  a  matte  component  due  to  the 
albedo  of  the  underlying  material.  Appendix  I  shows  that  if  most  of  the  illumination  of  a  region  is 
due  to  the  source  that  is  reflected  in  the  highlight,  then  the  highlight  H  can  be  described  as  a  process 
that  strictly  augments  image  intensities  at  all  wavelengths.  That  is,  if  the  normal  highlight  condition 
holds,  the  image  intensity  measurable  in  a  highlighted  region  is  the  same  as  that  of  a  neighboring 
matte  region  plus  some  (always  positive-valued)  function  of  wavelength9  .  Note  this  is  identical  to  the 
first  of  the  normal  pigmentation  conditions.  Highlight  differs  from  pigment  density  change  in  that  it  is 
always  a  positive  change,  and  it  does  not  necessarily  preserve  the  shape  of  the  image  intensity  function 
of  wavelength  from  a  neighboring  matte  regions. 

5  Details  of  Process  Rejection:  Spatial  and  Spectral  Samples 

Our  computational  strategy  is  to  examine  image  regions  and  to  attempt  to  reject  them  as  arising 
from  the  action  of  a  confounding  process  on  a  single  material.  How  might  rejections  be  made?  If  a 
process  is  lawful,  as  the  major  confounding  processes  arc,  then  some  system  of  equations  characterizes 
the  effects  of  the  process.  Given  measurements  of  image  intensities,  if  there  is  always  a  plausible 
solution 10  to  the  equations  describing  a  process,  then  we  can  always  mathematically  interpret  the 
image  intensities  as  arising  from  that  process.  When  we  can  always  interpret  image  intensities  as  being 
due  to  a  particular  process,  we  can  never  reject  the  occurrence  of  that  process.  Whether  or  not  there 
always  exist  plausible  solutions  depends  on  the  number  of  samples  being  taken.  In  this  section  we 
examine  the  minimum  information  needed  to  be  sometimes  able  to  reject  the  presence  of  the  major 
confounding  processes.  We  will  answer  the  questions:  What  is  the  minimum  number  of  spatial  and 
spectral  samples  needed  to  reject  image  intensities  as  arising  from  each  of  the  confounding  processes? 
How  would  increasing  the  number  of  samples  increase  the  number  of  correct  rejections? 

(Spectral  samples  will  at  first  be  assumed  to  be  taken  at  a  single  wavelength.  In  Appendix  II,  it  is 
shown  that  essentially  any  sort  of  spectral  sample  preserves  the  results  of  the  following  sections,  which 
are  derived  using  narrowband  samples.) 

“Since  (he  word  “highlight"  denotes  a  region  of  greater  brightness  than  surrounding  regions,  the  normal  highlight 
condition  ia  reasonable  and  necessary  to  avoid  mathematical  anomalies  such  as  "highlights"  which  are  darker  than 
surrounding  regions. 

,0A  plausible  snluiton  to  I  set  of  equations  is  one  which  assigns  meaningful  values  to  physical  variables  For  example, 
a  solution  which  assigns  a  number  greater  than  one  to  a  satiable  representing  a  reflectance  is  not  physically  meaningful 

and  must  be  discarded 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


13 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


5.1  Rejecting  the  £  Hypothesis 

Impossibility  of  Rejecting  £  with  One  Spectral  Sample.  Suppose  one  narrowband 
spectral  sample  is  taken  at  some  wavelength  Xj .  Two  image  intensities  can  then  be  measured:  hx  and 
I\y,  die  intensities  at  Xi  in  image  regions  X  and  Y  (see  fig.  2).  Can  we  reject  the  possibility  that  the 
only  difference  between  regions  X  and  Y  is  due  to  a  shadow?  Since  either  X  or  Y  can  be  lit,  and  the 
other  in  shade,  there  are  two  equations  to  examine.  In  more  formal  terms,  we  need  to  know  if  we  can 
rule  out  the  existence  of  a  plausible  solution  to  either  of  two  discrete  versions  of  equations  (2a): 


hx  —  (Ei  D  +  Eis)pi 
Iiy  —  EidPi 

corresponding  to  X  lit  and  Y  shadowed,  or 


(5o) 


hx  =  EidPi 
Iiy  —  [Eid  +  E\s)pi 


(5b) 


corresponding  to  X  shadowed  and  Y  lit.  Note  that  p j  is  the  albedo  of  the  material  at  Xi,  and  E\s  and 
Eid  are  the  strengths  of  the  synthetic  and  diffuse  components  of  the  illuminant. 

A  shadow  interpretation  is  some  solution  to  equations  (5a)  or  (5b)  that  assigns  physically  meaning¬ 
ful  values  to  variables.  If  the  measured  values  of  hx  and  hr  can  be  shown  to  be  inconsistent  with 
both  equations  (5a)  and  (5b),  then  there  canot  be  a  shadow  interpretation.  On  the  other  hand,  if  any 
values  of  hx  and  hy  yield  a  plausible  solution  to  the  equations,  then  there  will  always  be  a  shadow 
interpretation.  If  there  is  always  an  £  interpretation,  rejection  is  impossible,  and  we  must  resort  to  a 
greater  number  of  spectral  samples. 

Intuitively,  we  arc  given  two  measurements  of  image  intensity  at  only  one  wavelength.  Wc  are 
faced  with  the  question:  Is  there  any  pair  of  image  intensities  that  cannot  be  construed  as  arising  from 
lit  and  shadowed  portions  of  the  same  material?  Given  two  measurements,  one  will  be  darker  than  the 
other.  The  darker  region  can  be  interpreted  as  being  a  shadowed  continuation  of  the  lighter  region.  So 
any  pair  of  measurements  can  be  construed  as  a  shadow.  'Ilicrcforc,  there  can  be  no  rejection  of  the 
shadow  interpretation  with  only  a  single  spectral  sample. 

The  casual  argument  above  can  be  made  rigorous.  Is  there  ever  a  possibility  that  both  equations 
(5a)  and (5b)  will  have  no  solution?  hirst  we’ll  consider  solutions  to  equations  (5a).  One  solution  is 
given  as  follows: 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


14 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


Eid 

Pi 


6 

hr 

6 


£1S  =  *(£*-!) 
IlY 


(6) 


where  6  is  the  parameter  of  the  one-dimensional  solution  space  of  equations  (Sa).  (Two  equations 
in  three  variables  almost  always  have  a  one-dimensional  solution  space.)  This  solution  is  acceptable 
or  plausible  as  long  as  all  the  variables  take  positive  values,  and  pi  E  (0, 1).  The  latter  constraint  is 
satisfied  by  restricting  £  to  the  interval  (Iiy,  oo).  Note  that  E\p  and  p\  are  always  positive,  since  6  is 
restricted  as  above,  and  the  measurement  l\y  is  positive.  Therefore  all  variables  will  take  on  positive 
values  if E\s  is  positive,  or,  equivalently,  if  hx  >  Iiy •  So  whenever  I\x  >  Iiy,  there  is  a  plausible 
solution  to  (5a).  By  the  symmetry  of  equations  (5b),  it  is  clear  that  whenever  hr  ~>  hx,  equations 
(5b)  will  have  a  plausible  solution.  Therefore,  there  will  always  be  a  solution  to  either  (5a)  or  (5b). 
regardless  of  the  values  of  measured  image  intensities.  So  there  is  always  a  shadow  interpretation 
for  monochromatic  measurements;  the  darker  region  can  be  construed  as  the  shadowed  one.  Hence, 
monochromacy  is  inadequate  to  reject  measured  image  intensities  as  arising  from  shadows1 1 . 


Two  Spectral  Sample*. 

Perhaps  adding  a  second  spectral  sample  will  help.  Will  samples  at  two  wavelengths  from  each  of 
regions  X  and  Y  sometimes  allow  the  rejection  of  the  shadow  hypothesis  about  the  X-Y  difference? 
Or  will  any  sets  of  measurements  always  have  a  shadow  interpretation,  as  in  the  monochromatic  case? 

Intuitively,  dichromacy  should  allow  some  rejections  of  the  shadow  hypothesis.  Suppose  that  in  the 
first  spectral  sample,  region  X  is  lighter  than  region  Y .  Then  the  same  ought  to  hold  for  the  second 
spectral  sample  if  Y  is  to  be  construed  as  a  shadowed  continuation  of  the  same  material  that  composes 
X.  So  if  one  region  is  lighter  in  the  first  spectral  sample,  but  darker  in  the  second  spectral  sample,  we 
probably  aren’t  looking  at  a  shadow.  This  follows  from  noting  that  in  the  case  of  shadow,  both  regions 
reflect  a  diffuse  component  of  illumination,  while  the  lit  region  has  a  synthetic  component  in  addition. 

A  more  formal  demonstration  can  be  made,  by  rewriting  the  shadow  equations  (2a)  in  discrete 


**Thc  datm  dial  monochromacy  does  not  allow  shadow  rejections  only  applies  to  the  type  of  computations  describee 
here  Of  course  there  might  be  some  type  of  achromatic  computation,  involving,  say.  icxiuic.  that  would  allow  (hi 

rejection  of  tfiadow 


RUBIN  a  RICHARDS 


15 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


form  for  two  spectral  samples: 

hx  =  (Ew  +  Eis)pi 
hx  =  [Eio  +  Eis)pi 
Iiy  —  E\DPl 
hy  —  ElDPi 

corresponding  to  X  lit  and  Y  shadowed,  or 

hx  —  EidPi 
hx  =  EidPi 
h  y  —  (Eid  +  Eis)pi 
Hy  =  [Eio  4-  E?s)p2 


(7a) 


(76) 


corresponding  to  X  shadowed  and  Y  lit. 

Once  again,  the  left-hand  side  terms  are  the  measured  image  intensities,  and  the  right-hand  side 
contains  the  variables  for  which  we  attempt  to  solve  the  equations.  Given  any  four  measurements  fix, 
7i  y.  hx.  and  hY.  will  there  always  be  a  plausible  solution  to  either  equations  (7a)  or  (7b)? 

Consider  first  solutions  to  (7a).  We  have  four  equations  in  six  unknowns,  suggesting  a  two- 
parameter  family  of  solutions. 

Below  is  a  solution  to  equations  (7a),  parameterized  by  6  and  e: 


The  constraints  of  the  values  of  the  variables  arc  once  again  that  p\  and  pi  £  (0, 1),  and  that  all  the 
variables  take  on  positive  values.  So  extending  the  results,  of  the  previous  section  on  a  single  spectral 
sample,  it  is  clear  that  whenever  both  hx  >  hr  and  hx  >  hr.  there  is  a  solution  to  equations  (7a). 
Symmetrically,  whenever  both  hr  >  hx  and  hr  >  hx.  there  is  a  solution  to  equations  (7b).  So 
there  is  a  dichromatic  rejection  condition  for  shadows.  lf(/ix  >  hr  and  hy  >  h\)or  (hr  >  hx 
and  hx  >  h) ).  there  will  be  no  plausible  solution  to  equations  (7a).  nor  to  (7b),  and  the  presence  of 
shadow  can  be  rejected. 


RUBIN  *  RICHARDS 


16 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


SPECTRAL  CROSSPOINT 


Figare  4.  Rejection  of  S  by  crosspoint  in  plots  from  regions  X  and  Y  of  image 
intensity  versus  wavelength. 

There  is  a  simple  geometric  interpretation  of  the  dichromatic  rejection  condition:  5  can  be  rejected 
if  the  graphs  of  image  intensity  versus  wavelength  for  regions  X  and  Y  intersect,  or  have  a  crosspoint. 
Furthermore,  it  has  just  been  proved  that  the  crosspoint  condition  is  unique  and  minimal.  It  is  minimal 
in  the  sense  that  it  involves  two  spatial  and  two  spectral  samples;  no  smaller  number  of  samples 
would  do.  It  is  unique  in  that,  given  two  spatial  and  spectral  samples,  only  the  crosspoint  condition 
holding  among  the  four  measurements  can  accurately  lead  to  a  rejection  of  S.  Whenever  there  is  no 
crosspoint,  a  shadow  interpretation,  possibly  wrong12  ,  can  be  found.  A  final  point.  Given  two  line 
segments  (two  spectral  samples  at  two  spatial  locations  yields  two  line  segments  in  our  system  of  rep¬ 
resentation)  there  is  only  one  topological  property  that  they  have:  intersection  (or  non-intersection). 
Fortunately,  intersection,  or  crosspoint,  has  been  shown  to  be  a  physically  interesting  condition  in 
this  problem,  as  well  as  a  topologically  interesting  one.  Figure  4  illustrates  the  dichromatic  rejection 
condition  forS. 

I}A  wrong  in icrpr nation  is  one  that  assigns  values  to  physical  variables  that  do  not  correspond  lo  the  actual  value. 
Interpretations  of  sensory  data  arc  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Richards  ti  aL,  1981 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


17 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


n-chromacy.  It  is  easy  to  extend  the  dichromacy  result  above  to  the  general  case  of  n  spectral 
samples  (X|, . . . ,  X„).  Imagine  taking  pairs  of  these  spectral  samples  and  plotting  a  line  segment  from 
region  X  and  another  segment  from  region  Y.  If  any  pair  of  spectral  samples  yields  a  crosspoint  (the 
line  segments  intersect),  then  &  can  be  rejected  for  the  X-Y  change.  More  formally,  we  can  reject 
S  n-chromatically  if  there  exist  j  k  such  that  the  line  segment  from  Ijx  to  Ax  intersects  the  line 
segment  from  Ijy  to  Iky-  Equivalently,  we  can  reject  £  n-chromatically  if  there  exist  j  ^  k  such  that 

(Ax  —  IjvWkx  —  Iky)  <  0. 


S.3  Rejecting  the  6  Hypothesis 

One  Spectral  Sample.  The  surface  orientation  change  equations  (3b)  can  be  re-expressed  as  a 
single  equation: 


MX)  _  fa 

MX)  Py 


0) 


Equation  (9)  describes  a  simple  proportionality  holding  over  wavelength  for  image  intensities. 
Clearly,  if  only  a  single  spectral  sample  is  taken  at  each  of  X  and  Y,  a  trivial  proportionality  will  hold 
between  the  measurements  Ax  and  At.  regardless  of  their  values.  (That  is.  for  all  measurements  of 
image  intensities,  there  arc  appropriate  values  of  p\  and  py  so  that  a  discrete  version  of  equation  (9) 
holds.)  Hence  a  surface  orientation  change  cannot  be  rejected  monochromatically. 


Two  Spectral  Samples.  Will  a  second  spectral  sample  sometimes  allow  the  rejection  of  image 
intensities  as  arising  from  a  surface  orientation  change?  And  if  so,  under  what  conditions?  Equation 
(9)  can  be  rewritten  in  discrete  form  for  two  spectral  samples: 


Ax  _  Px 
At  Py 
hx  Px 
hy  Py 


(10) 


It  is  clear  (by  combining  equations  (10))  that  we  can  reject  the  d  hypothesis  whenever 


RUBIN  a  RICHARDS 


18 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


Note  that  the  nonproportionality  condition  above  is  narrower  than  the  crosspoint  condition  that  we 
derived  for  shadows;  a  crosspoint  allows  the  rejection  of  both  shadow  and  surface  orientation  change 
interpretations  of  image  intensities. 

5.4  Rejecting  the  P  Hypothesis 

In  the  preceding  two  sections,  relationships  among  image  intensities  (at  two  spectral  samples) 
were  derived  such  that  the  discovery  of  the  relationship  could  be  taken  as  evidence  that  certain  con¬ 
founding  processes  were  not  occurring  in  the  image,  'Hie  spectral  crosspoint  was  the  less  strict  of 
the  two  criteria  derived.  In  this  section,  a  different  tack  is  taken.  First,  it  is  taken  as  obvious  that 
monochromacy  is  inadequate  to  reject  the  presence  of  P.  Next,  it  will  be  pointed  out  that  a  spectral 
crosspoint  is  good  evidence  that  the  image  intensities  under  consideration  do  not  arise  from  a  change 
in  pigment  density13  .  It  suffices  to  show  (normal)  pigmentation  docs  not  produce  crosspoints.  But  this 
follows  immediately  from  the  first  of  the  normal  pigmentation  conditions.  Specifically,  equations  (4) 
can  be  rewritten  for  two  spectral  samples  as 


hx=P±_ 
h  y  PlY 
hx  __Pjx 
hr  PlY 


(12) 


which  implies  (by  the  first  normal  pigmentation  condition )  that  if  fy*  >1,  then  jj*  >  1,  or  vice 
versa.  Therefore,  if  ^  >  1  and  <  1  (one  of  two  possible  spectral  crosspoint  conditions),  then 
the  presence  of  a  normal  pigmentation  process  can  be  rejected. 


5.5  Rejecting  the  fl  Hypothesis 

The  presence  of  a  spectral  crosspoint  can  also  be  taken  as  evidence  that  no  normal  highlight  is 
prcscnL  Since  a  (normal)  highlighted  region  has  greater  image  intensity  at  all  wavelengths  than  a 
neighboring  matte  region,  no  spectral  crosspoints  can  arise  from  such  a  pair  of  regions.  (Also  note  that 
shadow  changes  are  formally  equivalent  to  highlights,  in  that  lit  and  higlightcd  regions  correspond 
to  strictly  augmentative  changes  to  image  intensities  in  neighboring  shadowed  and  matte  regions, 
respectively.)  Hence  the  spectral  crosspoint  allows  the  rejection  of  normal  highlights. 


•’More  precisely,  it  will  be  shown  *  emsspoint  implies  cither  (not  /')  or  (/’,  but  not  a  normal  pigmentation  process) 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


19 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


5.6  Rejecting  Special  Cases  of  £,  6,  and  H 

Shadows  with  Penumbrae.  In  the  event  of  an  extended  source,  shadows  with  penumbrae 
(Spun)  can  be  rejected  monochromatically  (see  Appendix  II),  but  it  should  be  noted  that 
monochromatic  rejection  of  the  penumbra  case  requires  three  independent  spatial  samples,  in  con¬ 
trast  to  the  two  spatial  samples  needed  for  dichromatic  rejection  of  S  (point  source).  I'hat  is,  for  sharp 
(point-source-generated)  shadows,  two  spatial  and  two  spectral  samples  are  the  minimum  needed 
for  rejection.  For  shadows  with  penumbrae,  three  spatial  samples  at  a  single  wavelength  suffice  for 
rejection.  Nonmonotonicily  of  the  discrete  plot  of  image  intensity  versus  postion  in  the  image  at  any 
wavelength  is  sufficient  for  rejecting  3y,en.  (Nonmonotonicity  is  when  three  collincar  spatial  samples 
arc  neither  strictly  increasing  or  decreasing.  This  is  identical  to  the  condition  that  the  center  spatial 
sample  of  the  collinear  three  has  the  greatest  intensity,  which  cannot  occur  when  the  line  passes 
through  lit,  penumbra,  and  shaded  regions.) 

"Simple"  surface  orientation  changes.  A  special  class  of  b  changes  can  be  rejected  with 
a  single  spectral  sample  taken  over  three  spatial  regions.  Let  d,impit  be  the  subset  of  6  changes 
involving  no  inflections.  0,impie  is  similar  to  Speu  in  that  both  describe  spatially  monotonic  processes. 
Clearly  then.  Ot,„,pte  can  also  be  rejected  monochromatically  using  three  spatial  regions  with  the 
nonmonotonicily  test.  (Sec  Appendix  II,  which  treats  the  shadow-with-penumbra  case,  ^pen-) 

Highlights  and  Monchromacy.  Consider  three  collinear  samples  passing  through  a  normal 
highlight  such  that  die  center  sample  is  taken  in  the  highlight,  and  the  end  samples  arc  taken  in 
nearby  matte  regions  of  the  same  material.  A  luminance  profile  (at  a  single  spectral  sample)  shaped 
like  an  upside-down  vec  can  be  expected  for  our  piecewise  linear  representation.  Therefore,  a 
monotonic  luminance  profile,  or  a  vee-shaped  profile,  can  allow  the  rejection  of  the  possibility  that  the 
three  samples  correspond  to  mattc-highlight-mattc  regions. 

5.7  Summary  of  Rejecting  Individual  Confounding  Processes 

In  the  sections  above,  it  was  shown  that  a  single  spectral  sample  was  not  sufficient  (except  in 
special  cases  involving  three  spatial  samples)  to  reject  image  intensities  as  die  ciTcct  of  a  single  major 
confounding  process.  Two  spectral  samples,  however,  were  proven  adequate  to  sometimes  allow 
rejection  of  image  intensities  as  the  effect  of  a  single  process.  Ihc  strictest  rejection  criterion  occurred 
with  surface  orientation  changes;  nonproportionulity  was  shown  sufficient  for  rejection  of  O.  The 


RUBIN  *  RICHARDS 


20 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


broadest  criterion  was  the  spectral  cosspoint,  derived  from  the  shadow  equations.  Since  shadow  and 
(normal)  highlight  are  similar  in  being  processes  that  allow  any  strictly  augmentative  change  over 
wavelength,  the  spectral  crosspoint  also  allows  the  rejection  of  highlight.  Furthermore,  the  crosspoint 
was  shown  to  be  the  unique  and  minimal  rejection  criterion  for  $.  The  crosspoint  is  a  special  case  of 
nonproportionality,  and  hence  allows  the  rejection  of  surface  orientation  changes  as  well.  (And  the 
crosspoint  is  more  secure  than  the  nonproportionality  condition  in  situations  of  noisy  measurements 
of  image  intensity.)  Changes  in  pigment  density  are  strictly  augmentative  (or  subtractive)  changes 
over  wavelength,  and  therefore  cannot  cause  crosspoints.  So  the  crossoint  is  sufficient  to  reject  P. 
Since  each  of  the  major  confounding  processes  5,  //,  6,  and  P  can  be  rejected  dichromatkally  by  the 
presence  of  a  spectral  crosspoint,  the  crosspoint  criterion  for  rejection  of  single  confounding  processes 
is  adopted. 

5.8  Rejecting  Combinations  of  Processes 

The  discussion  above  focused  on  what  happens  when  a  single  confounding  process  occurs.  But  by 
inspecting  any  photograph,  it  is  obvious  that  arbitrarily  chosen  neighboring  regions  of  the  image  may 
depict  elements  of  the  scene  which  differ  in  pigment  density,  surface  orientation,  and  shadowing.  (In 
particular,  joint  occurrences  of  £>  and  5  are  common.  Architecture  provides  examples  in  which  one 
face  of  a  polyhedral  structure  shades  another.) 

How  can  the  analysis  be  extended  to  cover  instances  of  combinations  of  processes ?  Perhaps  we 
can  restrict  our  attention  to  some  subset  of  neighboring  image  regions  in  which  matcrial-change- 
mimicking  conspiracies  among  the  confounding  processes  arc  unlikely. 

Which  Neighboring  Image  Regions  should  be  Examined?.  It  would  be  computationally 
exhausting  to  examine  all  possible  neighboring  image  regions  for  material  changes.  And  unnecessary 
as  well.  Material  changes  invariably  produce  with  luminance  discontinuities  or  edges  in  the  image.  If 
finding  material  changes  is  the  goal  being  pursued,  there's  no  point  in  looking  for  them  where  they’re 
not  going  to  be.  That  is,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  material  changes,  "neighboring  regions" 
should  be  taken  to  mean  regions  separated  by  edges. 

Can  several  confounding  processes  coincide  at  a  single  edge?  As  pointed  out  above,  shadows  and 
surface  orientation  changes  can  occur  at  a  single  edge.  But  aside  from  this  case  of  self-shading,  it 
is  generally  believed  that  at  an  edge,  a  single  process  predominates  (Marr  &.  Hildreth.  1980;  Marr, 
1982). 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


21 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


(In  the  ease  of  self-shading,  no  crosspoint  can  occur.  By  examining  the  shadow  and  surface  orienta¬ 
tion  change  equations,  it  can  be  seen  that  a  * ainf  occurrence  of  S  and  O  is  mathematically  equivalent 
to  an  occurrence  of  S  alone.  And  S  changes  cannot  induce  crosspoints.  So  self-shading  cannot  cause 
crosspoints.) 

5.9  Accepting  M  by  Default 

When  a  crosspoint  occurs  across  an  edge,  we  know  it  does  not  arise  from  one  of  our  confounding 
processes.  If  the  reasoning  above  is  correct,  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  such  a  crosspoint  is  caused  by 
a  peculiar  conspiracy  among  S,  H,  6,  and  P  across  an  edge.  It  is  worth  asking  if  we  have  fully 
captured  the  range  of  possible  confounding  processes  by  our  models  of  5,  H,  O,  and  P.  All  that  could 
be  said  was  that  a  highlighted  region  had  greater  image  intensity  at  all  wavelengths  than  a  nearby 
matte  region  of  the  same  material.  The  same  is  true  for  lit  versus  shadowed  regions.  And  a  slightly 
more  stringent  condition  held  for  pigment  density  changes.  It  is  clear  from  the  discussion  above  that 
any  process  that  acts  on  a  scene  variable(s)  (that  is  a  function  of  wavelength)  by  strictly  increasing  or 
decreasing  its  value  (at  ail  wavelengths)  can  be  rejected  with  the  spectral  crosspoint.  Thus,  when  a 
spectral  crosspoint  occurs  across  an  edge,  it  is  almost  always  due  to  a  material  change. 

5.10  False  Targets:  Effectiveness  of  the  Spectral  Crosspoint  in  M  Detection 

A  word  should  be  said  about  the  theory  of  M  detection  presented  here.  If  our  characterization 
of  confounding  processes  is  accurate,  most  spectral  crosspoints  across  edges  will  be  M  changes. 
Exceptions  include  instances  of  highlight  and  pigment  density  changes  that  aren’t  normal,  and  rare 
(measure  zero)  coincidences  of  confounding  processes  at  edges.  So  in  signal  detection  language,  the 
false  target  rate  of  crosspoints  in  M  detection  is  low;  most  crosspoints  will  be  material  changes. 
As  for  the  hit  rate,  it  need  not  be  the  case  that  most  M  changes  cause  crosspoints  in  the  image. 
Intuitively,  only  about  half  of  the  material  changes  in  a  scene  will  cause  crosspoints.  This  should 
not  be  disturbing.  The  crosspoint  computation  is  extremely  easy,  and  provides  immediate  strong 
assertions.  Of  course  a  full  theory  of  M  detection  is  likely  to  involve  other  spectral  computations,  as 
well  as  nonspectral  (textural)  computations. 


RUBIN  *  RICHARDS 


22 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


6  Rotation  to  Psychophysics  and  Neurophysiology 

The  theory  we  have  presented  begins  with  the  physics  underlying  several  scene  processes  affecting 
image  intensities.  Simple  analysis  of  equations  describing  the  processes  has  shown  the  crosspoint 
is  the  unique  criterion  for  rejecting  each  of  the  confounding  processes,  and  thus  a  good  tool  for 
spectrally  identifying  material  changes.  But  what  has  this  to  do  with  color  vision?  The  implica¬ 
tion  of  the  results  above  is  our  crosspoint  conjecture  that  biological  visual  systems  interpret  spectral 
crosspoints  as  material  changes. 

Psychophysical  Evidence.  An  interesting  fact  about  human  color  vision  is  that  it  becomes  un¬ 
stable  under  isoluminance  conditions  (Evans,  1948).  Boundaries  defined  only  by  a  chromatic  change 
are  weak;  colors  from  one  side  of  such  a  boundary  are  likely  to  invade  the  other.  Color  vision  seems 
to  require  luminance  discontinuities  for  stability.  It  was  argued  (section  S.8)  that  the  only  place  in  an 
image  it  makes  sense  to  seek  material  changes  is  at  edges.  If  color  vision  were  concerned  with  the 
detection  of  material  changes,  then  it  would  be  an  efficient  system  only  if  its  computational  resources 
were  employed  at  edges.  Besides,  spectral  computations  carried  out  in  arbitrary  neighboring  regions 
would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  since  many  confounding  processes  could  be  acting  together  be¬ 
tween  the  two  regions.  The  number  of  hypotheses  to  be  entertained  would  become  combinatorically 
nasty  (that  is,  all  possible  subsets  of  S,  fi,  O,  and  P),  and  the  biological  value  of  enduring  such 
tedium  is  dubious. 

Number  of  Spectral  Channels.  Biological  color  vision  systems  arc  usually  di- or  trichromatic 
(Walls,  1942).  Why  arc  there  no  pcntachromatic  systems,  say?  The  theory  suggests  an  answer. 
Dichromacy  was  shown  sufficient  to  enable  a  system  to  make  strong  M  assertions  across  edges. 
Adding  a  third  spectral  sample  increases  the  chances  of  finding  a  crosspoint.  Ibat  is,  trichromacy 
seems  to  provide  higher  hit  and  lower  miss  rates  in  M  detection  than  dichromacy.  Why  not  add 
spectral  channels  ad  infinitum ?  The  spectral  reflectances  of  natural  objects  are  almost  always  functions 
that  change  slowly  over  wavelength  (Krinov,  1971).  (There  appear  to  be  rarely  more  than  three 
extremal  points  in  reflectance  function  of  wavelength.)  It  seems  unlikely  that  a  tetrachromatic  system 
would  detect  enough  additional  crosspoints  to  be  cvolutionarily  advantageous. 

Comment  on  Physiology  and  Neurophysiology. 

Trying  to  design  an  operator  to  detect  spectral  crosspoints  provides  some  insights  into 
neurophysiology.  Although  biological  pholopigmcnls  arc  broadband  (Dartnall.1962).  Appendix  III 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


Figure  5.  Designing  an  operator  for  delecting  crosspoints  A)  A  crosspoinl  B)  A  "land  unit,"  a  circularly 
symmetric  operator  that  compares  image  intensities  at  a  single  spectral  sample  (here  short  wavelength,  or  S), 
over  two  spatial  regions  C)  The  S+£X+  crosspoint  detector.  Two  different  Land  units.  S  and  L,  are 
combined  with  a  logical  and  across  an  edge.  E.  A  nonzero  response  indicates  a  crosspoint  D)  The  S+EL+ 
unit  resembles  the  double  opponent  unil  See  text. 

shows  that  the  particular  shape  of  the  photopigments  used  for  taking  spectral  samples,  and  their 
degree  of  overlap,  have  no  effect  on  the  basic  crosspoint  finding. 

The  crosspoint  (fig.  5a)  is  equivalent  to  the  following  inequality  among  image  intensities: 


[hx  —  I\Y){hx  —  hr)  <  0  (13°) 

which  is  identical  to 

(hx  —  /i  >•)(—/ 2.x  +  hr)  >  0  (136) 

Suppose  wc  desire  a  crosspoint  operator  that  is  circularly  symmetric  (for  tessellation  efficiency,  say). 
I.ct  the  photopigments  be  S  and  L,  having  their  respective  X,„„/s  at  short  and  long  wavelengths  (sec 


RUBIN  *  RICHARDS 


24 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


fig.  Sa).  Equation  (13b)  can  be  rewritten: 


(S*  -  Sy){-Lx  +  M  >  0  (13c) 

where  Sx  denotes  image  intensity  in  region  X  viewed  through  photopigment  S,  and  so  on. 

The  operator  depicted  in  fig.  5b  is  ideal  for  computing  the  (Sx  —  Sy)  factor  in  equation  (13c). 
This  sort  of  unit  we  call  a  "Land  unit"  since  it  was  suggested  by  Land's  (1977)  retinex  theory  of  color 
vision.  The  Land  unit  has  zero  output  in  a  homogeneous  field,  and  maximum  output  when  the  center 
receives  more  energy  at  short  wavelengths  than  the  surround. 

Obviously,  the  firing  of  a  single  Land  uniL  even  a  maximal  firing,  does  not  provide  information 
about  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  crosspoint.  A  single  unit  can  only  inform  about  events  at  single 
spectral  sample.  Consider,  however,  the  nonzero  firing  of  a  pair  of  I,and  units  across  an  edge,  as 
shown  in  fig.  5c.  The  S  Land  unit’s  nonzero  firing  implies  Sx  >  Sy ;  the  L  Land  unit’s  firing  implies 
Ly  >  Lx-  The  conjunction,  or  logical  anding,  of  the  two  conditions  over  and  edge  provides  a  test 
for  crosspoint.  We  propose,  then,  a  crosspoint  detector  composed  of  the  conjunction  of  two  (spectrally 
different)  Land  units  on  opposite  sides  of  an  edge.  Note  that  without  the  requirement  of  an  edge,  this 
unit  might  respond  to  gradations  of  image  intensities  due  to  the  effects  of  confounding  processes.  We 
call  this  operator  an  S+EL+  unit14 . 

Two  further  points  should  be  raised  about  crosspoint  detection  with  the  SEL  operator.  First,  the 
unit  shown  in  fig.  5c  only  detects  the  type  of  crosspoint  shown  in  fig.  5a.  If  Land  units  arc  constrained 
to  have  only  positive  response,  as  neurons  arc,  a  second  type  of  unit,  L+ES+,  would  be  required  to 
detect  the  other  type  of  crosspoint  (fix  <  h  y)- 

Second,  a  positive  response  of  an  on-center  off-surround  l.and  unit  on  one  side  of  an  edge  implies 
a  positive  response  of  an  off-center  on-surround  unit  on  the  other  side  of  the  edge.  In  fig.  5c,  imagine 
replacing  the  L+  unit  on  the  Y  side  of  the  edge  with  an  L~  unit  (off-center)  on  the  X  side.  Suppose 
the  L~  unit  and  an  S+  unit,  both  on  the  X  side  of  an  edge,  were  logically  anded  in  a  single  unit 
Such  a  unit  might  be  sketched  as  in  fig.  5d;  it  resembles  a  double-opponent  cell,  found  in  the  retina 
of  goldfish  and  in  the  primary  visual  cortex  of  primates  (Daw,  1972)' 5  .  A  final  point  should  be 

MThis  unit  can  be  compared  to  Marr  and  Ullnians  (1981)  S+TS~  unit  for  directional  selectivity  The  two  units  ate 
similar  in  that  they  have  three  components,  the  outer  two  of  which  are  "polar"  forms  of  the  same  computation  (.S'  +• 
and  S~  differ  in  sign  of  contrast:  and  L+  arc  different  spectral  samples  Also,  the  center  components  of  the  two 

units  perform  more  sophisticated  computations  than  the  outer  components. 

,5lhc  unit  depicted  in  fig  5d  may  be  misleading  in  suggesting  an  arithmetic  sum  of  two  land  units,  rather  than  a  logical 
andmg  Only  detailed  quantitative  neurophysiological  study  of  such  double- opponent  units  can  reveal  the  computation 

they  perform 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


25 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


made  about  the  double-opponent  operator.  It  does  not  produce  maximum  output  when  it  precisely 
straddles  a  edge  with  spectral  crosspoint.  The  operator's  largest  response  occurs  when  it  is  slightly 
offset  from  the  material  change  boundary.  This  is  reminiscent  of  properites  of  the  V2G  convolution 
operator18  for  luminance  discontinuities  (Marr  &  Hildreth,  1980). 

7  Conclusion 

Color  vision  systems  evolved  to  solve  certain  problems  in  making  sense  of  natural  images.  Natural 
images  are  complicated  things,  however,  caused  by  a  myriad  of  processes.  While  first  intuition  might 
be  to  study  color  vision  over  a  simplified  or  restricted  domain,  we  feel  much  can  be  understood  by 
considering  the  more  complicated  natural  domain.  Certain  regularities  emerge  from  the  confusion  of 
the  world,  and  these  lawful  relationships  can  be  exploited  as  assumptions  in  the  solution  of  sensory 
problems.  Even  given  assumptions  about  the  physics  underlying  scenes,  natural  images  are  still  com¬ 
plicated.  While  ambitious  goals  can  be  successfully  pursued  in  limited  domains  (Land,  1977),  we 
feel  that  generally,  more  modest  goals  arc  appropriate  to  complicated  domains.  Our  simple  goal  is  to 
detect  changes  of  material  in  an  image  using  spectral  information. 

One  unusual  characteristic  of  material  changes  is  that  they  are  unconstrained.  Since  an  uncon¬ 
strained  process  cannot  be  sought  directly  (for  what  equations  could  we  seek  solutions?),  we  resort  to 
inferring  material  changes  by  rejecting  a  class  of  processes  that  confound  spectral  image  intensities. 
Rejecting  the  presence  of  a  lawful  process,  it  was  pointed  out,  is  often  computationally  much  simpler 
then  solving  explicitly  for  the  variables  of  the  process. 

First,  a  computation  based  on  a  single  spectral  sample  was  sought  that  would  allow,  at  least  on 
some  occasions,  the  rejection  of  the  presence  of  one  of  the  major  confounding  processes.  But  it 
was  shown  that  no  such  computation  exists  (of  the  type  discussed  here);  all  neighboring  pairs  of 
regions  look  like  lit  and  shaded  portions  of  the  same  surface  when  viewed  monochromatically.  (It  was 
shown,  however,  that  special  classes  of  confounding  processes  Sp,,,  and  Otimpte,  as  well  as  H,  could 
be  rejected  monochromatically  using  three  spatial  regions.)  Next,  it  was  found  that  adding  a  second 
spectral  sample  (for  two  spatial  regions)  did  allow  us  to  sometimes  be  able  to  reject  the  presence 
of  a  confounding  processes.  The  spectral  crosspoint  was  the  broadest  criterion  derived,  and  it  was 
shown  that  its  discovery  allowed  the  rejection  of  each  of  the  confounding  processes  P,  /?,  6,  and  P. 
(Furthermore,  the  spectral  crosspoint  was  proved  the  unique  and  minima!  criterion  for  the  rejection 

l#Thc  laplacian  of  a  two-dimensional  gaussian 


RUBIN  4  RICHARDS 


26 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


of  $.)  It  was  argued  that  by  restricting  the  search  for  spectral  crosspoints  to  edges,  that  complications 
arising  from  the  joint  occurrence  of  several  confounding  processes  were  unlikely.  (And  if  several 
confounding  processes  did  occur  coincidentally,  a  crosspoint  could  only  be  generated  under  very 
unusual  circumstances  of  illumination.)  The  spectral  crosspoint  allows  us  to  say  with  great  confidence 
that  image  intensities  do  not  arise  from  S,  Hy  d,  P,  or  any  of  a  large  class  of  possible  confounding 
processes.  The  simultaneous  rejection  of  this  large  class  of  processes  allows  us  to  infer  with  great 
confidence  that  a  material  change  is  taking  place.  Our  crosspoint  conjecture  is  that  biological  visual 
sytems  interpret  crosspoints  as  material  changes. 

When  no  crosspoint  occurs,  more  sophisticated  computations  arc  still  possible  (Richards,  Rubin 
&  Hoffman,  1981).  The  crosspoint  strategy  is  not  foolproof.  While  material  assertions  will  be  al¬ 
most  always  correct,  there  will  be  many  missed  material  changes.  Not  all  material  changes  produce 
spectral  crosspoints.  A  good  strategy  for  visual  systems  would  be  to  locate  the  maximum  absorption 
frequencies  of  their  photopigments  in  order  that  a  maximum  number  of  crosspoints  be  detected17 
.  A  study  of  the  reflectances  of  natural  objects  could  perhaps  reveal  if  biological  photopigments  are 
located  in  wavelength  in  such  a  manner  as  to  maximize  the  detection  of  crosspoints  in  an  organism's 
environment 

Finally,  it  was  shown  that  an  operator  for  the  detection  of  crosspoints,  constrained  to  use  only 
simple  arithmetic  functions,  to  output  only  positive  values,  and  to  be  circularly  symmetrical,  is  the 
S+EL+  unit  which  performs  a  logical  and  of  two  spectrally  different  units  across  and  edge.  The 
SEL  unit  resembles  the  double-opponent  cell  commonly  found  in  biological  color  vision  systems. 

APPENDIX  I 
Details  about  Highlights 

The  image  intensity  equation  (1)  docs  not  apply  to  highlight.  Highlight  occurs  on  certain  surfaces 
when  two  conditions  hold.  First  the  viewer  direction,  surface  normal,  and  illuminant  direction  must 
be  approximately  copianar.  Second,  $  Q\  that  is,  the  angle  of  incident  illumination  must  be  nearly 
equal  to  the  angle  of  reflection  to  the  viewer.  When  the  two  conditions  above  hold,  certain  materials 
will  display  mirrorlike  qualities,  and  the  illumination  source  will  be  imaged  on  the  surface.  Let 
E$ouretW  be  the  source  that  is  imaged  in  the  highlight.  We  can  expect  the  following  image  intensities 


17 Also,  the  pholopigments  should  be  located  to  minimize  "doublccrossings,"  ot  situations  in  which  a  pair  of  complementary 
and  cancelling  crosspoints  occur  between  the  spectral  sample  points  Such  situations  would  cause  material  changes  to  be 

missed 


t 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


27 


RINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


from  two  neighboring  regions  of  the  same  surface  orientation  that  differ  only  in  that  one  region  has  a 
highlight: 


Anafle(X)  — (E*our«(X)  ~\~  E>Oi*r(X))p(A)  ,  . 

Wi„,m(X)  =6E.ource(\)  +  (1  -  6)(E,ourC'{\)  +  Eo(her(X))p(X)  1  a) 

where  r(X)  and  Jhighnyt,i(h.)  arc  the  image  intensities  expected  from  the  matte  and  highlighted 
regions,  and  E,«/,er(X)  represents  all  illumination  other  than  the  source  E,ource(X)  reflected  in  the 
highlight  Note  in  the  equation  for  the  highlighted  region  that  there  arc  matte  and  specular  com¬ 
ponents  (Evans,  1948;  Horn,  1977)  in  some  linear  combination  determined  by  fraction  6.  The  specular 
component  is  just  some  coefficient  multiplied  by  the  source;  the  albedo  plays  no  role.  The  matte 
component  involves  all  illumination,  not  just  the  direct  source,  as  well  as  the  albedo  p(X)  of  the 
material. 

Next,  note  die  highlight  equation  can  be  rewritten  as  follows: 


Aighliyhl(X)  =  6L(\)  +  /moKe(X)  (156) 

where  Z-(X)  =  E,ourci{\)  —  (E,our«(X)  -f  E0<Aer(X))p(X).  Therefore,  the  highlight  becomes  a  purely 
additive  process  whenever  L(X)  >  0.  We  shall  call  this  condition  the  nonnal  highlight  condition,  ft  is 
equivalent  to  the  following: 


E.< 


*(X) 


e(X)  +^«<Aer(X) 


>  P(X) 


for  all  X  in  the  visually  useful  range. 


(15c) 


Since  reflectances  of  surfaces  usually  have  maxima  around  .7  (Krinov,  1971),  the  nonnal  highlight 
criterion  above  is,  loosely  speaking,  that  the  source  provide  a  little  more  than  twice  the  illumination 
than  the  diffuse  light.  Normal  sunlit  scenes  will  obey  this  criterion. 


APPENDIX  II 

Shadows  with  Pcnumbrae  (S,,en):  Rejection  with  One  Spectral  Sample 

Here  wc  seek  to  rule  out  the  existence  of  a  solution  to  cither  of  the  following  discrete  equations: 

h,x  —  [Eis  4-  E\  n)p\ 

/|,»  =  {nE\s  -j-E|/))pi  (18a) 

I\,z  =  E\np\ 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS  28  FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


Figure  6.  Rejecting  Sprn  by  (be  nonmonotonicity  of  the  discrete  plot  of  image  intensity 
versus  spatial  position  at  some  wavelength. 


where  X,  Y  and  Z  denote  three  collinear  spatial  regions  being  tested  for  their  correspondence  to  lit, 
penumbra,  and  shaded  regions,  respectively,  of  a  shadow  with  penumbra,  or 

Ax  —  EidPi 

Iiy  =  (oEis  +  Bid)  Pi  (16b) 

hz  =  [Eis  +  E\v)p\ 

corresponding  to  the  other  case  that  Z  is  the  lit  region  and  X  is  shaded. 

A  solution  to  equations  (16a),  parameterized  by  6  is  given  below: 

Eid  —  6 

h,z 

Pl=sT 

Els  =  6(rj£-  1) 

A,z 

A.v  —  A  ,z 

Q  ss  - 

A,x  —  A.z 


(17) 


» 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


29 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


The  constraints  are  that  all  the  variables  be  positive,  and  a  £  (0, 1).  EIS  is  positive  if  —  1  >  0 
Now  the  only  interesting  restriction  is  that  a  £  (8, 1). 

a  >  0  implies  h.Y  —  h,z  >  0  implies  h.Y  >  h,z 
a<l  implies  h.x  —  h,z  >  h.Y  —  h,z  implies  h.x>h,Y 

Therefore,  any  violation  of  the  restriction  h.x  >  h.Y  >  h,z  implies  die  unsolvability  of  equa¬ 
tions  (16a).  By  the  symmetry  of  the  alternate  equations  (16b),  it  is  clear  they  provide  the  restriction 
h,z  >  h.Y  >  hx ■  The  pair  of  restrictions  from  (16a)  and  (16b)  together  imply  that  the  three 
collinear  image  intensities  must  be  either  strictly  increasing  or  strictly  decreasing;  that  is,  they  must 
be  monotonic.  This  rejection  condition  of  nonmonotonicity  is  illustrated  in  figure  6,  and  can  be 
summarized  as  follows; 

If  the  discrete  plot  of  image  intensity  versus  position  across  the  Spen  candidate  is  nonmonotonic, 
we  can  reject  Spt„  .  Equivalently,  we  can  reject  Spen  if  (/,  *  —  h  Y)(h ,  y  —  h ,z)  <  0. 

It  is  clear  that  with  additional  spectral  samples,  the  nonmonotonicity  of  the  discrete  plot  of  image 
intensity  versus  wavelength  at  any  wavelength  is  sufficient  to  reject  Spen 

However,  in  practice,  there  is  a  problem  with  the  type  of  operator  suggested  by  the  theory:  at  what 
scale  should  triplets  of  spatial  regions  be  examined  for  nonmonotonicity?  Shadows-with-pcnumbrae 
can  occur  with  large  variations  in  spatial  extent  in  images.  Should  a  whole  range  of  triplets  be  ex¬ 
amined?  The  computational  complexity  of  such  a  task  should  make  one  wary  of  it.  We  Like  this  scale 
problem  to  imply  that,  for  practical  use,  the  crosspoint  condition  is  preferred. 

APPENDIX  III 

Broadband  spectral  samples  cannot  induce  crosspoints. 

It  will  be  shown  that  a  crosspoint  cannot  arise  in  P,  O ,  or  S  situations  from  an  overlapping  of 
samples. 

1]  Assume  the  change  from  X  to  Y  is  due  to  one  of  the  confounding  processes.  Therefore,  the 
continuous  spectral  energy  distributions  /.\(X)  and  /» (X)  do  not  intersect.  (Otherwise  the  proof  in 
section  5.1  could  be  shown  wrong  by  taking  samples  straddling  the  intersection.)  Assume,  without  loss 
of  generality,  that  /\(X)  is  always  greater  than  />{X). 

2]  Assume  that  our  two  spectral  samples  will  be  measured  by  "photopigments"  P\  and  Pi  where 
each  Pi  is  simply  a  function  mapping  some  wavelength  interval  into  the  unit  interval  (0, 1). 


RUBIN  A  RICHARDS 


30 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


3]  The  sample  measured  at  X,  in  region  X,  Six,  and  in  region  Y,  Sir,  are  defined  as  follows. 


Six 


Sir 


/  /x(X)P,(X)dX 

'Li 

/  \(X)P,(X)dX 

'Li 


(18) 


where  X<j  >  Xji  and  the  interval  (X,i,Xt2)  is  the  range  of  wavelengths  over  which  the 
"photopigment"  Pi  is  sensitive. 

4}  Six  >  Sir,  for  all  t,  follows  directly  from  the  fact  that  J*(X)  >  Iy(\),  for  all  X. 

$]  Therefore,  spectral  crosspoints  cannot  be  induced  by  overlapping  spectral  samples. 


REFERENCES 

Oartnall,  H.J.A.,  "The  identity  and  distribution  of  visual  pigments  in  the  animal  kingdom,"  Ch.  18  in 
The  Eye,  2,  H.  Davson,  cd..  Academic  Press,  New  York,  1962. 

Daw,  N.W.,  “Color-coded  cells  in  goldfish,  cat  and  rhesus  monkey,"  Investigative  Ophthalmology  1 1 
(1972),  411-417. 

Evans.  R.M.,  An  Introduction  to  Color,  Wiley,  New  York,  1948. 

Horn.  B.K.P.,  "Image  intensity  understanding”  M.l.T.  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Memo  335 
(1975). 

Horn,  B.K.P.,  "Understanding  image  intensities,"  Artificial  Intcll.  8  (1977),  201-231. 

Horn,  B.K.P.  &  Sjoberg,  R.W.,  "Calculating  the  reflectance  map,”  Applied  Optics  18  (1979),  1770- 
1779. 

Judd,  D.B.  A  Wyszecki,  G.,  Color  in  Business,  Science,  and  Industry,  John  Wiley  and  Sons,  Inc.,  New 
York.  1963. 

Krinov,  E.l...  Spectral  reflectance  properties  of  natural  formations.  National  Research  Council  of 
Canada  Technical  Translation  439, 1971. 


RUBIN  A  RICHAROS 


31 


FINDING  MATERIAL  CHANGES  WITH  COLOR 


Kubelka,  P.  &  Munk  F.,  “Ein  Beitrag  zur  Optik  der  Farbanstriche,”  Z  tech.  Physik.  12  (1931),  593. 

Land,  E.H..  “The  retincx  theory  of  color  vision,"  Scientific  American  218  (1977),  108-128. 

Marr,  D.,  Vision:  A  computational  investigation  into  the  human  representation  and  processing  of  visual 
information.  Freeman  and  Company,  San  Francisco,  1982. 

Marr.  D.  &  Hildreth,  E.,  “Theory  of  edge  detection,”  Proc.  R.  Soc.  LondL  B  207  (1980),  187-217. 

Marr,  D.  &  Ullman,  S..  “Directional  selectivity  and  its  use  in  early  visual  processing,"  Proc.  R.  Soc. 
Lond  #211  (1981),  151-180. 

Richards,  W.A.,  Rubin,  J.M.  &  Hoffman,  D.D.,  “Equation  counting  and  the  interpretation  of  sensory 
data,”  M.I.T.  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Memo  614  (1981). 

Silver,  W.,  “Determining  shape  and  reflectance  using  multiple  images,”  (June,  1980). 

Walls,  G.,  The  Vertebrate  Eye  and  its  Adaptive  Radiation.  Hafncr  Publishing  Co..  New  York,  1942. 

Wyszccki,  G.  &  Stiles.  W.S.,  Color  Science:  Concepts  and  Methods,  Quantitative  Data  and  Formulas, 
John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc.,  New  York.  1967. 


