AD-A020  725 


MODELS  OF  THE  LEARNER  IN  COMPUTER-ASS  I STED  INSTRUCTION 
J.  D.  Fletcher 

Navy  Personnel  Research  and  Development  Center 
San  Diego,  California 

December  1975 


DISTRIBUTED  BY; 


Nationai  Technical  information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


i 


NPRDC  TR  76-23 


Deceirber  1975 


MODELS  OF  THE  LEARNER  IN  COMPUTER-ASSISTED  INSTRUCTION 


i J.  D.  Fletcher 

E 

E 

!> 

P 


Approved  by 
J.  J.  Regan 
Technical  Director 


J 


ItLD  

SCCUMITV  CLAStliriCATIOM  Or  TmiS  ^ACC  'Vhan  0«f«  EAtmtmd) 

I REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


HC^OflT  numI 

TR  76-23 


l«  Tit  LC  ran*  *»*■(»•) 


IJ.  OOVT  ACCtUION  S6J 


MODELS  OF  THE  LEARNER  IN  CCMPUTER-ASSISTED 
INSTRUCIION 


t AutMoar*; 

J.  D.  Fletcher 


READ  OItTRUCnONt 
BEFORE  COMPLETWG  FORM 
i.  RCCiaie^T*s  CATALOO  auMBta 


I.  rvat  o!>  RtaoNT  « acateo  coveaco 
Technical  Report 
1 July  197S  — 10  October  75 

I «.  acaroaMiMO  ono.  aeaoar  NUMaea 

I • coNTaACT  oa  orant  Nu^acaca; 


> acaroRMiNC  orgamization  name  ano  address 

Navy  Personnel  Researdi  and  Development  Center 
San  Diego,  California  92152 

•1  COMTROLLINC  OrriCE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Navy  Personnel  Research  and  Development  Center 
San  Diego,  California  92152 


•0.  aaocRAM  elemeht.  aaojeCT.  tav< 

AREA  S WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 


63720K 

ZPN07.P32 

1Z.  REaoRT  DATE 

December  1975 

'is  number  or  raoes 


U monitoring  agency  name  a ADONESSr*/  *iMa>«i(  fM  CanIraillWE  OMtc»>  | IS.  SECURITY  CLASS.  (•!  *fa  n^orl) 


MS  Distribution  statement  roi  Uu«  Ra^aai; 


UNCLASSIFIED 

Til  DECLASSiaiCATIOM/DORNCRAOlNC 
SCHEDULE 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


It  DISTRIBUTION  statement  {al  tha  aAaCracI  antara*  In  BlacA  .to.  II  miHranI  traci  Rapatf; 


I*  SUPaLCMENTARY  NOTES 


^9  xCy  wOnOS  (Cof\Um09  9149  If  n9€999mf  Itfanfliy  Ajr  k$9ck  mmh99) 

Computer-assisted  instruction,  models  of  the  learner,  mathematical  models, 
regression  models,  automaton  models,  artificial  intelligence. 


20  ASSTWACT  rConffftu«  on  r«vof#«  9t4m  U t%9C99999y  ^t4  f4t*Utf  by  bImtA  mam$Br) 

The  adaptability  of  computer-assisted  instruction  to  individuals  should  be 
enhanced  by  i-he  use  of  explicit  models  of  the  learner.  To  be  appropriate  for 
computer  representation,  these  models  must  take  the  form  of  effective  procedures. 
Such  procedures  may  be  derived  from  four  areas  of  investigation:  quzmtltative 

models  of  memory,  regression  models  of  performance,  automaton  models  of  per- 
formance, and  artificial  intelligence.  Relevant  work  in  these  four  aieas  is 
identified  and  reviewed. 


DD 

1 JAM  7J 


edition  oa  I NOV  «k  IS  obsolete 


UNCLASSIFIED 

security  CLASSiriCATlON  OF  THIS  RABE  I 


FUKEWORJ 


Hds  report  is  the  first  in  a series  docunentinR  work  conpleted  under 
Technical  Developtr.ent  Plan  ZPN07  (Education  and  Training  Development'',  Work 
Unit  ZPN07.P32  (Advanced  Uoinputer-Kased  System  for  Instructional  Dialogues). 
Tliis  work  unit  will  test  and  evaluate  t'  chniques  for  computer  generated  in- 
struction. Tl’.js  type  of  instruction  can  be  distinguished  from  more  conven- 
tional approaciies  by  the  automation  of  instructional  interaction  and  choice 
of  strategy.  Tnis  approacli  promises  to  reduce  the  costs  of  instnictional 
materials  preparation  and  to  increase  the  adaptability  and  individualization 
of  the  instruction  delivered.  One  aspect  of  this  approach  is  the  represen- 
tation, by  computer,  of  learner  capabilities  and  needs.  Tliis  report  identifies 
and  reviews  relevant  learner  representation  techniques  that  are  reasonable 
candidates  for  tn.-out  in  Na'/y  training  environment*;. 

Tiie  autlior  acknowledges  the  continued  support  and  encouragement  of  Dr. 

J.  D.  Ford,  Jr.,  Program  Director  for  the  Development  of  Training  Technology/. 


I.  J.  CLAHKIN 
Coosanding  Of fic-  r 


V 


PrcMcB 


Thft  central  problea  In  cosputer-aasleted  inetraction  is  the  tracalaCicn 
of  inatxucttco&l  practice,  which  is  f£4.rly  vague,  into  ccmpatar  progness, 
which  arc  quite  precis*.  If  effectivo  procadures  are  icomasplsic  with 
coaster  prograaa,  this  problee  is  csiii  of  tranalating  instructional  prac* 
tiee  inta  effective  procedures.  Models  of  the  leaxser  saa^  be  essential 
in  translating  instruction  into  effete tlvs  procedures. 

Purpose  and  Approach 

This  psport  reviews  the  explicit  use  of  sudels  of  Che  learner  based  on 
quantitative  aodels  of  neaory,  regreisslon  aodels  of  perforsence,  antoauitoQ 
aodelfi  of  perfoxBsnce,  and  artificial  intalligence. 

Plndinga 

Models  of  Mawnry.  Four  quantitativo  oiodela  of  oenoty  have  been  inv&sti- 
gatai  for  their  utility  in  nodellng  learners  in  cooputer-assisted  in- 
struction:  the  increoental  model,  the  ooe>eleaent  model,  tho  rsndovi-' 

tri^l  Increaents  sodel,  and  eodels  baaed  on  General  Forger*’in3  Theory. 
In/itxuctional  strategies  based  on  the  incxeaental  taodel  ate  te..^Qsd 
respoaaa  Inaensitive  because  they  <»ncem  the  nuaber  rather  that  Che  out- 
comes of  presentations.  Strategies  based  on  the  ooe-eleaent  noc  si,  the 
rsodoeftTiMl  Increnents  model,  and  a General  Forgetting  Theory  /re 
termed  response  sensitive  because  they  take  into  account  the  o'.ccoites 
of  prcsaotatlons.  General  Forgetting  Theory  meets  a need  for  a tise- 
ispeadmt  forgetting  process  in  modeling  learners*  Iziowledgs  of  items , 
However,  only  locally  optimal  instructional  strategies  have  been  derivei 
from  General  Forgetting  Iheoxy.  Global  optinization  strat'/gias  that 
maximize  gain  over  the  entire  instruction^  treatment  have  bean  derived 
from  the  incremental,  one-eleaent,  and  rendoa-trial  incres  ents  modals. 

Regression  Hocels,  Despite  considerable  use  of  regression  i'odeis  to 
describe  student  progress  in  coaputet- assisted  instruction,  only  two 
examples  of  these  aodels  used  to  dynamically  predict  and  pr«iscrlbe 
instruction  for  individual  students  were  found.  Predl.ctive  control 
based  on  regression  aodels  of  performance  using  such  independent  vari- 
ables as  percent  correct,  response  latency,  and  measures  of  state  and 
trait  anxiety  has  been  used  successfully  to  teach  concepts  associated 
with  heart  disease,  A theory  of  student  progress  derived  from  a stt>~ 
chastic  differential  equation  may  be  applicable  to  a variety  of  curric- 
uluas  and  has  provided  very  precise  predictive  control  in  experiments 
on  cooputer-sssisted  Instruction  in  arithmetic  coa^atstion.  Although 
regrassicn  models  are  well  understood  and  easy  to  apply  sad  aodifF, 
they  are  sufficiently  powerful  to  satisfy  isany  more  applications  then 


vii 


have  yet  been  sttea^ted.  Through  the  use  of  regressioa  mcidala,  coj»> 
put«r>assi8ted  instruction,  which  can  d;!na]a.''.c8lly  adjust  to  within- 
ccurse  psrfonumce  as  well  as  entering  .x>urse  sejeures,  ae^  realize 
the  intuitive  ptoaiee  of  aptitude-treatcieat  Interaction. 

AutCTMitoa  HodeJa.  What  coaputers  do  and  what  effoctiva  procedures  are 
itsy  o«  jsost  ie^ily  described  in  tcras  of  autoir-sta  theory,  and  it  is  rea- 
sonable to  turn  to  autoBKta  theory  for  sodels  of  the  learner  that  Tisy 
be  easily  represented  by  eouputer  ®d  used  In  coaipater^assisted  instruc- 
tion. The  rower  of  autoiaeton  ^dsls  can  be  seen  in  contrast  with  isodels 
based  on  regression.  However,  regression  models  arc  applied  to  grouped 
data.  Ko  aatter  how  adaqttate  they  are  for  a\any  applications  or  bow 
dtccurately  they  predict  perforaance,  they  do  net  postulate  the  specific 
sdgorithaic  processes  that  students  use  in  solving  problems*  On  the  other 
handy  analysis  of  these  '\lgorithsis  is  a natural,  integral  aspect  of  au- 
toaaton  models.  TJse  of  these  Bodals  is  just  beginning,  but  tiiey  have 
already  deaaonstrated  their  utility  in  describing  the  algorlthalc  processes 
used  by  students  in  solving  arichaetic  problems. 

Models  as  Artificial  Intelligence.  Several  ccaputer-sssisted  tnstnjetioc 
projects  have  been  based  on  models  of  such  fonoally  structured  subject 
matter  as  ssathsaatical  logic,  electronic  troth Icu^hocting,  end  coa^vter 
programming.  Additional  efforts  are  being,  made  to  extend  this  approach 
to  less  formal  subject  matter  such  as  South  American  geography  history 
of  th«  American  Civil  War.  All  these  efforts  attempt  Co  devise  adequate 
models  of  the  learner  by  starting  with  an  adequate  model  of  some  subject 
matter  sad  ''shading  it  in"  as  the  learner  masters  given  siipects  of  it. 
Another  approach  is  to  model  human  belief  systems  directly , This  latter 
approach  has  not  been  applied  to  coaputer-assisted  instruction,  but  fairly 
adequate  models  of  belief  systems  have  been  devised  for  several  levels 
of  parazu)ia  and  for  a "Cold  Warrinr."  Given  all  that  must  be  represented 
»e  discrere  facts  and  all  the  Interrelations  between  tbe^e  facts,  adequate 
representation  of  a human  belief  system  may  be  unattainable.  However, 
a bullef  system  for  an  instructional  subject  nay  be  simpler  and  more 
amenable  to  cosqjuter  representation. 

Conclusion 

Impllclc  in  xhe  review  is  the  assinsptlon  that  explicit  representations 
of  the  learner  should  be  applied  in  coc^uter-assisted  instruction. 
Instruction  uoes  not  merely  deposit  information  on  blank  slates.  Students 
coasprisa  complex,  dynamic  systems  that  are  altered  by  instruction*  The 
more  precisely  these  student/systesss  are  explicated,  the  better  inst ruction 
can  be  devtaed,  modified,  evaluated,  and  individualized.  Moreover,  the 
approaches  to  instruction  discussed  by  the  review  use  to  advantage  the 
power,  speed,  and  accuracy  of  computers,  and,  in  doing  so,  illustrate 
unique  and  valuable  capabilities  of  computers  applied  to  instruction. 


viil 


CONTENTS 


ss:' 


Page 


INTRODUCTION 1 

Problem 

Purpose  and  Approach 1 

RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION  3 

Models  of  Memory 


Repression  Models  of  Performance 
Automaton  Jlodels  of  Performance 


Models  as  Artificial  Intelligence  ....  10 

Final  Comment 14 

CONCLUSIONS 15 

REFERENCES 17 

DISTRIBUTION  LIST 23 


VO  00  u> 


INTRODUCTION 


Problem 


'Ihe  central  problem  in  computer-assisted  instruction  (CAi)  is  the  trans- 
lation of  instructional  practice,  which  is  fairly  va^;ue,  to  computer  programs, 
which  are  quite  precise.  If  effective  procedures  are  Isomorphic  with  computer 
programs,  this  p»“oblem  is  one  of  translating  instructional  practice  into 
effective  procedures.  Ibring  (1936)  argued  that  any  procedure  programmed 
for  a computer  is  computable  and  effective,  and  he  did  not,  current  apocrypha 
to  the  contrary,  argue  the  converse  of  this  statement.  However,  In  agreement 
with  Minsky  (1967)  and  others,  this  report  assumes  chat  tiny  procedure  that 
is  effective  can  be  programmed  for  a computer. 

Models  of  the  leamrr  may  be  essential  In  translating  instruction  to 
effective  procedures.  In  a sense,  ail  CAI  includes  these  models  either  im- 
plicitly or  explicitly.  In  a linear  sequence  of  curriculum  items,  a student 
is  modeled  by  that  sequence  and  by  his  rosition  in  it.  In  a non-linear, 
branching  sequence,  a student  is  modeled  by  the  branching  structure  and,  again, 
by  his  position  in  it.  Tliis  suggests  that  content  analysis  ot  curriculum 
and  models  of  the  learner  are  dependent  and  inextricable,  but  this  suggestion 
will  not  be  argued  here. 

Purpose  and  i\pproach 

This  report  reviews  the  explicit  use  of  models  of  the  learner  based 
on  quantitative  models  of  memory,  regression  models  of  performance,  autom- 
aton models  of  performance,  and  artificial  intelligence. 


1 


RESLILTS  AND  Disa’SSION 


It  is  obviously  beyond  the  scope  of  this  paper  to  present  a conprehensive 
analysis  of  the  use  of  models  in  psychology.  It  should  be  sufficient  to 
say  that  the  use  of  models  has  been  a..  Integral  aspect  of  psychology  for 
a long  time.  Tiie  use  of  quantitative,  or  "mathematical,"  mo>  els,  wiiich  lead 
directly  to  effective  f rocedures,  has  occurred  more  recently.  i>eginning 
with  the  search  for  a universal,  analytic  learning  function  by  Robertson, 
Thurstone,  Woodro'.. . and  others,  it  is  possible  to  trace  a gradually  increasing 
emphasis  on  systematic  specification  of  the  elementary  units  underlying  learn- 
ing. Hull’s  Principles  of  Behavior  (1943)  is  a landmark  in  this  regard. 

Hull's  postulates,  which  were  designed  to  encompass  the  major  aspects  of 
learning,  initiated  considerable  empirical  research.  However,  it  is  not 
possible  to  make  more  than  a few  quantitative  predictions  of  behavior  from 
these  postulates.  Re  that  as  it  may,  the  work  of  Hull,  Lewin,  Tolman,  and 
others  eraplia sized  the  importance  of  quantitative  theory  in  psychology  and 
set  the  stage  for  the  more  recent  work  of  Atkinson,  Estes,  Luce,  Suppes, 
and  many  others. 

Considering  the  current  status  of  quantitative  models,  there  appears  to 
be  a trade-off  between  the  precision  and  the  breadth  and/cr  complexity  of 
the  phenomena  ti>ey  account  for.  This  report  discusses  models  of  the  learner 
in  order  of  increasing  complexity,  moving  from  quantitative  models  applied 
in  simple  learning  situations  to  more  qualitative  models  applied  in  more 
complex  situations. 

Models  of  .*tamory 

Although  earlier  work  can  be  cited  (e.g.,  Karush  and  Dear,  196C;  Matheson, 
1964),  a 1966  paper  by  Groen  and  Atkinson  appears  to  have  been  seminal  in 
the  application  of  models  of  memory  to  instruction.  Groen  and  Atkinson  tied 
the  application  of  quantitative  learning  models  to  the  optimization  of  instruc- 
tion. The  prototypal  instructional  situation  addressed  by  this  and  similar 
papers  was  first  presented  by  Suppes’  (1964)  analysis  of  learning  a list  of 
items.  Roughly,  a set  of  M items  is  to  be  learned  In  a fixed  number,  S, 
of  sessions.  Gn  each  session  a subset  of  the  M items  is  presented  for  study. 
Tne  optimization  problem  is  to  maximize  performance  on  a posttest  of  all  M 
items  by  appropriate  selection — in  size  and/or  content — of  the  subsets  subject 
to  the  constraints  piesented  by  M and  S.  This  optimization  problem  is  general- 
ly solved  by  the  particular  model  of  memory  chosen  to  represent  the  learner, 
and  discussions  of  optimized  Instructicr  would  be  academic  were  it  rot  for 
the  use  of  computers  in  instruction.  These  discussions  typically  start  with 
the  single-operator,  or  Incremental,  model  (Bush  and  Sternberg,  1959)  and 
the  all-or-none,  or  one-element  model  (Estes,  1960).  These  two  models  have 
become  prototypal  and  serve  as  standard  straw-men  in  the  development  of  learn- 
ing models. 


Pracediitg  page  blank 


3 


The  Incremental  model  assumes  that  the  probability  of  an  error  on  item 
1 on  the  n+1  presentation  (q.  ) is 


^i ,n+l 


aq 


i,n 


where  0 <•  a < 1. 


In  other  words,  the  probability  of  an  error  on  an  item  is  reduced  by  a constant 
amount  every  time  the  item  is  presented,  no  matter  what  happens  on  the  presen- 
tation. The  magnitude  of  the  constant  amount  is  estimated  by  a parameter, 
a,  that  is  uniquely  determined  for  each  learner. 


The  onc-element  model  assumes  thnt,  for  each  student,  each  item  to  be 
presented  is  in  one  of  two  states — learned  or  unlearned.  When  an  unlearned 
item  is  presented,  it  moves  into  the  learned  state  with  probability  c.  Spe- 
cifically, the  probability  of  ai.  error  on  item  1 on  the  nfl  presentation 


^i,n+l 


with  probability  1-c 
with  probability  c. 


In  other  words,  the  probability  of  an  error  on  an  item  remains  constant  no 
matter  how  many  times  it  is  presented  until  a correct  response  to  the  item 
is  made,  at  which  time  the  probability  of  an  error  on  the  item  immediately 
drops  to  zero  and  remains  there  forever.  The  probability  of  a correct  response 
is  estimated  by  a parameter,  c,  that  is  uniquely  determined  for  each  learner. 


Given  their  simplicity,  it  is  not  surprising  that  these  models  have  become 
straw-men  or  even  whipping  boys.  What  is  surprising  is  the  large  amount  of 
experimental  data  they  account  for.  There  are  many  experimental  situations 
in  which  these  models  adequately  describe  the  phenomena  observed. 


Both  the  Incremental  and  the  one-elemcnt  models  predict  the  same  learning 
curve  for  a given  set  of  items.  As  Calfee  (1970)  pointed  out,  they  differ 
in  their  assumptions  about  underlying  processes,  and  these  differences  hinge 
on  the  response- dependent  character  the  one-element  model.  Tne  conditional 
probability  of  an  error  on  presentati^a  irt-l  of  item  i,  given  an  error  on 
trial  n,  is 


“ ’l.l 

for  the  incrementcl  model  and 


for  the  one-e]ement  model.  Ilotably,  the  latter  probability  is  not  a function 
of  trial  macber;  learning  either  occurs  or  does  not  occur  solely  as  a function 
of  the  parameter  c in  the  one-element  model.  For  thir*  reason  Groen  and  Atkinson 
termed  instructional  strategies  based  on  the  incremental  model  as  response 


4 


insensitive  because  they  concern  the  number  rathe!'  than  the  outcoiaes  of  the 
presentations,  and  strater;ies  based  on  the  one-el»aaent  model  as  response 
sensitive  because  tisey  consider  outcomes  of  item  presentations. 

Dear,  Silbennan,  Estavan,  and  Atkinson  (1967)  reported  the  first  appli- 
cation of  a quantitative  memory  model  to  CAI.  They  used  a presentation  strategy 
based  on  the  one-element  model  to  teach  paired-associates  under  cosqiuter 
control.  Although  their  strategy  wa^  theoretically  optimal,  it  required  massed 
presentations  and  produced  poor  results  relative  to  tl'ioae  obtained  from  a 
standard  presentaton  schedule  that  required  distributed  presentations.  The 
point  to  be  emphasized  here  is  that  a theoretically  optimal  procedure  may 
not  be  the  best  Instructional  procedure  available.  An  optical  p;oc_u!.re 
attempts  to  maximize  some  outcomes  subject  to  some  constraints-  outcou-i 

and  constraints  may  comprise  a model  of  an  instructional  situati'^n  and,  to 
the  extent  that  this  model  is  accurate,  it  will  produce  superior  inst ,raccion?.I 
outcotneo.  The  Dear  et  al.  study  tested  both  the  adequacy  of  an  optimal 
procedure  and  its  underlying  instructional  model;  thus,  it  provided  imp'-rcanc 
feedback  both  to  those  concerned  with  instructional  procedures  and  with  .heories 
of  human  learning.  Greeno  (1964)  and  Groen  and  Atkinson  (1966)  had  suggested 
that  the  one-element  model  may  Tall  badly  in  accounting  for  learning  under 
massed  presentation,  and  it  was  reasonable  to  avoid  massed  presentation  in 
subsequent  tests  of  the  Dear  et  al.  strategy. 

Lorton  (1973)  compared  a modified  form  of  the  Dear  et  al,  strategy  with 
a standard  strategy  based  on  the  incremental  model  in  presenting  CA.I  in  spel- 
ling to  disadvantaged  4th  through  6th  grade  students.  Lorton's  modification 
disallowed  the  presentation  of  any  item  more  than  once  in  any  session.  His 
results  indicated  a lesser  error  rate  during  training  for  the  strategy  based 
on  the  incremental  model,  but  significantly  better  posttest  performance  for 
the  strategy  based  on  the  one-element  model.  Using  the  modified  Dear  et  al, 
strategy,  then,  Lorton  demonstrated  the  anticipated  superiority  for  a response 
sensitive,  optimal  strategy  in  a posttreatment  measure  of  achievement. 


Laubsch  (1970)  took  a step  further  and  applied  a presentation  strategy 
based  on  the  random-trial  increments  model  (Norman,  1964)  to  teach  Swahili 
vocabulary  to  native  speakers  of  English^,  The  random-trial  increments  model 
includes  the  features  of  both  the  Incremental  and  one-element  models  by  as- 
suming that  the  probability  of  an  error  on  item  1 on  the  nfl  presentation 


'’i,n+l 


{ 


'•i,n 


aq 


l,n 


with  probability  1-c 


with  probability  c. 


It  shoulc  be  "loted  chat,  if  c < 1,  a strategy  based  on  Che  random  trial 
increments  model  will  be  response  sensitive  in  that  it  will  have  to  attend 


^Although  Lorton's  study  was  documented  after  Laubsch's,  it  was  designed  and 
rtin  earlier. 


to  the  outcoroes  of  prior  presentations.  Laubsch’s  study  was  motivated  by 
the  consideration  that  the  assumptions  of  subject  and  item  homogeneity  in 
strategies  based  on  the  one-element  model  are  untenable  in  most  practical 
situations.  The  review  by  Atkinson  and  Paulson  (1972)  emphasized  that  an 
essential  contribution  of  Laubsch's  investigation  was  the  development  of 
a strategy  b.ased  on  the  random-trial  Increments  model  to  allow  the  parameters 
of  the  model  to  vary  with  different  students  and  different  items.  Laubsch 
concluded  that  although  significant  improvements  in  learning  can  be  achieved 
by  applying  optimal  presentation  strategies  based  on  models  of  memory,  these 
models  are  Inadequate  in  an  Important  aspect:  they  do  not  Include  a time- 
dependent  forgetting  process. 

This  inadequacy  was  directly  addressed  in  a paper  by  Paulson  (1973) , who 
discussed  the  implications  of  the  General  Forgetting  Theory  formulated  by 
Rumelbart  (e.g.,  1967)  for  presentation  strategies  based  on  different  vari- 
eties of  the  one-element  model.  The  General  Forgetting  Theory  can  be  briefly 
described  as  assuming  that  a subject  at  any  given  time  is  in  one  of  three 
possible  states  of  learning  with  respect  to  any  item:  (1)  an  unlearned  state 

(U),  (2)  a short-term  retention  state  (S),  or  (3)  a long-term  retention  state 
(L).  As  formulated  by  Paulson,  when  an  item  is  presented,  transitions  between 
states  occur  accordlne  to  the  following  stochastic  matrix: 


Probability  of  a correct 
State  on  trial  t+1  response  given  the  state 


L S U 


L 

10  0 

1 

State  on  S 

c 1-c  0 

1 

trial  t U 

a b 1-a-b 

g 

In  other  words,  if  an  item  is  in  the  learned  state,  it  stays  there  forever. 

If  an  item  is  in  the  short-term  state  and  is  preseiited,  it  may  either  change 
to  the  learned  state  or  remain  in  the  short-term  state.  If  ar.  item  is  in 
the  unlearned  state,  it  may  change  either  to  the  learned  or  short-term  state 
or  it  may  remain  in  the  unlearned  state.  The  probability  of  a correct  response 
to  an  item  in  the  learned  or  short-term  state  is  one,  while  the  probability 
of  a correct  answer  to  an  item  in  the  unlearned  state  is  equal  to  some  guesnlng 
parameter. 

Under  the  General  Forgetting  Theory,  it  is  also  necessary  to  consider 
items  that  are  not  presented  on  a trial.  Transitions  between  states  for 
these  items  occur  according  to  the  following  matrix: 


6 


/ 


State  on 
trial  t 


L 

S 

U 


State  on  trial  t+1 
L S U 

10  0 
0 1-f  f 

0 0 1 


In  other  words,  only  Items  In  the  short-term  state  may  change  state  during 
a trial  In  which  they  are  not  presented;  they  may  either  stay  In  the  short-term 
state  or  drop  back  to  the  unlearned  state.  If  we  are  willing  to  think  of 
time  measured  by  trials  or  presentations  rather  than  minutes,  these  transitions 
answer  Laubsch's  call  for  a time-dependent  forgetting  process. 

Despite  the  Inclusion  of  a forgetting  process,  presentation  strategies 
based  on  the  family  of  models  represented  by  the  General  Forgetting  Theory 
Incorporate  a serious  llaltatlon.  With  respect  to  this  limitation,  two  types 
of  optimal  strategies  can  be  distinguished:  (1)  local  strategies  that  maximize 

limnedlate  gain,  and  (2)  global  strategies  that  maximize  gain  over  the  course 
of  the  instructional  treatment.  Paulson  demonstrated  that  the  difficulty 
in  applying  the  General  Forgetting  Theory  to  the  derivation  of  globally 
optimal  strategies  is  that  these  strategies  require  looking  more  than  one 
trial  rhead  in  all  cases  of  Interest.  The  tractablllty  of  the  one-element 
model  in  deriving  a globally  optimal  strategy  Is  a fortunate  exception  to 
a general  rule  of  intractability.  Paulson  discussed  several  locally  optimal 
strategies  based  ou  the  General  Forgetting  Theory  that  look  only  one  trial 
ahead.  Utese  strategies  are  mathematically  manageable  and  Intuitively  rea- 
sonable, but  they  were  all  shown  not  to  br.  globally  optimal. 

It  Is  Important  to  note  that  the  application  of  quantitative  models  of 
memory  Is  not  a straightforward  process  of  selecting  the  most  adequate  model 
available,  grinding  threugh  the  necessary  mathematics  to  derive  an  optimal 
presentation  strategy,  and  programolng  the  strategy  on  the  local  CAI  system. 

The  verification  task  for  selecting  the  most  adequate  available  model  Is 
undecidable.  The  mathematics  for  demonstrating  that  a selected  ::trategy  Is 
optimal  may  be  prohibitively  dlfficulc.  The  selected  strategy  may  not  be 
Implementable  on  a computer  In  general  or  on  the  particular  operating  system 
available.  A global,  quantitative  theory  for  deciding  these  problems  may 
someday  be  developed,  but.  In  the  Interim,  selection  of  optimal  presentation 
strategies  for  CAI  must  necessarily  depend  on  the  biases  of  concerned  Individ- 
uals and  on  the  results  of  empirical  Investigations. 


7 


Hie  llsiitatlons  of  the  learning  situations  to  which  these  quantitative 
models  can  be  applied  were  mentioned  earlier.  Considering  these  limitations, 
the  number  of  remaining,  unresolved  Issues  is  especially  riotable.  It  can 
hardly  be  overemphasized  that  we  are  Just  beginning  to  apply  these  models 
to  instruction. 

Regression  Models  of  Performance 

There  has  been  considerable  use  of  regression  models  to  describe  tne 
progress  of  students  in  CAI  (e.g.,  Searle,  Lorton,  and  Suppes,  1973;  Suppes, 
Fletcher,  Zanotti,  Lorton,  and  Searle,  1973).  Such  applications  are  analogous 
to  the  use  of  production  functions  in  economic  theory  and  can  be  used  for 
both  the  optimization  and  the  evaluation  of  instruction  (Fletcher  and  Tamlson, 
1973).  The  use  of  regression  models  to  predict  and  prescribe  instruction 
dynam* tally  for  individual  students  has  been  less  common.  IVo  examples  of 
this  type  of  application  are  represented  by  the  work  of  Rivers  (1972)  and 
Suppes,  Fletcher,  and  Zanottl  (1975a,  1975b). 

Rivers  documented  an  application  of  multiple  linear  regression  to  an 
elementary  course  in  heart  disease.  He  Identified  nine  concepts  taught  in 
the  course  and,  based  on  existing  student  performance,  devised  linear  regres- 
sion models  for  posttest  performance  on  che  concepts,  given  cumnulatlve  course 
performance  up  to  and  including  the  presentation  of  each  concept.  After 
adjustments,  regression  models  that  predicted  posttest  performance  were  devised 
for  seven  points  in  the  program,  l.e. , after  presentation  of  each  of  seven 
concepts.  A student  could  be  given  remedial  work  after  finishing  a concept 
and  before  proceeding  in  the  course  if  his  posttest  performance  was  predicted 
to  be  sufficiently  low  by  the  relevant  regression  model.  These  models  in- 
cluded such  Independent  variables  as  percentages  of  correct  responses,  response 
latency,  and  performance  on  state  and  trait  anxiety  scales. 

Rivers  compared  the  posttest  performance  of  four  treatment  groups. 

The  first  group  received  remedial  material  as  indicated  by  the  regression 
models;  the  second  received  all  prepared  remedial  material;  the  third  received 
no  remedial  material;  and  the  fourth  received  remediation  at  the  option  of 
individual  students.  There  were  no  significant  differences  in  posttest  per- 
formance between  the  regression  model  group  and  the  all-remediation  group, 
but  both  these  groups  performed  significantly  better  on  the  posttest  than 
the  no-renediatlon  group  and  the  student-choice  group.  Notably,  the  regression 
model  group  averaged  less  time  in  the  course  than  the  all- remediation  group, 
but  this  difference  was  not  significant. 

Suppes,  Fletcher,  and  Zanottl  used  regression  models  of  achievement  derived 
for  individual  students  to  determine  tmlque  goals  for  individual  students 
and  the  amount  of  Instructional  intervention  required  by  individual  students 
to  reach  their  goals.  Suppes  et  al.  (1975a)  documented  a theory  of  student 
progress  from  which  was  derived  a stochastic  differential  equation  that  may 
be  characteristic  of  many  curriculums.  At  time  zero,  this  equation  takes 
the  following  simple  form: 

y(T)  - a + b T*^ 


8 


where  y(T)  represents  the  position  of  the  student  in  the  course  (Suppes  et  al. 
take  this  postion  to  be  grade  placement  measured  by  a standard,  paper-and- 
pencil  achievement  test);  T represents  the  amount  of  time  measured  by  minutes 
or  sessions  a student  may  spend  In  the  course;  and  a,  b,  and  c are  parameters 
of  the  model  uniquely  estimated  for  each  student. 

For  achievement  In  arithmetic  computation,  Suppes  et  al.  (1975a)  reported 
a mean  standard  error  of  estimate  of  .06  in  years  of  grade  placement,  with 
a range  of  .02  - .2j,  when  c was  set  to  a constant  value  for  all  students 
and  only  e and  b were  estimated  fo’-  Individuals.  Notably,  if  c is  constant, 
the  equation  is  intrinsically  linear  In  the  sense  of  Draper  and  Smith  (1966). 
If  c Is  allowed  to  vary,  the  equation  is  no  longer  Intrinsically  linear,  but 
it  can  be  effectively  estimated  by  the  'k>lub-Pereyra  algorithm  (1972). 

Obviously,  there  is  room  for  more  woik  in  the  application  of  regression 
models  to  achieve  predictive-control  in  CAI.  Although  these  models  are  well 
understood  and  easy  to  apply  and  modify,  they  are  sufficiently  powerful  to 
satisfy  many  more  applications  than  have  yet  been  attempted.  Although  Rivers 
used  both  anxiety  measures  and  within  course  measures,  the  number  of  person- 
ality and  aptitude  measures  that  might  be  entered  into  regression  models  of 
performance  is  large  and  worthy  of  investigation.  Cronbach  and  Snow  (1969) 
suggested  that  these  entering  measures  may  be  insufficient  for  prescribing 
instructional  intervention  by  themselves.  However,  in  the  context  of  CAI, 
which  can  dynamically  adjust  to  wlthln-course  performance  as  well  as  entering 
course  measures,  the  intuitive  promise  of  aptitude-treatment  interaction  may 
be  realized.  The  quantitative  theory  of  curriculum  progress  presented  by 
Suppes  et  al.  \;as  derived  from  qualitative  principles.  These  principles  and 
the  theory  presented  are  subject  to  empirical  scrutiny.  The  strength  of  this 
theory  is  its  generality;  it  can  be  directly  applied  to  a wide  variety  of 
CAI  in  a straigiitforward  manner  with  a minimum  of  empirical  tinkering. 

Automaton  Models  of  Performance 


What  conqjuters  do  and  what  effective  procedures  are  may  be  most  easily 
described  in  terms  of  automata  theory  (cf.  Minsky,  1967;  Moore,  1964),  An 
automaton  may  be  described  as  a device  with  a finite  number  of  internal  states 
which  change  in  response  to  letters  from  a finite  alphabet.  These  letters 
are  presented  one  at  a time  on  a tape  which  is  "read"  sequentially  by  the 
device.  It  seems  reasonable  to  turn  to  automata  theory  for  models  of  the 
learner  that  may  be  easily  represented  by  computer  and  that  may  be  used  in 
CAI.  Suppes  (e.g.,  1969)  and  Offir  (1973)  have  discussed  such  applications 
in  detail.  An  Impetus  for  these  applications  is  Suppes'  (1969)  demonstration 
of  an  asymptotic  isomorphism  between  a given  recognition  automaton  (Rabin, 
1964)  and  a derivable  stimulus-response  model.  In  making  this  demonstration, 
Suppes  identified  internal  states  of  automata  with  the  responses  of  organisms. 
Different  states  of  conditioning  of  the  organisms  were  represented  by  dif- 
ferent automata  rather  than  by  different  internal  states  of  automata.  Sets 
of  stimuli  that  might  be  presented  to  organisms  were  represented  naturally 
and  obviously  by  the  letters  of  the  finite  alphabet  recognized  by  the  auto- 
mata. 


9 


For  behavioral  data,  it  is  intuitively  desirable  to  Introduce  some  sto- 
chastic notions  into  automaton  models  of  organisms.  Suppes  (1969)  did  this 
by  turning  from  deterministic  automata  to  probabilistic  automata  in  devising 
a model  for  column  addition  of  Integers  in  which  the  integers  and  their  sums 
all  have  the  same  numbers  of  digits.  The  power  of  this  approach  can  be  seen 
in  contrast  with  models  based  on  regression.  Regression  models  are  applied 
to  grouped  data.  Thus,  no  matter  how  adequate  they  are  for  many  applications 
or  how  accurately  they  predict  performance,  they  do  not  postulate  the  specific 
algorithmic  processes  that  students  use  in  solving  problems.  On  the  other 
hand,  analysis  of  these  algorithms  is  a natural.  Integral  aspect  of  automaton 
models. 

Of  fir  (1973)  presented  another  analysis  of  CAI  performance  data  in  ele- 
mentary addition  based  on  an  application  of  stochastic  sequential  machines 
(Paz,  1971).  The  models  developed  by  Of fir  are  more  elegant  than  the  earlier 
models  devised  by  Suppes  in  that  the  algorithmic  processes  are  described 
more  parsimoniously  and  are  more  powerful  in  that  between — problem  depend- 
encies can  be  Included.  In  applying  these  models  to  CAI  performance  data 
from  two-integer  vertical  addition  problems,  Offir  was  also  able  to  avoid 
two  assumptions  made  by  Suppes.  These  assumptions  were  that  (1)  if  a carry 
error  is  executed,  the  probability  of  a correct  response  in  that  column  is 
negligible,  and  (2)  responses  in  different  columns  are  independent. 

Suppes  and  Flannery  (in  preparation,  but  see  Suppes,  1974  or  Fletcher 
and  Suppes,  1975)  used  register  machine  models  to  compare  the  performances 
of  deaf  and  hearing  students  on  a variety  of  elementary  arithmetic  problems 
presented  in  CAI.  The  results  of  this  study  derived  considerable  value  from 
the  precision  with  which  the  arithmetic  processes  used  by  the  learners  could 
be  modeled.  On  one  hand,  the  study  demonstrated  with  some  certainty  that 
objective  features  of  the  curriculum  (for  example,  whether  a vertical  addition 
problem  has  a carry  or  not)  were  processed  in  much  the  same  way  by  both  deaf 
and  hearing  children.  On  the  other  hand,  the  study  provided  knowledge  of 
the  arithmetic  processes  used  by  the  students  that  could  have  been  used  to 
individualize  their  instruction  <ind,  in  so  doing,  would  serve  as  precise  models 
of  the  learners.  In  any  case,  CAI  represents  a serious  hope  for  realizing 
the  potential  inherent  in  the  dynamic,  interactive  appllcatic.n  cf  these  au- 
tomaton models  to  Instruction. 

Models  as  Artificial  Intelligence 

A common  complaint  about  quantitative  models  is  that  tney  are  not  "cog- 
nitive.” This  complaint  may  stem  from  the  lack  of  complexity  in  the  behavior 
the  models  account  for,  and/or  from  the  lack  of  intuitive  bases  for  the 
parameters  of  the  models.  In  either  case,  it  may  be  reasonable  to  turn  to 
artificial  intelligence  for  more  satisfactory  models  of  the  learner. 

Although  they  have  not  been  addressed  directly  to  CAI,  the  claims  for 
artificial  Intelligence  hold  considerable  promise.  Newell  and  Simon  (1972) 
have  discussed  methods  such  as  generate  and  test,  heuristic  search,  and  matching 


10 


that  may  be  prototypal  in  Rener..l  problem  solving.  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon 
(e.g.,  1960)  worked  for  several  years  on  a general  problem-solving  computer 
program.  Final'  Ison  (e.g.,  1968;  1973)  and  Colby  (e.g.,  1967;  1973) 

have  developed  c - programs  to  model  human  belief  systems. 

In  discussing  . ailosophlcal  problems  of  artificial  intelligence, 

McCarthy  and  Hayes  (1969  Jistinguished  two  aspects  of  intelligence — an  epis- 
temological part  and  a iieuristic  part.  The  epistemological  part  represents, 
or  models,  the  world  so  that  problem  solutions  follow  from  what  is  represented. 
The  heuristic  part  actually  solves  the  problem  and  decides  courses  of  action. 
Most  recent  work  in  artificial  intelligence  has  been  concerned  with  the  epis- 
temological part  of  Intelligence.  Once  "reality"  is  adequately  represented, 
appropriate  problems  should  be  sufficiently  well  defined  to  facilitate  deri- 
vation of  effective  procedure?,  or  heuristics,  for  solving  them.  McCarthy 
and  Hayes  proceeded  to  distinguish  metaphysically  adequate  representations 
from  epistemologically  adequate  representations.  A representation  is  meta- 
physically adequate  if  it  does  not  contradict  those  aspects  of  reality  that 
are  of  interest.  It  is  epistemologically  adequate  if  it  does  not  contradict 
aspects  of  reality  that  are  known.  What  computers  cannot  do  may  hinge  on 
this  distinction.  For  instance,  Dreyfus’  (1972)  discussion  of  problems  in 
artificial  intelligence  seems  to  hinge  directly  on  the  distinction  of  meta- 
physically adequate  representations  from  epistemologically  adequate  repre- 
sentations. Dreyfus'  point  seems  to  be  that  there  is  no  effective  procedure 
for  distinguishing  what  we  need  to  know  in  some  context  from  what  we  know. 

This  point  gains  Importance  in  considering  artificial  intelligence  approaches 
to  CAI. 

Goldberg  (1973)  attempted  to  devise  a metaphysically  adequate  represen- 
tation by  basing  her  approach  to  CAI  on  formally  structured  subject  matter. 
Goldberg  developed  a proof- interpreter  for  CAI  in  mathematical  logic.  This 
interpreter  Imitated  the  adaptive  behavior  of  a human  tutor  by  supplying 
relevant  hints  to  students  and  by  encouraging  students  to  use  diverse  solution 
paths.  The  Interpreter  was  used  in  a CAI  system  that  permitted  a student 
to  specify  or  extend  the  axiomatic  theory  he  was  studying.  It  should  be 
emphasized  that  the  hints  and  diverse  solutions  indicated  by  the  program 
were  devised  dynamically  and  Interpretlvely ; they  were  not  pre-speclfled 
or  pre-stored.  Goldberg’s  model  of  the  learner,  then,  was  basically  a model 
of  the  subject  matter  that  represented  the  learner  by  keeping  track  of  the 
subject  matter  he  had  mastered.  In  another  sense,  however,  Goldberg’s  proof- 
interpreter  in  its  entirety  modeled  an  ideal  student-graduate  of  the  course 
and  represented  the  behavior  that  was  the  goal  of  the  instruction.  Notably, 
the  proof-interpreter  could  not  only  complete  the  proofs  required  of  students, 
but  it  could  also  take  a student’s  own  proof  steps  into  account  as  it  searched 
for  a solution.  In  this  sense,  the  proof- Interpreter  did  ix>t  represent  a 
single  idealized  student-graduate  but,  rather,  the  ideal  to  which  a particular 
student  might  aspire. 


11 


Tlje  llmicaclons  of  i'k>ldb<Jrf?’s  system  appear  to  have  been  along  the  lines 
of  epistemological  and  metaphysical  adequacy  discussed  earlier. 

Tu  what  extent,  then  does  the  computer'-based  tutor 
fail  to  perform  as  well  as  a human  teacher  might?  Tlie  answer 
to  this  question  is  based  on  the  ability  of  the  human  teacher 
to  leave  th'2  present  domain  of  discourse  and  to  borrow  freely 
from  general  sources  of  knowledge.  The  human  teacher  can 
let  the  student  ask  general  questions,  and  can  devise  illus- 
trations from  other  subject  areas  in  order  to  help  the  student 
understand  the  answer  to  his  query.  The  human  teacher  is 
not  as  restricted,  as  is  the  present  computer- tutor,  in 
formulating  the  tutorial  dialogue,  or  in  allowing  inter- 
ruptions from  the  student  which  could  be  useful  in  inferring 
problems  the  student  may  be  experiencing  (p.  255). 

The  strengths  of  the  system  are  powerful  and  obvious.  It  never  errs,  misleads, 
or  Ignores  progress  made  by  the  student;  it  is  infinitely  patient;  and  It 
serves  many  students  simultaneously. 

Several  other  CAl  projects  have  been  based  on  metaphysically  adequate 
models  of  formally  structured  subject  matter.  Brown,  Burton,  and  Bell  (1974) 
devised  a computer  representation  of  electronic  equipment  that  both  supported 
CAI  and  revealed  operating  characteristics  of  the  equipment  that  had  not  been 
anticipated  by  the  manufacturer.  Barr,  Beard,  and  Atkinson  (1975)  are  at- 
tempting to  develop  CAI  techniques  to  judge  the  semantic  correctness  of 
student-written  computer  prograir<s  based  on  a representation  of  the  BASIC 
computer  languaf-c.  Finally,  work  reported  by  Collins,  Wamock,  and  Passafiuroe 
(1974)  supports  mixed- initiative  CAI  based  on  a representation  of  South 
American  geography.  TJjis  type  of  CAI  is  called  mixed- initiative  because 
Inquiries  can  be  initiated  by  either  the  student  or  the  computer.  It  is 
reasonable  to  expect  Increasing  use  of  subject  matter  models  in  CAI.  Clearly 
one  way  to  devise  adequate  models  of  the  learner  is  to  start  with  an  adequate 
model  of  the  subject  matter  and  "shade  it  in"  as  an  individual  masters  given 
aspects  of  it.  A useful  review  of  some  of  this  work  was  presented  by  Self 
(1974). 

Another  approach  is  to  model  human  belief  structures  directly.  Colby, 
at  Stanford,  and  Abelson,  at  Yale,  have  been  investigating  coii^uter  simulations 
of  human  belief  systems  for  several  years.  Colby's  original  intention  was 
to  simulate  neurotic  belief  systems  and  the  change  they  might  undergo  during 
psychotherapy  (cf.  Colby,  1967).  This  resembles  what  we  would  like  to  see 
in  CAI.  A belief  system  in  both  Colby's  and  Abelson's  formulations  is  a 
set  of  Interdependent  concepts  which  could  reflect  the  status  of  a student 
and  the  changes  in  his  belief  system  or  concept  structure  that  might  result 
from  instructional  intervention.  Such  a system  could  simulate  the  effects 
of  instruction  on  a student  so  that  the  best  instructional  alternatives  might 
be  chosen  for  given  objectives.  As  Colby  has  pointed  out  (19737,  the  dif- 
ficulties of  these  tasks  have  limited  him  to  the  first,  epistemological  part  — 
modeling  the  belief  systems.  Evidently,  both  Colby  and  Abelson  have  suspended 


12 


work  on  the  heuristic  part  concerned  with  cii.uigcs  in  the  system.  Applications 
of  these  models  to  CAI  as,  periiaps,  criterion-referenced  representations  of 
the  learner  are  “till  desirable  and,  based  on  the  evidence,  possible.  Colby's 
success  in  modeling  a paranoid  belief  system  is  attested  by  a verification 
experiment  reported  by  Colby,  Hilf,  Weber,  and  Kraener  (1972).  In  a teat 
based  on  Turing's  (1950)  suggestions,  therapy  protocols  from  computer  models 
of  strong  and  weak  parar^ola  and  from  human  patients  exhibiting  paranoia  were 
compared  by  practicing  psychiatrists.  None  of  the  psychiatrists  were  aware 
that  a computer  model  of  paranoia  was  involved.  The  psychiatrists  rated  the 
strong  version  of  the  computer  model  significantly  higher  in  paranoia  than 
the  human  patients,  and  the  weak  version  of  the  computer  model  significantly 
lower  in  paranoia  than  the  human  patients. 

Abelscn  (cf.  1973)  has  taken  a more  theoretical  approach  to  the  problem, 
basing  his  teclmiques  on  work  in  computer  understanding  of  natural  language 
concepts  by  Shank  (e.g.,  1972).  This  work  holds  great  promise,  both  with 
respect  to  the  esplstemologlcal  and  metaphysical  adequacy  of  the  represen- 
tations it  may  produce  and  with  respect  to  the  heuristics  for  change  that 
should  result.  Abelson's  model  of  a human  belief  system,  the  Cold  Warrior, 
has  indicated  a problem  that  is  easy  to  understand  and  difficult  to  solve. 

As  he  has  said,  "there  can  be  no  veridical  simulation  of  a be..ief  system 
on  a small  scale  [1973,  p.  338]."  Given  all  that  must  be  represented  as 
discrete  facts  and  all  the  interrelations  between  these  facts,  a metaphys- 
ically adequate  representation  of  a human  belief  system  turns  out  to  be 
enormot^.  However,  a metaphysically  adequate  belief  system  for  an  instruc- 
tional subject  may  be  much  simpler  and  smaller  than  a paranoid  or  a Cold 
Warrior  belief  system.  As  evidenced  by  the  work  of  Goldberg  and  others  (e.g., 
Kimball,  1973),  the  existing  structure  of  instructional  subject  matter  may 
lead  to  metaphysically  adequate  computer  representations  that  lend  themselves 
to  relatively  facile  derivation  of  heuristics  for  the  dynamics  of  instruction. 

Overall,  there  appears  to  be  useful  progress  on  two  fronts:  (1)  devising 

models  of  subject  matter  that,  in  turn,  can  model  learners,  and  (2)  modeling 
belief  systems.  Additionally,  there  are  a few  attempts  to  directly  model 
human  cognition  in  leamr.ng.  >fast  of  this  activity  stems  from  the  early, 
influential  development  of  EPAM  (Elementary  Perceiver  and  Memorizer)  by  Simon 
and  Feigenbaum  (e.g.,  1964).  EPAM  is  a computer  program  designea  to  act  as 
a human  subject  in  rote  learning  experiments.  Its  success  has  been  substantial, 
and  its  behavior  has  been  shown  to  be  similar  to  that  of  human  subjects  in 
a variety  of  activities  (e.g.,  Gregg  end  Simon,  1967;  McLean  and  Gregg,  1967). 
EPAM  might  be  used  successfully  to  prescribe  instruction  for  learners  based 
on  its  "understanding"  of  their  learning  status,  but  an  application  of  this 
sort  has  not  been  attempted.  Hopefully,  efforts  of  this  sort  based  on  the 
new  models  of  human  cognition  are  forthcoming. 


13 


Final  Comaent 


It  should  be  emphasized  that  attempts  to  devise  adequate  models  of  the 
learner  are  necessarily  myopic.  A truly  adaptive  Instructional  system  must 
not  only  teach  but  learn.  Such  a system  must  embody  models,  procedures  for 
hypothesis  testing,  and  controls.  The  models  provide  formal  reprssencatlons 
of  the  subject  matter,  the  learner,  and  their  Interaction.  The  procedures 
for  hypotheses  testing  allow  the  system  to  draw  conclusions  concerning  the 
behavioral  characteristics  of  the  learner.  Finally,  the  controls  enable 
the  system  to  effect  desired  behavioral  changes  in  the  learner  to  accord 
with  specified  instructional  objectives.  A thorough  discussion  of  these 
issues  was  recently  prepared  by  Offlr  (1975). 


COVCUi*-:!*!-. 


Implicit  iii  this  review  is  tlie  assumption  that  explicit  representations 
of  the  learner  should  be  applied  in  CAI.  litstruction  does  not  merely  deposit 
information  on  blank  slates.  Students  comprise  complex,  dynamic  systems 
that  are  altered  by  instruction,  and  we  ne^-d  models  for  translating  these 
systems  to  the  effective  procedures  necessary  for  computer  representations. 
Presumably,  the  better  we  explicate  these  student/systeins , the  better  we 
can  devise,  modify,  evaluate,  and  individual i2e  instruction.  Iloreover.  the 
approaches  to  instruction  discussed  by  tnis  paper  use  to  advantage  the  power, 
speed,  and  accuracy  of  computers,  and,  in  doing  so,  illustrate  a unique  and 
valuable  capability  of  computers  applied  to  instruction. 

No  general  reconmendations  can  be  rade  concerning  tlie  approaches  reviewed 
bv  this  report.  Models  of  memory  support  optimization  of  instruction,  regres- 
sion models  promise  wide  applicability  and  the  inclusion  of  supplementary 
information  such  as  tliose  of  aptitude  and  personality  characteristics,  automaton 
models  support  direct  investigation  of  the  cognitive  processes  underlying  pro- 
blem solving  bv  learners,  and  artificial  intelligence  techniques  may  provide 
the  most  complete  representation  of  what  the  learner  knows  and  does  not  know. 
Vnich  of  these  approaches  should  be  pursued  will  depend  on  the  interests,  goals, 
and  capabilities  of  tl’.ose  investigating  them. 


REFERENCE-; 


Abeltion,  R.  P.  Computer  simulation  of  social  behavior.  In  G.  Llndzey 
and  E.  Aranson  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  Social  Psycitolo^y.  Vol.  2.  Research 
Methods.  Reading,  Mass.:  Addlson-Weslev,  1968, 

Abelson,  R.  P.  The  structure  of  belief  systems.  In  R.  S.  Shank  and  K.  M. 

Colby  (Eds.),  Computer  Models  of  Thought  and  Language.  San  Francisco: 

W.  H.  Freeman,  1973. 

Atkinson,  R.  C. , & Paulson,  J.  A.  An  approach  to  the  psychology  of  instruction. 
Psychological  Bulletin,  1972,  ^9-61. 

Barr,  A.,  Beard,  M. , & Atkinson,  R.  C.  A rationale  and  description  of  BASIC 
instructional  program.  Instructional  Science,  1975,  1-31. 

Brown,  J.  S.,  Burton,  R.  R. , & Bell,  A.  G.  SOPHIE-a  sophisticated  Instructional 
environment  - an  example  of  AI  in  CAI.  BBN  AI  Report  No.  12,  Bolt,  Beranek, 
and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  March  1974. 

Bush,  R.  R. , & Sternberg,  S.  H.  A single  operator  model.  In  R.  R.  Bush  and 
W.  K.  Estes  (Eds.),  Studies  in  Mathematical  Learning  Theory.  Stanford; 
Stanford  University  Press,  1959. 

Calfee,  R,  C.  The  role  of  mathematical  models  in  optimizing  instruction. 
Scientla;  Revue  Internationale  de  Synthese  Scientifique.  1970,  105, 

1-25. 


Colby,  K,  M.  Computer  simulation  of  change  in  personal  belief  systems. 
Behavioral  Science,  1967,  12,  248-253. 

Colby,  K.  M.  Simulations  of  belief  systems.  In  R.  C.  ShcUik  and  K.  M.  Colby 
(Eds.),  Computer  Models  of  Thought  and  Language.  San  Francisco:  W.  H. 
Freeman,  1973. 

Colby,  K.  M. , Kilf,  F.  D. , Weber,  S.,  & Kraemer,  H.  Turing- like  indistirguish- 
abllity  tests  for  the  validation  of  a computer  simulation  of  paranoid 
processes.  Artificial  Intelligence,  1972,  3^,  199-221. 

Collins,  A.,  Wamock,  E.  H. , & Passafiume,  J.  J.  Analysis  and  synthesis  of 
tutorial  dialogues.  Technical  Report  No.  2789,  Bolt,  Beranek,  and  Newman 
Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass.  02138,  March  1974. 

Cronbach,  L.  J. , & Snow,  R.  E.  Individual  differences  in  learning  ability 
as  a function  of  instructional  variables.  Final  Report,  U.  S.  Office  of 
Education,  Contract  No.  OEC  4-6-061269-1217,  Stanford  Center  for  Research 
and  Development  in  Teaching,  Stanford  University,  1969. 


Prtceding  page  Uaak 


17 


IL 


am 


Dear,  R.  E. , Sllberman,  H.  F. , Eatavan,  D.  P.,  & Atkinson,  R.  C.  An  optimal 
strategy  for  the  presentation  of  paired-associate  items.  Behavioral  Science, 
1967,  12,  1-13. 

Draper,  N.  R. , & Smith,  H.  Applied  Regression  Analysis.  New  York:  Wileys 

1966. 

Dreyfus,  H.  L.  V?hat  Computers  Can’t  Dot  A Critique  of  Artificial  Reason. 

New  York:  Harper  and  Row,  1972. 

Estes,  W.  K.  Learning  theory  and  the  new  mental  chemistry.  Psychological 
Review,  I960,  207-223. 

Fletcher,  J.  D. , & Jamison,  D.  T.  Computer-assisted  instruction  and  equality 
in  educational  achievement.  American  Educational  Research  Association 
Annual  Meeting,  March,  1973. 

Fletcher,  J.  D. , & Suppes,  P.  The  Stanford  project  on  computer-assisted 
instruction  for  hearing  impaired  students.  American  Annals  of  the  Deaf, 

1975,  in  press. 

Goldberg,  A.  Computer-assisted  instruction:  The  application  of  theorem- 

proving to  adaptive  response  analysis.  Technical  Report  No.  203,  Institute 
for  Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University,  May 
25,  1973. 

Golub,  G.  H. , & Pereyra,  V.  The  differentiation  of  pseudo-inverses  and  non- 
linear least  squares  whose  variables  separate.  Technical  Report  No.  261, 
Computer  Science  Department,  Stanford  University,  February,  1972. 

Greeno,  J.  G.  Paired-associate  learning  with  massed  and  distributed  repetition 
of  items.  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology,  1964,  286-295. 

Gregg,  L.  W. , & Simon,  H.  A.  An  information-processing  explanation  of  one- 
trial  and  incremental  learning.  Journal  of  Verbal  Learning  and  Verbal 
Behavior,  1967,  780-787. 

Groen,  G.  J. , & Atkinson,  R.  C.  Models  for  optimizing  the  learning  process. 
Psychological  Bulletin,  1966,  66,  309-320. 

Hull,  C.  L„  Principles  of  Behavior.  New  York:  Appleton-Century-Crofts, 

1943. 

Karush,  W. , & Dear,  R.  E.  Optimal  stimulus  presentation  strategy  for  a 
stimulus  sampling  model  of  learning.  Journal  of  Mathematical  Psychology, 
1966,  3,  19-47. 


18 


Kimball,  K.  B.  Self-optimiz computer- assisted  tutoring:  Tlieory  and 
practice.  Technical  Report  'lo.  206,  Institute  for  Mathematical  Studies 
in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  Universitv,  June  25,  1“73. 

Laubsch,  J.  H.  Optimal  item  allocation  in  computer-assisted  instruction. 
lAC  Journal,  1970,  3,  295-311. 

Lorton,  P.  V.  Con^uter-based  instruction  in  spelling:  An  investigation  of 

optimal  strategies  for  presenting  instructional  material.  Unpublished 
doctoral  dissertation,  Stanford  University,  1973. 

;iatheson,  J.  E.  Optimal  teaching  strategies  derived  from  mathematical 
learning  models.  Technical  Report  lio.  CCS-2,  Institute  in  Engineering- 
Economic  Systems,  Stanford  University,  1964. 

McCarthy,  J.,  & Hayes,  P.  Some  philosophical  problems  from  the  standpoint 
of  artificial  intelligence.  In  Macliine  Intelligence  4.  Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh  University  Press,  1969. 

McLean,  U.  S. , & Gregg,  L.  W.  Effects  of  induced  chunking  on  temporal 
aspects  of  serial  recitation.  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology,  1967, 
74,  455-459. 

:iinsky,  M.  Computation:  Finite  and  Infinite  Maclaines.  Englewood  Cliffs, 

N.  j.:  Prentice-Hall,  1967. 

;ioore,  E.  F.  Sequential  :!achines:  Selected  Papers.  Reading,  Mass: 

Addison-Wesley , 1964. 

•Jewell,  A.,  Shaw,  J.  C.,  & Simon,  H.  A.  A variety  of  intelligent  learning 
in  a general  problem  solver.  In  Information  Processing:  Proceedings  of 

the  International  Conference  on  Inforraatxon  Processing.  Paris:  UNESCO, 

im 


Newel],  A.,  & Simon,  H.  A.  Human  Problem  Solving.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.  J. : 
Prentice-Hall,  1972. 

Norman,  M.  K.  Incremental  learning  on  random  trials.  Journal  of  Mathematical 
Psychology,  1964,  2,  336-350. 

Of  fir,  J.  D.  Automaton  models  of  performance.  Journal  of  Mathanatlcal 
Psychology,  1973,  10,  353-363. 

of  fir,  J.  D.  Supervised,  adaptive  man-machine  systems  with  applications  to 
computer-assisted  instruction.  Navy  Personnel  Research  and  Development 
Center,  San  Diego,  California.  In  p:ess,  1975. 


Paulson,  J.  A.  An  ev2luation  of  instructional  strategies  in  a simple  learn- 
ing situation.  Technical  Report  No.  209,  Institute  for  Mathematical 
Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University,  July  30,  1973. 

Paz,  A.  Introduction  to  Probabilistic  Automata.  New  York:  Academic  Press, 

1971. 

Rabin,  M.  Probabilistic  automata.  In  E.  F.  Moore  (Ed.),  Sequential  Machines: 
Selected  Papers.  Reading,  Mass.:  Addison-Wesley,  1964. 

Rivers,  L.  Development  and  assessment  of  an  adaptive  strategy  utilizing 
regression  analysis  techniques  for  the  presentation  of  instruction  via 
computer.  Technical  Report  No.  27,  Computer  Assisted  Instruction  Center, 
Florida  State  University,  August  30,  1972. 

Rumeihart,  D.  E.  The  effects  of  interpresentation  intervals  on  performance 
in  a continuous  paired-associate  task.  Technical  Report  No.  115,  Institute 
for  Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University, 

August  11,  1967. 

Searle,  B.  W. , Lorton,  P.  V.,  & Suppes,  P,  Structural  variables  affecting 
CAI  pe»-fomance  on  arithmetic  word  problems  of  disadvantaged  and  deaf 
students.  Technical  Report  No.  213,  Institute  for  Mathematical  Studies  in 
the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University,  October  31,  1973. 

Self,  J.  A.  Student  models  in  computer-aided  instruction.  International 
Journal  of  Man-Machine  Studies,  1974,  261-276. 

Shank,  R.  C.  Conceptual  dependency:  A theory  of  natural  language  under- 
standing. Cognitive  Psychology,  1972,  552-631, 

Simon,  H.  A. , & Feigenbaum,  E.  An  information  processing  theory  of  some 

effects  of  similarity,  familiarization,  and  meaningfulness  in  verbal  learning. 
Journal  of  Verbal  Learning  and  Verbal  Behavior,  1964,  385-396. 

Suppes,  P,  Problems  of  optimization  in  learning  a list  of  simple  items. 

In  M.  W.  Shelly  and  G.  L.  Bryan  (Eds.),  Human  Judgments  and  Optimality. 

New  York:  Wiley,  1964. 

Suppes,  P.  Stlm  lus-response  theory  of  finite  autom'’’' Journal  of 
Mathematical  Psychology,  1969,  327-355. 

Suppes,  P.  A survey  of  cognition  in  handicapped  children.  Review  of 
Educational  Research,  1974,  44,  145-176. 

Suppes,  P.,  Fletcher,  J.  D. , & Zanottl,  M.  Models  of  individual  trajectories 
in  computer-as  Isted  instruction  for  deaf  students.  Journal  of  Educational 
Psychology,  1975a,  in  press. 


20 


Suppes,  P. , Fletcher,  J.  D. , & Zanotti,  K.  Performance  models  of  American 
Indian  students  on  computer- assisted  Instruction  in  elementary  mathematics. 
Instructional  Science,  1975,  303-313, b. 

Suppes,  P.,  Fletcher,  J.  D. , Zanotti,  M. , Lorton,  P.  V.,  & Searle,  B.  W. 
Evaluation  of  computer-assisted  Instruction  in  elementary  mathematics  for 
hearing-impaired  students.  Technical  Report  No.  200,  Institute  for 
Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University,  March  17, 
1973. 

Turing,  A.  M.  On  computable  numbers,  with  an  application  to  the  Entscheidungs- 
problem.  Proceedings  of  the  London  Mathematical  Society,  (series  2),  1936, 
230-265. 

Turing,  A.  M.  Computing  machinery  and  intelligence.  Mind,  1950,  433-450. 


21 


