AD-AIOO  TftS 

UNCLASSIFIED 


AIR  FORCE  INST  OF  TECH  URSOHT-FArtCRSON  AF0  ON  SCHOO— ETC  F/0  4/5 
THE  OEVCLORNENT  OF  A  TVO-OXMENStONAL  MULTIELECTROOE  ARRAT  FOR  V— ETCf 
KC  SO  S  H  FITESCRALO 

AFlT/SC/BE/SOO-tl  ml 


> 

a. 

o 

o 


SJI? 

jCaL 

JHWUI' 

laHMd.: 


DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  AIR  FORCE 
AIR  UNIVERSITY  (ATC) 

AIR  FORCE  INSTITUTE  OF  TECHNOLOGY 

- -DTIC 

Wripht.Pnt»T«on  Air  Force  Base,  Ohio  ^  ■  ■ 


JMSTRIBUnON  STATEMBWT  A 

Approv«d  ioi  public  leleoMl 

Distribution  Uoiimited 


81  6 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  A  TWO-DIMENSIONAL 
MULTIELECTRODE  ARRAY  FOR  VISUAL  PERCEPTION 
RESEARCH  IN  THE  MA>D1ALIAN  BR(MN 
THESIS 

AFIT/GE/BE/80D-21  Gary  H.  Fitzgerald 

Capt  USAF 


DTIC 


ELECTE 

JUL  1  1981 


F 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


Ain7t;i;/r,i;/80u-2i 


THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  A  TWO-DIMENSIONAI.  MULTIELECTRODE  ARRAY 
FOR  VISUAL  PERCEPTION  RESEARCH  IN  TOE  :iAMMALI/vN  BRAIN  ■ 

THESIS  . 


Presented  to  the  Faculty  of  the  School  of  Engineering 
of  the  Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology 
Air  University 

in  Partial  Fulfillment  of  the 
Requirements  for  the  Degree  of 
Master  of  Science 


i 

\ 

r 


by 

Gary  H.  Fitzgerald,  B.S. 

Capt  USAF 

Graduate  Electrical  Engineering 
JJ  Dec«i*e*  »80 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


/ 


Preface 


This  thesis  develops  a  novel  muJ tielectrode  array  for  neurological 
research  and  suggests  a  research  method  that  may  Improve  our  knowledge 
of  the  human  visual  system.  Motivation  for  such  a  project  lies  in  two 
fundamental  areas. 

The  first  area  concerns  the  development  of  visual  pattern  recognition 
devices.  Years  of  pattern  recognition  research  has  resulted  in  marginal 
success.  We  can  build  commercially  useful  machines  that  read  the  printed 
page  if  the  print  is  precisely  controlled.  But  we  have  had  little  success 
with  a  device  that  can  select  objects  from  a  complex  visual  scene.  Such 
a  machine  could  revolutionize  military  reconnaissance  and  weapons  guidance. 
Of  course,  the  human  brain  routinely  accomplishes  this  task  with  seeming 
ease.  If  we  could  understand  and  emulate  the  algorithms  used  by  the  brain, 
the  visual  pattern  recognition  problem  might  be  solved.  Understanding  the 
human  visual  perception  mechanism  is  the  second  motivation  for  this  thesis. 

The  human  visual  system  is  a  complex  and  mysterious  device.  It 
can,  with  great  ease,  read  the  printed  or  handwritten  word  in  a  number 
of  idiosyncratic  forms.  Even  though  much  is  known  about  the  anatomy 
of  the  system,  the  algorithms  used  for  human  visual  pattern  perception 
remain  unknown.  Medical  researchers  feel  that  if  we  can  properly 
identify  the  workings  of  the  human  visual  system,  we  might  better 
understand  other  functions  of  the  human  neurological  system.  Such 
knowledge  could  lead  to  solutions  for  many  problems  such  as  blindness. 

This  investigation  is  concerned  with  developing  a  multielectrode 
array  that  may  help  solve  problems  in  these  seemingly  unrelated  areas: 
pattern  recognition  and  human  neurology.  The  array  is  designed  to  obtain 


11 


lire  i;,v,.i:ied  data  from  tlie  visual  cortex  of  a  living  mammalian  brain. 

The  data  should  help  identify  the  transfer  functions  used  during  the 
visual  perception  process.  I  do  not  expect  any  easy  or  quick  solutions, 
but  1  believe  that  the  multielectrode  array  will  provide  an  important 
tool  to  Increase  the  knowledge  of  human  visual  perception. 

I  gratefully  acknowledge  the  advise  and  encouragement  provided  by 
Dr.  Kabrisky,  Ma j .  Borky,  and  Dr.  Wolaver  during  this  research.  I  am 
also  indebted  to  Lt.  Joseph  Tatman  for  his  design  efforts  on  the 
multielectrode  array.  The  use  of  the  Air  Force  Avionics  Laboratory's 
Integrated  Circuit  Facility  was  fundamental  to  this  research  project, 
and  greatly  appreciated. 

Gary  H.  Fitzgerald 


Hi 


Coiitpn';s 

Page 

Preface . ii 

List  of  Figures . vii 

List  of  Tables . viil 

Abstract . ix 

I  Introduction  .  1 

Significance  .  1 

Background  .  3 

Present  Knowledge  of  the  Visual  Perception  System  .  3 

Past  Research  With  Recording  Electrodes  .  5 

Problem  .  9 

Approach . 10 

Scope . 11 

Sequence  of  Presentation  .  12 

II  Biological  Model  and  Theory  of  Opei-ation . 13 

Introduction  .  13 

The  Neuron . 14 

Anatomy  and  Function  of  the  Visual  Pathway  .  18 

Anatomy  of  the  Visual  Pathway . 18 

The  Retinae . 20 

The  Lateral  Geniculate  Body . 22 

The  Visual  Cortex  . 22 

Cortical  Interconnections  .  25 

The  Basic  Computing  Element  .  26 

Physiological  Research  of  the  Visual  System  .  28 

Chemical  Neuroresearch  .  . . 28 

Bioelectric  Neuroresearch  .  30 

Psychological  Neuroresearch  .  32 

Kabrisky's  Theory  of  Visual  Perception  .  37 

A  Method  to  Test  Kabrisky's  Theory . -  38 

III  Multielectrode  Array  Design  and  Fabrication  .  40 

Introduction  .  40 

Multielectrode  Array  Design  .  40 

Overview . 40 

Interelectrode  Spacing  .  42 

Array  Size . .  .  42 

Contact  Resistance  .  42 

Multiplexing  Requirements  .  44 

The  Insulation  Layer  .  47 


iv 


f 


Solution  of  the  Three  Fabrication  Problems  .  A7 

Mu  1 tielectrodc  Array  Fabrication .  51 

Results  of  Electrical  Tests  .  54 

Design  Improvements  .  58 

IV  Support  Electronics  .  60 

Introduction  .  60 

System  Descriptions  .  61 

Record  Mode .  61 

Playback  Mode .  65 

Drive  Circuitry .  65 

V  In  Vitro  Multielectrode  Array  Evaluation  .  73 

Introduction  .  73 

Static  Pinch-off  Tests  .  74 

Test  Set-up .  74 

Test  Procedure .  74 

Test  Results .  75 

Crosstalk  Tests  .  76 

Test  Set-up .  76 

Test  Procedure .  77 

Test  Results .  77 

Ambient  Noise  Tests  .  77 

Test  Set-up .  77 

Test  Procedure .  78 

Test  Results .  78 

Lifetime  Tests  .  79 

Test  Set-up . 79 

Test  Procedure .  79 

Test  Results .  80 

Multiplexing  Tests  .  82 

Test  Set-up  .  .....  82 

Test  Procedure .  83 

Test  Results  . .  83 

Electrode  Impedance  Tests  .  86 

Test  Set-up .  86 

Test  Procedure .  86 

Test  Results .  86 

VI  In  Vivo  Multielectrode  Array  Evaluation  .  90 

Introduction  .  90 

Test  Equipment  Set-up  .  91 

Implant  Protocol  .  94 

Baseline  Test  Procedures  .  95 

Data  Acquisition  Procedures  .  97 

Data  Processing  and  Analysis .  99 


V 


VII  Conclusions  and  Recommendations  .  107 

Introduction  .  107 

Conclusions  . 107 

Recommendations  .  109 

Bibliography  .  Ill 

Appendix  A:  Initial  Fabrication  Procedure  .  114 

Appendix  B:  Revised  Process  Schedule  .  118 


vl 


I 


List  F i ^’iircs 


Figure  Page 

1  The  Neuron . 16 

2  The  Visual  Pathways . 19 

3  Visual  Field  Arrangement  .  21 

4  The  Visual  Cortex . 24 

5  The  Basic  Computing  Elements  .  27 

6  The  Kanizsa  Triangle  Illusion  .  34 

7  Mueller-Lyer 's  Illusion  .  36 

8  The  Multielectrode  Array  .  41 

9  Multielectrode  Array  Circuit  Diagram  .  46 

10  Lead  Attachment  to  the  Array . 53 

11  JFET  Curve  Tracer  Characteristics  .  56 

12  Record  System  Block  Diagram  .  62 

13  Timing  and  Voltage  Level  Diagram  .  64 

14  Playback  System  Block  Diagram  .  66 

15  Drive  Circuit  and  Array . 67 

16  JFET  Switch  Equivalent  Circuit  .  71 

17  Crosstalk  in  CVD  Passivated  Device . 81 

18  Electrode  Impedance  Test  Set-up  .  87 

19  Electrode  Impedance  .  88 

20  In  Vivo  Test  Set-up . 92 

A-1  The  Fabrication  Process  Sequence  .  120 

A-2  Cross  Section  of  the  JFET  Structure . 124 


vli 


List  of  Tabl 


I 


Table 

1  Calculated  electrode  Impedances 


it 


I 


vlii 


Abstract 


A  review  of  previous  mammalian  visual  system  neurological  and 
psychological  research  is  presented.  Results  of  previous  research 
motivated  the  development  of  a  device  that  would  record  fine  grained 
elccti'ocncephalic  data  from  the  surface  of  a  living  mammalia'^  cortex. 

A  multiplexing  multiclectrode  array  has  been  developed  and  tested 
for  this  purpose.  The  device  consists  of  a  four  by  four  array  of 
electrodes  and  sixteen  junction  field  effect  transistors  fabricated  on  a 
silicon  substrate  using  integrated  circuit  manufacturing  techniques.  In 
vitro  tests  indicated  the  device  is  capable  of  detecting  and  multiplexing 
fine  grained  cortical  signals.  Technical  problems  with  the  passivation 
material  precluded  in  vivo  evaluation.  A  solution  to  this  problem  is 
presented  and  an  in  vivo  test  procedure  recommended. 


lx 


dkvhi.opmknt  of  a  tko-dimfnsiokal  multi ei.ectrodf.  arilw 


FOR  VISUAL  PERCEPTION  RESEARCH  IN  THE  N/vIC^ALIAN  BRAIN 


I.  Introduction 


Significance 

Many  years  of  neurological  research  have  provided  considerable 
information  concerning  the  structure  of  the  central  nervous  system. 

Yet  little  is  known  about  the  perceptual  process  of  the  mai^alian  brain. 

In  particular,  the  methods  used  by  the  human  brain  to  recognize  handwriting 
and  complex  visual  scenes  are  completely  unknown.  This  thesis  is  signifi¬ 
cant  because  it  develops  an  integrated  circuit  device  that  can  access 
fine  grained  electroencephalic  data  from  the  visual  cortex.  These  data 
may  improve  the  understanding  of  the  visual  perception  process.  Three 
fundamental  advantages  would  result  from  this  improved  understanding. 

First,  a  machine  may  be  developed  that  emulates  the  mammalian  visual 
pattern  recognition  process.  A  machine  that  could  identify  specific  objects 
in  a  complex  visual  scene  has  considerable  military  and  civilian  utility. 
Military  reconnaissance  is  an  application  area  of  particular  interest. 
Quality  cameras,  high  altitude  reconnaissance  aircraft  and  reconnaissance 
satellites  provide  the  equipment  necessary  for  effective  photographic 
intelligence  gathering.  But,  in  a  scenario  of  high-speed  mechanized 
conventional  warfare,  time  required  to  process  the  miles  of  photographic 
film  can  render  the  intelligence  information  useless.  Data  from  weather  and 
earth  resources  satellites  pose  a  similar  problem  for  the  civilian 
community.  Computer  models  of  the  human  visual  system  might  solve  this 
problem  by  providing  an  efficient,  automatic  pattern  recognition  system. 


1 


f 


liu; i  t'ii.sed  knowlcdyi'  of  the  visual  perception  process  would  improve 
un,'  -rstanding  of  brain  function  in  general.  The  reason  for  such  conjecture 
is  tile  invariance  of  the  cortical  structure  despite  wide  differences 
in  typos  of  data  it  processes  (Ref  1:21).  The  outermost  layer  of  the 
mammalian  brain,  called  the  cortex,  processes  visual,  auditory  and  somes- 
thetic  information.  The  areas  where  these  data  are  processed  have  been 
well  mapped.  Microscopic  examination  of  the  cortex  shows  that  each  processing 
area  consists  of  six  layers  of  nerve  cells  or  neurons.  The  individual 
layers  vary  in  thickness  and  the  total  cortical  thickness  also  varies 
about  50  percent,  but  the  basic  six  layered  structure  is  invariant  between 
processing  areas.  Connections  between  neurons  are  also  invariant. 

Such  invariance  could  be  compared  to  the  structure  of  a  digital  computer. 

The  computer  contains  logic  elements  that  produce  specific  responses  to 
given  inputs.  For  example,  a  binary  adder's  output  is  strictly  a  function 
of  the  input  states.  It  does  not  matter  that  one  set  of  inputs  could  model 
the  function  of  an  aircraft's  flight  dynamics  while  another  set  of 
inputs  might  represent  the  response  of  a  highway  system  to  changing 
traffic  loads.  Similarly,  a  processing  area  in  the  cortex  produces  a 
specific  output  based  on  its  input  data,  no  matter  what  the  source  of 
these  data.  Thus,  increased  knowledge  of  the  visual  pattern  recognition 
process  should  enhance  understanding  of  the  function  of  other  areas  in 
the  brain. 

The  third  advantage  of  improved  knowledge  of  the  visual  perception 
process  concerns  developing  visual  prosthetic  devices  for  the  blind. 

Until  1967,  an  individual  with  inoperative  eyes  or  optic  nerves  was  con¬ 
sidered  irreversibly  blind.  Research  by  Brindley  (Ref  2),  Donaldson  (Ref  3), 


2 


a;Ki  Institute  for  liiomodical  Knglneer Ing,  University  of  L't.i!.  ('  ■ 

inU.  iuates  that  a  prosthetic  device  can  be  developed  to  provide  sort-  ! 
to  th.is  class  of  blind  individuals.  Experiments  on  blind  volunteer 
show  that  visual  sensations  are  perceived  when  current  pulses  are  applies 
to  el.'ctrodes  in  contact  with  the  visual  area  of  the  brain.  Increaseij 
knowledge  of  the  visual  system  could  improve  the  quality  of  the  prosthetic 
device.  In  addition,  the  multielectrode  array  developed  by  this  tliesis 
could  be  the  prototype  of  a  prosthetic  device  that  would  significantly 
improve  the  detail  of  the  perceived  image  by  increasing  the  number  of 
cortical  contact  points  per  unit  area  as  well  as  the  total  number  of 
contact  points. 

Background 

Present  Knowledge  of  the  Visual  Perception  System.  Despite  considerabl r 
neurological  research,  the  methods  used  by  the  visual  cortex  for  processing 
perceptual  information  remain  unknown.  The  human  visual  system  can,  with 
reasonable  ease,  decipher  ideosyncratic  hand  writing,  identify  a  familiar 
face  in  a  crowd,  or  pick  out  a  specific  object  from  a  cluttered  visual 
scene.  These  activities  are  known  to  be  very  difficult  pattern  recognition 
problems  and  designers  have  had  little  success  in  doing  these  things  with 
very  large  computers.  Much  is  known  about  the  interconnections  between 
the  retinae  and  the  primary  visual  cortex,  but  knowledge  of  the  necessary, 
complex  interactions  between  elements  in  the  two  dimensional  visual  field 
is  very  limited. 

Anatomical  research  provides  rather  detailed  Interconnection  diagrams 
of  the  retinae,  optic  nerve  and  the  primary  visual  cortical  area.  The  inter¬ 
ested  reader  can  refer  to  Figures  2,  3,  and  A  for  information  concerning 


3 


i  .iL  i' rconnoc  t  ions .  It  is  known  that  the  image  impressed  on  tin-  r.im.i 
is  li.i:  iconiorphically  mapped  to  the  primary  visual  cortex  so  that  ri:  l,i  [  i  vi' 
positions  oi  objects  in  ttic  visual  field  are  retained.  Local  cortical 
connections  allow  interaction  through  the  thickness  of  the  cortex,  but 
connec.  _ions  between  individual  visual  data  elements  are  almost  nonexistent. 

For  this  reason,  it  is  believed  that  pattern  recognition  cannot  occur  in  the 
primary  visual  cortex.  This  theory  is  supported  by  physiological  research 
where  points  on  the  surface  of  the  primary  visual  cortex  are  stimulated 
and  the  resulting  response  is  observed.  Such  research  shows  that  stimulation 
of  the  primary  visual  cortex  yields  a  visual  sensation  of  small  points  of 
light  called  phosphenes.  The  relative  position  of  the  phosphenes  are 
retained  and  complex  patterns  are  not  perceived  by  the  human  subject.  These 
results  indicate  that  pattern  recognition  of  complex  visual  data  occur 
beyond  the  primary  visual  cortex. 

Connections  between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortical  areas 
are  very  complex  and  detailed,  complete  information  concerning  these 
interconnects  is  nonexistent.  It  is  known,  however,  that  each  point  on  the 
primary  visual  cortex  connects  to  many  points  on  the  secondary  visual  cortex. 
The  complex  interconnects  allow,  for  the  first  time  in  the  processing  of  visual 
information,  interaction  between  elements  in  the  two  dimensional  visual 
field.  It  is  possible  that  pattern  recognition  begins  either  at  the  inter¬ 
connects  between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex  or  in  the 
secondary  visual  cortex  itself.  When  the  secondary  visual  cortex  is 
electrically  stimulated,  the  subject  reports  seeing  lines,  or  other  more 
complex  shapes.  This  result  suggests  that  some  pattern  recognition  has 
occured . 


4 


In  ;'u::!iiiury ,  present  knowledge  of  the  human  visual  system  suggt  si  , 
that  visual  perception  begins  with  the  interconnections  between  tlie  pri::;.iry 
and  secondary  visual  cortical  areas.  Extending  the  knowledge  of  this  process 
requires  additional  research  into  these  complex  cortico-cortical  connections. 
Two  poosible  approaches  to  such  research  are  suggested  by  previous 
successful  neurological  studies.  The  first  approach  is  to  develop  a 
detailed  anatomical  wiring  diagram  of  each  neuron  in  the  primary  and 
secondary  visual  cortex.  Total  neural  population  in  the  primary  visual 

g 

cortex  is  about  10  (Ref  5:150).  Since  each  neuron  from  the  primary  visual 
cortex  connects  to  several  neurons  in  the  secondary  visual  cortex  (a  very 

9 

conservative  estimate  is  ten),  there  are  at  least  10  interconnections. 

If  one  could  map  one  Interconnection  per  second,  the  job  would  be  completed 
in  just  over  30  years.  Such  a  research  approach  does  not  appear  promising. 

An  alternate  method  is  to  map  the  data  flow  instead  of  the  anatomical 
structure.  This  mapping  could  be  accomplished  by  simultaneously  recording 
electrical  signals  from  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex  so  that  a 
transfer  function  could  be  determined.  Recording  electrical  signals 
requires  a  specialized  electrode.  The  following  paragraphs  describe  the 
past  research  with  such  electrodes. 

Past  Research  With  Recording  Electrodes .  Increasing  the  knowledge 
of  cortico-cortical  connections  requires  some  form  of  electrode  so  that 
electroencephalic  data  can  be  recorded.  Past  researchers  have  used  three 
major  types  of  electrodes;  the  single  cell  microelectrode,  non-invasive 
scalp  electrodes,  and  the  multielectrode  array. 

Single  cell  microelectrodes  are  generally  made  from  tungsten  or  platinum 
alloy  wires,  or  glass  micropipette  tubes  which  have  been  pulled  to  form 


I 


5 


a  tip  dlaniftcr  of  about  one  micron.  The  microelectrode  Is  inserted  , 
the  brain  tissue  so  that  the  tip  of  the  probe  is  inside  a  single  nerve 
cell.  Electrical  signals  from  single  nerve  cells  are  recorded  and  /zed 

by  comparing  cell  activity  with  some  form  of  input  stimulus.  Hubei  and 
Weisel  researched  the  anesthetized  cat's  visual  cortex  (Ref  6)  with  this 
type  of  microelectrode.  They  theorize  that  nerve  cells  are  sensitive 
to  specific  line  orientations  within  certain  visual  field  areas  but  there 
is  much  controversy  as  to  the  validity  of  their  results.  One  reason  for 
the  controversy  is  the  assumption  that  the  coordinated  behavior  of  an 
aggregate  of  neurons  (say,  those  of  the  primary  visual  cortex)  can  be 
determined  by  observing  the  activity  of  numerous  neurons,  one  at  a  time, 
and  assuming  that  the  aggregate  performance  can  be  reliably  inferred 
from  their  individual  performances.  One  could  compare  this  approach  to 
that  of  determining  a  computer’s  function  by  observing  the  operation  of 
numerous  transistors,  one  at  a  time.  To  determine  the  function  of  the 
computer,  many  transistors  must  be  observed  simultaneously.  TTie  same  is 
true  for  the  primary  visual  cortex  and  its  neurons.  Some  research  has 
been  accomplished  that  records  the  function  of  large  groups  of  brain  cells. 

The  scalp  electrode  electroencephalograms  (EEGs)  take  advantage  of 
the  neuronal  electrical  activity  by  recording  electrical  activity  of  neuron 
groups  produced  on  the  surface  of  the  scalp.  The  recordings  can  provide 
important  medical  diagnostic  information  but  they  appear  to  lack  sufficient 
detail  to  determine  how  the  brain  processes  information.  Brain  function 
research  with  scalp  electrode  EEGs  can  be  compared  to  examining  the  operation 
of  a  large  computer  by  recording  electrical  activity  on  the  surface  of  its 
cabinets.  Since  the  early  1960's,  signal  averaging  has  been  used  to  increase 
the  ability  to  detect  more  fine  grained  electrical  signals  from  tlie 


6 


visri;  r'rte:-;  v;ith  scalp  electrodes.  This  experimental  technique,  called 
the  visual  evoked  response  (VER)  method,  allows  closely  spaced  scalp 
electrodes  to  define  where  signals  originate  in  the  visual  cortex.  The 
VER  expi rimenter  records  EEG  signals  while  stimulating  the  visual  system 
with  a  sjjecific  input.  After  numerous  recordings  are  made,  the  EEGs  are 
ensemble  averaged  as  a  function  of  time  from  stimulus  onset.  Since  noise 
is  uncorrelated  and  the  evoked  response  is  correlated,  the  averaging 
process  reduces  the  noise  level  and  Increases  the  signal  level.  Thus,  the 
resulting  ensemble  average  represents  an  enhanced  visual  evoked  response. 
Such  research  has  Identified  locations  of  the  VER  on  the  cortical  surface 
(Ref  7:17).  Yet,  VER  research  does  not  enhance  our  knowledge  of  the  visual 
pattern  perception  process.  It  appears  that  investigation  of  the  visual 
perception  process  requires  electroencephalic  data  more  fine  grained  than 
the  VER,  but  more  coarse  than  the  individual  cell  microelectrode.  The 
following  paragraphs  describe  research  in  this  area. 

Historically,  multielectrode  arrays  were  fabricated  from  fine  wire 
bundles.  DeMott  used  wire  bundles  for  auditory  and  visual  evoked  activity 
research  (Ref  8) .  Simmons  developed  an  auditory  prosthetic  device  which 
consisted  of  a  bundle  of  six  fine  wires  (Ref  9). 

These  wire  bundle  arrays  have  several  serious  disadvantages.  It  is 
difficult  to  develop  arrays  which  are  reproducible  in  their  mechanical  and 
electrical  properties  and  which  maintain  their  mechanical  and  electrical 
stability  during  insertion.  Electrical  impedance  depends  on  the  surface 
area  of  the  exposed  tip,  which  for  wire  electrodes,  depends  on  how 
reproducibly  the  insulation  can  be  removed.  Relative  position  of  the  fine 
wires  is  also  very  difficult  to  maintain.  Finally,  electrode  termination 
to  amplifiers  and  recording  devices  becomes  increasingly  difficult 


as  array  size  increases. 


In  spite  of  these  difficulties,  DeMott  developed  and  used  a  rat:,  i 
large  wire  bundle  array  to  record  electrical  activity  on  the  primary  vi  iil 
cortex  of  cats,  racoons,  and  squirrel  monkeys.  The  array  consisted 
400  stainless  steel  wires  spaced  0.25  mm  apart,  imbedded  in  plastic  so 
that  the  array  formed  a  flat  contact  surface  of  about  4  by  7  mm.  f.ich 
wire  was  terminated  to  an  RC  coupled  amplifier  which  was  used  to  drive  a 
neon  bulb.  The  neon  bulb's  intensity  represented  the  level  of  electrical 
activity  for  its  respective  electrode.  His  objective  was  to  demonstrate 
that  nothing  worth  recording  existed  on  such  a  fine  spatial  scale.  Instead, 
he  discovered  that  the  primary  sensory  areas  of  the  cortex  produced  detailed 
electrical  responses  to  visual  stimulus.  The  electrical  activity  was 
distinguished  by  steep  voltage  gradients  and  excellent  repeatability.  It  was 
largely  independent  of  background  cortical  activity.  Such  results 
support  the  theory  that  fine  grained  electroencephalic  data  may  be  significant 
to  determining  how  the  cortex  processes  visual  information.  Unfortunately, 
the  wire  bundle  arrays  are  difficult  to  fabricate  and  implant.  However,  the 
semiconductor  Industry  routinely  produces  devices  with  reproducible  electrical 
and  physical  properties.  For  this  reason,  photolithographic  technology 
was  considered  for  the  solution  to  the  multielectrode  array  fabrication 
problem. 

Wise  (Ref  10)  developed  the  first  biological  multielectrode  array  using 
photolithographic  techniques.  He  used  gold  conductors  on  silicon  substrates 
and  included  a  source  follower  FET  amplifier  for  each  electrode.  This 
approach  solved  the  mechanical  and  electrical  problems  associated  with  wire 
bundle  arrays,  but  did  not  address  the  problem  of  terminating  numerous  wires 
to  external  recording  equipment.  Research  by  Tatman  (Ref  11)  solved  this 
problem. 


8 


f 


Tatman  developed  a  novel  matrix  multielectrode  array.  This  device 
time  multiplexes  the  signals  on  each  column  of  electrodes  down  to  a  sinyle 
wire.  Thus,  an  array  of  400  electrodes  requires  only  40  connecting  wires. 

This  approach  enables  the  researcher  to  record  fine  grained  signals  from  a 
significant  portion  of  the  appropriate  cortical  surfaces. 

Tatman's  device  consists  of  a  matrix  of  gold  electrodes  spaced 
0.25  mm  apart  on  a  silicon  substrate.  Each  electrode  is  attached  to  a  FET 
switch  that  is  photolithographically  fabricated  on  the  same  substrate. 

The  output  of  each  column  of  FETs  is  electrically  terminated  to  an  output 
lead  and  the  gates  of  each  row  of  FETs  are  likewise  terminated  to  an  input 
lead.  By  driving  the  FET  switches  with  the  proper  logic  circuits,  each 
column  lead  signal  consists  of  time  multiplexed  samples  of  the  bioelectric 
data  received  by  the  electrodes.  The  Tatman  multielectrode  array  consti¬ 
tutes  the  tool  for  the  research  in  this  thesis. 

Problem 

The  proolem  to  be  solved  is  threefold.  First,  an  operational  multi¬ 
plexing  array  and  the  necessary  support  equipment  must  be  fabricated  and  tested. 

Second,  the  array  must  be  used  to  obtain  bioelectric  data  from  the  visual 
cortex  of  a  mammalian  subject.  Third,  the  data  must  be  analyzed  to  determine 
some  operating  characteristics  of  the  sensory  cortex.  The  ultimate  goal  is 
to  define  the  transfer  function (s)  used  by  the  visual  cortex  during  the 
perception  process.  The  following  paragraphs  describe  the  three  elements  of 
the  problem. 

A  multiplexing  multielectrode  array  that  can  access  fine  grained 
cortical  bioelectric  signals  must  be  fabricated.  This  device  must  survive 

in  a  cerebral  spinal  fluid  environment  for  several  hours.  Ideally,  it  j 

I 

should  survive  for  months  or  years  if  the  ultimate  goal  is  to  be  accoinplished  ^ 


r 


I 


(see  chapter  three).  Crosstalk  and  noise  should  be  at  least  10  db  IkI.'.v 
the  bioelectric  signal  levels  so  that  high  quality  electroencephal ic  data  are 
obtained  and  its  multiplexing  speed  must  exceed  the  Nyquist  samplin,'  rate 
for  the  highest  bioelectric  signal  frequency  so  that  aliasing  does  not 
occur.  The  device  must  also  be  sterilizable  and  sturdy  enough  to  survive 
during  the  implant  procedure. 

The  support  electronics  must  control  the  multiplexing  array  so  tb.at 
the  bioelectric  signals  from  the  cortex  can  be  amplified  and  recorded. 
Additional  support  electronics  must  retrieve  and  digitize  the  multiplexed 
signals  so  that  computer  analysis  can  be  accomplished. 

The  implant  and  resulting  in  vivo  test  procedure  must  allow  access 
to  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex  of  a  living,  unanesthetized  mam¬ 
malian  brain.  The  subject  should  be  of  a  species  with  good  visual 
acuity.  Visual  stimulus  equipment  must  be  capable  of  developing  repeatable, 
time  synchronized  stimuli  to  the  subject.  Great  care  must  be  taken  to  ensure 
humane  treatment  to  the  test  animal  (Ref  12). 

Data  analysis  should  determine  if  the  bioelectric  signals  are  capable 
of  providing  improved  knowledge  of  the  cortico-cortical  connections  in 
the  visual  cortex.  The  analysis  should  also  Identify  any  weakness  in  the 
acquisition  and  recording  procedures,  and  help  provide  solutions  to  these 
problems.  The  ultimate  objective  of  the  data  analysis  procedure  is  to 
identify  the  transfer  functlon(s)  used  by  the  mammalian  brain  during  the 
visual  perception  process. 

Approach 

The  approach  to  solving  the  problem  identified  in  the  previous  para¬ 
graphs  contains  six  major  steps.  The  first  four  steps  concern  the 


10 


fabric.ir  ion  and  testing  of  the  multiplexing  multielectrode  array  and  t',.- 
associated  support  electronics.  Step  five  obtains  bioelectric  data  from 
the  test  subject  and  the  final  step  analyzes  these  data.  The  following 
paragraphs  describe  these  procedures. 

Fabrication  of  the  multielectrode  array  requires  that  three  major 
problems  encountered  by  Tatman  be  solved.  These  problems  are  lack  of 
ohmic  contact  with  the  metalized  leads,  leakage  paths  in  the  passivation 
layer,  and  cracks  in  the  final  passivation  layer.  Once  these  problems  are 
solved,  a  revised  process  schedule  must  be  developed  and  used  to  fabricate 
the  multielectrode  array.  The  support  electronics  must  be  designed  and  built. 
To  insure  the  device  and  support  electronics  function  properly,  a  series 
of  in  vitro  tests  must  be  conducted.  These  tests  should  determine  FET  pinch- 
off  voltage,  lifetime  in  a  saline  bath,  crosstalk,  ambient  noise,  multi¬ 
plexing  ability  and  frequency  limit,  and  frequency  response  of  the  electrodes. 

After  the  devices  and  support  electronics  are  evaluated,  a  multie.lectrode 
array  must  be  implanted  on  the  visual  cortex  of  a  subject  animal.  The 
animal's  visual  system  is  stimulated  and  the  resulting  bioelectric 
signals  are  recorded.  The  animal  must  be  unanesthetized  during  data 
acquisition  so  that  brain  function  is  essentially  normal. 

The  recorded  data  are  analyzed  to  determine  data  quality.  Additional 
analysis  must  be  accomplished  to  determine  some  characteristic  of  the 
visual  cortex  during  the  perception  process. 

Scope 

In  order  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  prototype  support  electronics, 
the  initial  multiplexing  array  is  limited  to  a  four  by  four.  This  array 
is  sufficiently  large  to  determine  the  feasability  of  the  approach  and  to 
identify  any  possible  problem  areas  that  warrant  additional  research. 


11 


The  implnnt  is  limited  to  aii  acute  process  with  no  attempt  to 
accomplish  transcutaneous  signal  transfer.  In  future  work,  chronic 
implants  may  be  desirable  so  that  several  days  or  weeks  of  visual  data 
may  be  recorded. 

Data  analysis  consists  of  evaluation  necessary  to  determine  operational 
quality  of  the  multiplexing  array  and  support  electronics.  In  addition, 
limited  data  analysis  should  be  accomplished  to  identify  some  fundamental 
characteristics  of  the  visual  perception  system. 

Sequence  of  Presentation 

Chapter  two  discusses  the  biological  aspects  of  the  visual  system 
and  Kabrisky's  theory  concerning  its  operation.  Chapter  three  presents 
the  various  requirements  of  the  multielectrode  array  and  the  resulting 
design  constraints.  In  addition,  this  chapter  explains  the  fabrication 
process  used  to  produce  the  multielectrode  array.  Chapter  four  shows  the 
development  of  the  support  electronics  and  provides  block  diagrams  of  the 
resulting  configurations.  Chapter  five  explains  the  in  vitro  tests  used 
to  evaluate  the  raultielectrode  array  and  the  support  electronics.  Chapter 
six  discusses  the  proposed  implant,  data  processing,  and  analysis 
procedures.  Chapter  seven  lists  the  conclusions  and  recommendations  of 
the  thesis. 


12 


Introdi;ct  ion 


11.  Biological  Model  and  Theory  of  Operation 


Study  of  the  mammalian  visual  perception  process  requires  knowledge 
of  the  anatomical,  physiological,  and  psychological  aspects  of  the  visual- 
system.  This  chapter  contains  a  description  of  these  aspects.  The  approach 
is  to  present  the  information  from  a  data  processing  viewpoint.  As  a 
result,  the  information  contained  in  this  chapter  is  not  exhaustive,  but 
is  adequate  to  provide  insight  into  the  problem  and  goals  of  this  thesis. 

The  first  five  sections  of  this  chapter  discuss  the  results  of  past 
research  into  the  anatomy  and  function  of  the  mammalian  visual  perception 
system'.  The  reader  will  note  that  the  results  of  previous  research  strongly 
support  Kabrisky’s  theory  of  visual  perception  which  is  explained  in 
section  six.  The  follov/ing  paragraphs  briefly  describe  the  contents  of 
this  chapter. 

The  first  section  discusses  the  neuron's  anatomy  and  function.  The 
electrical  data  signals,  called  action  potentials,  and  the  chemical  inter¬ 
connections  between  neurons  are  described.  In  addition,  this  section 
presents  Information  concerning  the  signal  averaging  characteristics  of 
post  synaptic  potentials  and  how  these  potentials  are  recorded  with  small 
electrodes  placed  on  the  cortex. 

The  second  section  presents  the  anatomy  and  function  of  the  mammalian 
visual  system.  Connections  from  the  light  sensors  in  the  retinae  to  the 
primary  visual  cortex  are  described.  This  section  also  includes  a  functional 
description  of  the  retina  and  lateral  geniculate  body. 


13 


The  third  section  describes  the  visual  cortex  and  includes  inter:  iiien 
concerning  its  layered  structure,  tiie  location  of  input  and  output  lu  nruns, 
ai.d  tlK  structure  of  local  cortical  interconnections.  It  also  tlu  eri /,i  s 
about  the  connections  between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  corir:.. 

This  :u'ction  culminates  with  a  theoretical  description  of  the  basic 
co:tputing  element,  how  it  may  function,  and  its  physical  size. 

The  next  section  describes  some  physiological  research.  It  discus.ses 
the  results  of  chemical  neuroresearch,  describes  a  visual  evoked  rcssponse 
(VER)  experiment,  and  provides  information  concerning  past  research  with 
multielectrode  arrays.  In  addition,  it  reviews  the  results  of  Hubei  and 
Wiesel's  single  cell  microelectrode  research. 

Psychological  brain  research  is  discussed.  The  visual  system's 
response  to  optical  illusions  is  compared  to  the  response  of  a  computer 
algorithm  that  models  the  visual  perception  mechanism.  In  addition,  the 
spatial  frequency  sine  wave,  grating  response  of  the  visual  system  is 
presented . 

The  next  section  presents  Kabrisky's  theory  of  the  visual  perception 
mechanism.  It  includes  a  description  of  the  possible  interconnects 
between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex  and  a  transfer  function 
that  these  interconnects  might  support.  The  final  section  presents  a 
method  to  test  Kabrisky's  theory. 

The  Neuron 

The  neuron  is  the  fundamental  building  block  of  the  brain.  Collections 
of  this  specialized  cell  perform  the  total  function  of  the  central  nervous 
system.  Data  transmission  as  well  as  data  analysis  is  solely  a  result 
of  the  neural  activity.  Although  neurons  occur  in  different  forms,  all 


14 


,  iinilar  physical  and  functional  (•’auracteristics .  Figure  i  depicts 
thi'sc  cun-.iuon  physical  characteristics. 

T.ie  neuron  is  composed  of  three  major  parts:  the  soma,  which  is  t!ie 
main  body  of  the  neuron  tmd  contains  the  housekeeping  components;  a 
single  ax-on,  which  extends  from  the  soma  and  transmits  data  to  the  soma  and 
dendrites  of  other  neurons;  and  the  dendrites,  which  are  a  group  of 
arborized  branches  that  gather  and  process  data  from  surrounding  neurons. 

The  data  acquisition  and  transmission  functions  are  accomplished  with  two 
separate,  but  related  activities.  The  first  activity  is  the  intraneural 
transmission  of  electrical  pulses  down  the  axon.  The  second  activity  is 
the  chemical  transmission  of  data  from  the  axon  of  the  transmitting 
neuron  to  the  dendrites  or  soma  of  the  receiving  neurons. 

Intraneural  data  transmission  is  initiated  with  ion  exchanges  between 
intracellular  and  extracellular  fluids.  Within  each  neuron,  active  ion 
"pumps"  force  positively  charged  sodium  ions  from  the  cell's  intracellular 
fluid  and  potassium  ions  back  into  the  cell.  As  a  result,  the  ambient 
internal  voltage  level  is  about  70  millivolts  more  negative  than  the 
surrounding  extracellular  fluid.  This  potential  difference  is  called  a 
resting  potential.  The  resting  potential  is  maintained  until  some  outside 
stimulus  causes  a  depolarization  or  rise  in  the  intracellular  voltage. 

Should  the  intracellular  voltage  rise  above  some  specified  threshold  voltage 
(about  -60  millivolts  in  most  neurons),  complete  depolarization  will  occur 
because  the  ionic  permeability  of  the  cell  membrane  will  change  and  the 
cell  will  suddenly  allow  sodium  ions  to  enter  the  intracellular  space. 

The  inrush  of  positive  ions  causes  an  action  potential  which  is  a  positive 
voltage  spike  about  1  millisecond  in  duration  and  about  100  millivolts  in 


15 


a-.;'!  The  action  potential  is  propaj;ated  throughout  the  neuron  at 

a  speed  oi  up  to  130  meters  per  second.  After  passage  of  the  electrical 
inpul>.',  the  neuron  will  repolarize  by  removing  the  excess  sodium  ions  and 
pumpir.,;  in  potassium  ions.  Repolarization  can  be  done  at  rates  sufficient 
to  allevv  generation  of  several  hundred  action  potentials  each  second. 

The  action  potentials  are  essentially  invariant  in  amplitude  and  pulse 
width.  Thus,  pulse  repetition  rate  is  the  modulating  medium  for  electrical 
data  transmission  by  the  neuron.  Once  the  action  potential  reaches  the 
termination  between  its  axon  and  the  soma  or  dendrite  of  another  neuron, 
a  chemical  data  transmission  process  occurs. 

Neurons  transmit  data  to  other  nerve  cells  through  a  special  inter¬ 
neuronal  junction  called  a  synapse.  The  axon  terminates  in  a  synaptic 
junction,  which  is  a  very  narrow  space  between  the  axon  of  the  transmitting 
neuron  and  the  dendrite  or  soma  of  a  target  neuron.  The  electrical  impulse 
in  the  axon  causes  the  release  of  a  chemical  substance  in  the  synapse 
called  a  neurotransmitter.  About  30  different  chemical  substances  are 
known  or  suspected  to  be  transmitters  in  the  brain  (Ref  14:134).  Some 
neurotransmitters  tend  to  depolarize  target  neurons.  The  depolarizing 
effect  enhances  their  excitability,  which  reduces  the  additional  stimulation 
(electrical  or  chemical)  required  to  elicit  an  action  potential.  These 
synaptic  junctions  are  labeled  excitatory  and  the  depolarizing  effect  is 
called  an  excitatory  post  synaptic  potential  (EPSP) .  Other  neurotrans¬ 
mitters  tend  to  hyperpolarize  or  Inhibit  target  cells.  This  effect  is 
called  an  inhibitory  post  synaptic  potential  (IPSP). 

Target  neurons  receive  synaptic  neurotransmitters  from  hundreds  or 
thousands  of  other  neurons  and  Integrate  the  inhibitory  and  excitatory 


17 


pi'st  ic  potentials  to  form  a  composite  output  signal.  It  is  h.  1  I 

f  th.iL  tiu  electric  field  produced  by  the  summation  of  the  EPSPs  and  1!',  !'  . 

is  received  by  small  electrodes  resting  on  the  surface  of  the  cortical 
tissue.  Thus,  an  electrode  would  record  data  processing  activit-.'  of  the 
neuron.:,  beneath  it. 

Past  research  with  multielectrode  arrays  Indicate  that  the  v'oltage 
potentials  recorded  from  the  cortical  surface  range  from  200  to  500 
microvolts  in  amplitude  and  from  1  to  40  Hertz  in  frequency.  The  electrode 
used  for  this  research  project  measures  100  by  160  microns  and  will  sit  above 
a  population  of  approximately  1600  neurons.  A  consequence  of  tliC  results 
of  the  activity  of  these  1600  neurons  will  be  recorded  by  each  electrode. 

The  visual  cortex  section  in  this  chapter  describes  the  cortical  architecture 
which  supports  the  theory  that  such  recordings  will  enhance  the  knowledge 
of  the  visual  perception  process. 

Anatomy  and  Funct ion  of  the  Visual  Pathway 

Anatomy  of  the  Visual  Pathway.  Figure  2  illustrates  the  visual 
pathway  from  the  retinae  to  the  visual  cortex.  After  visual  data  are 
generated  in  the  retinae,  they  pass  through  the  optic  nerves  to  the  optic 
chiasm.  At  the  chiasm,  the  nerve  fibers  that  serve  the  right  half  of  the 
retina  of  each  eye  merge  to  form  the  right  optic  tract.  The  right  optic 
tract  synapses  in  the  right  lateral  geniculate  body  and  from  here,  the 
visual  data  pass  through  the  visual  pathway  to  the  primary  visual  cortex 
(Ref  13:810).  Since  the  lens  of  the  eye  inverts  the  image,  the  right 
primary  visual  cortex  receives  the  inverted  left  half  of  the  visual  scene. 
This  scene  is  mapped  on  the  visual  cortex  so  that  relative  position  of  the 
.  visual  scene  elements  is  maintained.  If  the  data  on  the  cortex  were  visible. 


18 


9 


it  1  K'k  like  an  upside  do\m  photograph  of  the  visual  scene  that  had 

been  stretched  in  the  center  and  compressed  around  the  periphery.  Figure  3 
shows  how  the  visual  field  is  arranged  as  i t  passes  down  the  visual  data 
channels.  The  following  paragraphs  describe  the  function  of  the  retinae 
and  the:  lateral  geniculate  bodies. 

The  Retinae .  The  human  retina  contains  light  receptors  called  rods 
and  cones.  The  central  visual  area  is  populated  primarily  with  cones  and 
the  peripheral  area  with  rods.  The  rods  have  a  very  low  light  Intensity 
threshold  and  provide  stimulation  to  optic  nerve  fibers  for  low  light  vision. 
They  are  not  color  sensitive.  This  is  the  reason  why  low  level  light 
conditions  result  in  monochromatic  vision.  The  cones  have  a  much  higher 
light  intensity  threshold  and  are  responsible  for  color  vision. 

There  are  about  125  million  rods  and  5.5  million  cones  in  each  retina. 
Yet,  only  900,000  optic  nerve  fibers  lead  from  each  retina  to  the  brain. 

Thus  an  average  of  140  rods  and  6  cones  must  connect  to  each  optic  nerve. 

To  accomplish  this  data  reduction,  the  retina  in  the  human  eye  has  two 
fairly  distinct  regions:  the  foveal  region  where  sharp  visual  images  are 
obtained  for  about  two  degrees  of  the  central  visual  field,  and  the  peri¬ 
pheral  area  for  the  remainder  of  the  visual  field.  Nearer  the  fovea, 
fewer  and  fewer  rods  and  cones  converge  on  each  optic  fiber.  This  causes 
a  progressive  increase  in  visual  acuity  toward  the  center  of  the  retina. 

The  central  retina  contains  no  rods  at  all,  and  each  cone  has  a  single 
dedicated  optic  nerve  fiber.  The  far  peripheral  area  has  no  cones  and 
each  optic  nerve  fiber  serves  over  600  rods.  Thus,  the  peripheral  optic 
nerve  fibers  receive  data  from  a  large  area  of  the  visual  scene.  This 
anatomical  structure  explains  why  the  human  peripheral  vision  has  much 


20 


less  spatial  resolution  than  tlie  central  vision  (Ref  1:17). 

Light  stimulation  of  the  rods  and  cones  causes  decomposition  of  a 
photochemical  which  in  turn  generates  a  voltage  called  the  receptor 
potential.  The  receptor  potential  is  carried  down  each  rod  and  coin’ 
to  a  synapse  where  a  post  synaptic  potential  is  impressed  on  a  neuron. 

Thvis ,  the  post  synaptic  potential  controls  the  action  potential  pulse 
rate  of  a  nerve  fiber  in  the  optic  nerve. 

The  Lateral  Geniculate  Body .  The  visual  data  generated  by  the 
retinae  travel  down  the  optic  nerves  to  the  chiasm  and  on  to  the  lateral 
geniculate  bodies.  Layers  one,  four,  and  six  of  the  six-layered  lateral 
geniculate  body  receive  signals  from  the  nasal  retina  while  layers  two,  three, 
and  five  receive  signals  from  the  temporal  portion  of  the  ipsilateral 
retina  of  the  opposite  eye.  It  is  at  this  point  that  nerve  fibers  from 
superimposed  retinal  fields  in  the  two  eyes  connect  with  co-located  neurons. 

As  a  result,  the  geniculocalcarlne  fibers  transmit  visual  fields  from 
each  eye  through  the  optic  radiations  to  closely  related  areas  in  the 
primary  visual  cortex. 

The  Visual  Cortex 

The  cerebral  cortex  is  the  largest  and  most  easily  accessible  part  of 
the  brain.  Yet,  we  know  little  about  its  operation.  Anatomical  researchers 
have  mapped  some  of  the  local  interconnections  and  identified  the  structure 
and  function  of  tlie various  cortical  areas.  These  cortical  areas  consist  of 
a  two  millimeters  thick,  convoluted  plate  of  neural  tissue  that  covers 
the  outer  surface  of  the  brain.  Destruction  or  stimulation  of  certain 
areas  of  the  cortex  have  provided  some  information  about  what  these  areas 
do.  For  example,  the  location  of  the  visual  cortex  is  well  known. 


22 


Til  visual  cortex  is  located  on  the  posterior  surface  of  the  ccTihr il 
corlox.  it  consists  of  two  areas  called  the  primary  visual  cortex  (Area  17 
of  Brodi.iann)  and  the  secondary  visual  cortex  (Area  18  of  Brodmann). 

Figure  4  shows  the  location  of  these  areas.  The  human  primary  visual  cortex 
is  abo  '  26  square  centimeters  in  surface  area  (Ref  1:29). 

Dr.  Wilder  Penfield  confirmed  the  location  of  the  visual  cortex  in 
man  during  some  unique  physiological  experiments.  Dr.  Penfield,  a  neuro¬ 
surgeon,  performed  numerous  brain  operations  in  which  he  removed  cortical 
tissue.  These  operations  were  an  attempt  to  stop  the  occurrence  of 
epileptic  seizures.  Before  removing  brain  tissue  of  locally  anesthetized 
patients.  Dr.  Penfield  would  electrically  stimulate  small  areas  of  the 
cerebral  cortex  and  observe  the  response  of  the  alert  patient.  Electrical 
stimulation  of  the  visual  cortex  caused  the  patient  to  see  lights, 
colored  forms,  or  black  forms,  moving  or  stationary,  usually  in  the 
opposite  visual  field.  It  would  also  make  the  patient  blind  in  that 
visual  field.  Dr.  Penfield  speculated  that  the  primary  visual  cortex  is 
a  way-station  through  which  afferent  visual  data  pass  to  some  central 
integrating  area  (Ref  16). 

Microscopic  examination  shows  each  square  millimeter  of  cortical 

s  8 

tissue  contains  about  10  neurons  (Ref  5:150).  Thus,  there  are  about  10 

individual  neurons  in  the  human  primary  visual  cortex.  The  neurons  are 

arranged  in  layers  about  50  to  100  cells  thick.  Six  layers  are  generally 

recognized.  These  layers  are  sequentially  numbered  starting  from  the 

outer  surface  of  the  cortex  to  the  innermost  portion  of  the  cortex  where 

it  interfaces  with  the  white  matter  of  the  brain.  Anatomical  research 

indicates  that  layer  IV  of  the  visual  cortex  contains  the  terminal  for 


Fig.  4.  The  visual  cortex. 


(Area  l8)  (After  Ref.  15s l86) 


f 


afferent  (incoming)  visual  data.  Layers  II  and  III  provide  connection-, 
with  other  areas  of  the  cortex.  The  nerve  cells  from  these  layers  are 
ciilied  association  fibers  because  it  is  thought  that  visual  information 
may  be  "associated''  with  other  information  via  these  nerve  fibers. 

Layc-r  V  sends  neural  impulses  to  a  portion  of  the  brain  called  the  supc'rior 
colliculus,  while  layer  VI  sends  visual  data  back  to  the  lateral  geniculate 
bodies.  The  reason  for  this  feedback  loop  is  unknown  (Ref  17). 

Anatomical  research  of  the  cerebral  cortex  by  Santiago  Ramon  y  Cajal  indicates 
that  local  cortico-cortlcal  connections  are  primarily  vertical.  Thus, 
most  data  are  transferred  through  the  thickness  of  the  cortex  with 
lateral  spread  limited  to  a  few  millimeters. 

Since  the  primary  visual  cortex  maintains  conformality  of  the 
visual  scene,  the  limited  horizontal  cortico-cortical  connections  suggest 
that  very  little  interaction  of  visual  scene  elements  occurs  here.  In 
fact,  since  the  cortical  structure  in  general  inhibits  lateral  data  spread, 
the  picture  element  interaction  necessary  for  pattern  recognition  cannot 
occur  within  any  cortical  area.  Thus,  the  pattern  recognition  process 
must  occur  when  visual  data  are  transmitted  between  visual  cortical  areas. 

Cortical  Interconnections .  Little  is  known  about  the  interconnections 
between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex.  It  is  known,  however, 
that  the  interconnections  between  these  areas  are  very  dense  and  many 
locations  on  Area  18  appear  to  be  randomly  enervated  by  a  single  location 
on  Area  17  (Ref  1:51).  Thus,  the  complex  picture  element  interaction 
required  for  pattern  recognition  probably  occurs  in  these  interconnections. 
Kabrisky  theorizes  about  the  type  of  pattern  recognition  scheme  that 
such  interconnections  would  support.  Section  six  of  this  chapter  explains 


25 


his  theory  and  how  this  tliesis  will  help  determine  the  validity  of  his 
theory . 

The  Basic  Comput  inp.  Element .  The  conformal  arrangement  of  data 
on  the  cortical  surface  and  the  primarily  vertical  flow  of  data  within 
the  cortex  suggest  the  existence  of  column-like  computational  components 
in  the  cortex.  It  has  been  suggested  that  these  components  can  be 
considered  as  a  collection  of  cell-like  structures  arranged  perpendicular 
to  the  cortex  and  running  througli  from  top  to  bottom  (Ref  1,  6,  and  18). 
Figure  5  shows  how  these  basic  computing  elements  (BCEs)  might  be 
arranged.  Each  BCE  would  consist  of  many  neurons  and  would  process  data 
received  from  one  or  more  afferent  nerve  fibers,  Tbe  results  of  its 
calculations  would  then  leave  the  cortical  area  by  one  or  more  efferent 
nerve  fibers.  The  finite  lateral  coupling  of  neurons  and  the  few  specific 
horizontal  data  pathways  probably  modify  the  data  processing  so  that 
some  cross-coupling  (perhaps  giving  rise  to  lateral  inhibition)  between 
data  channels  occurs. 

The  size  of  the  BCE  can  be  estimated  by  observing  the  anatomical 
structure  of  the  connections  between  the  retinae  and  the  visual  cortex. 

The  fovea  dedicates  one  optic  nerve  cell  for  each  light  receptor. 

This  one-to-one  correspondence  apparently  continues  through  the  lateral 
geniculate  bodies  and  back  to  the  primary  visual  cortex.  The  receptor 
cells  in  layer  IV  of  the  primary  visual  cortex  occur  at  a  rate  of  about 
100,000  in  2.5  square  centimeters.  If  each  receptor  cell  serves  a 
single  BCE,  one  can  postulate  the  size  of  a  BCE  to  be  about  0.05 
millimeters  in  diameter,  consisting  of  about  200  neurons.  The  Hubei  and 
Wlesel  data  suggest  that  the  BCE  in  the  cat  may  be  as  large  as  0.5  milli¬ 
meters  in  diameter  and  contains  about  25,000  neurons.  Their  results 


BRSIC 

TJ  tmTckn£5s\^ 

/  {  OF  CORTEX  i'^  2.5  mm 

COMPuri  fv(5 

A 

E  L  E  M  F  rs 

- bbbti~> 

1 

1 

1 

fragment  of 

CORTICAL  SHEET 

(After  Ref.  1:39) 

Fig.  5.  The  basic  computing  elements. 


arc  discussed  in  the  ptiys iological  research  section  of  this  chapter. 

riiysiologlcal  Research  of  the  Visual  System 

Chemical  and  electrical  physiological  research  provides  consider  ilil  e 
information  about  how  the  visual  system  transmits  information  from 
one  location  to  anouther.  This  research  has  made  possible  an  accurate' 
mapping  of  the  visual  cortex  into  the  blocks  of  neural  tissue  which  may 
be  the  BCES  described  by  Kabrisky.  Tiie  following  paragraphs  describe 
the  results  of  physiological  research  related  to  this  thesis. 

Chemical  Neuroresearcb .  Neurotransmitters  are  not  randomly  distributed 
throughout  the  brain,  but  are  localized  in  specific  clusters.  Techniques 
exist  that  can  cause  specific  neurotransmitters  to  glow  when  exposed 
to  ultraviolet  light  in  the  fluorescent  microscope.  Such  studies  have 
mapped  portions  of  the  cell  structure  originating  in  the  brain  stem  and 
terminating  in  the  hypothalamus,  cerebellum,  and  forebrain  (Ref  14). 

A  related  study  has  provided  interesting  information  concerning  the 
primary  visual  cortex.  The  research  method  capitalizes  on  the  fact  that 
the  brain  cells  depend  primarily  on  glucose  for  metabolism.  A  chemical 
substance  closely  related  to  glucose,  called  2-deoxy glucose,  is  actively 
taken  up  by  the  neurons,  but  the  substance  cannot  be  disposed  of  or 
metabolized.  Thus  the  more  active  neurons  will  absorb  more  deoxyglucose 
than  the  less  active  neurons.  When  an  animal  is  injected  with  radioactively 
tagged  deoxyglucose  and  given  a  task  that  stimulates  a  particular  mode  of 
the  visual  process,  the  active  neurons  can  be  detected.  To  Isolate  the 
active  neurons,  the  animal  is  sacrificed  and  its  brain  is  sliced  into 
thin  sections.  The  section.';  are  pressed  against  a  photographic  plate. 


Tlu’.  rntlioactive  Isotope  will  expose  the  photographic  plate  in  areas 
that  contain  more  active  neurons.  The  results  of  the  experiment  show  the 
primar;-  visual  cortex  consists  of  neural  blocks  about  one  millimeter  square 
and  two  millimeters  deep.  Each  neural  block  appears  to  serve  a  specific 
area  of  the  visual  scene  (Ref  5)  . 

Studies  with  the  silver-degenerative  method  for  mapping  neuronal 
connections  provide  information  concerning  the  right  eye-left  eye 
mapping  onto  the  primary  visual  cortex  (Ref  5) .  The  silver-degenerative 
method  Is  based  on  the  phenomenon  of  axonal  transport.  If  radioactlvely 
labeled  amino  acids  are  Injected  into  an  area  of  nervous  tissue,  the 
neuronal  chemical  transport  system  will  move  the  tagged  amino  acids 
through  the  axon  to  the  synaptic  junction.  Wlien  the  neuron  releases 
neurotransraitter  substances  into  the  synapse,  some  of  the  radioactlvely 
tagged  amino  acids  are  also  released.  The  tagged  amino  acids  proceed 
through  to  the  next  neuron  in  a  similar  manner.  When  a  single  eye  of 
an  animal  was  injected  with  tagged  amino  acids,  some  of  the  material 
escaped  from  the  optic  nerve  and  traveled  through  the  synaptic  junctions 
to  the  lateral  geniculate  body.  Neurons  in  the  geniculate  body  trans¬ 
ported  the  material  to  specific  locations  on  the  primary  visual  area 
of  the  cerebral  cortex.  By  coating  tissue  slices  of  the  cortex  with 
photographic  emulsion  and  chemically  developing  the  emulsion,  location 
of  the  deposit  sites  for  radioactive  amino  acids  was  seen.  When  viewing 
a  slice  of  cortical  tissue  taken  parallel  to  the  surface  of  the  brain,  the 
photographed  pattern  was  one  of  parallel  stripes  corresponding  to  terminals 
belonging  to  the  Injected  eye.  The  gaps  between  stripes  represent  termi¬ 
nals  belonging  to  the  other  eye.  The  width  of  the  terminals  in  the 
macaque  monkey  is  about  O.A  millimeters  (Ref  5:159).  Since  the  macaque 


:  I'l'inKiry  visual  cortex  is  similar  to  the  human,  this  research 
suggests  that  the  terminals  for  each  eye  are  about  0.4  millimeters  In 
diaret.  r . 

Bioelectric  seuro research.  Jeffreys  and  Axford's  VER  experiment 
provided  some  information  about  the  location  of  the  visual  processing 
areas  of  the  brain  (Ref  7).  The  experiment  consisted  of  stimulating 
various  sections  of  12  human  subjects'  visual  field  with  a  pattern  of 
isolated  squares  while  recording  the  electroencephalogram  (EEC)  with 

a  horizontal  transverse  row  of  seven  to  nine  scalp  electrodes.  The  EhG  j 

signals  were  digitized  and  sampled  by  a  computer  every  4.7  millisecond:;  | 

I 

for  a  period  of  300  milliseconds  after  stimulus  onset.  The  first  two  compo¬ 
nents  of  the  visual  evoked  potentials  (VEPs),  designated  C.l.  (latency 
65-80  milliseconds)  and  C.II.  (latency  90-110  milliseconds)  were 
influenced  by  the  retinal  location  of  the  stimulus.  The  results  of  the 
experiment  are  described  below. 

1.  Corresponding  peaks  (C.l.  and  C.II.)  of  the  VEPs  to  stimulation 
of  the  upper  and  lower  half-fields  were  inverted  in  polarity. 

2.  For  the  left  and  right  half-field  VEPs  the  transverse  distribution 
of  C.l.  but  not  of  C.II.  showed  a  polarity  reversal  across  the  lateral 
midline  of  the  brain. 

These  results  indicate  that  C.l.  and  C.II.  have  spatially  separate 
sources.  Based  on  know  anatomy  of  the  primary  visual  cortex,  it  appears 
that  C.l.,  but  not  C.II.  originates  from  the  primary  visual  cortex. 

One  could  postulate  that  data  transmission  from  the  retina  to  the  primary 
visual  cortex  requires  65  milliseconds  while  transmission  from  the 
primary  to  secondary  visual  cortex  requires  25  milliseconds.  These 
results  support  the  idea  that  the  primary  visual  cortex  is  a  way  station 


30 


through  which  afferent  visual  data  pass  to  some  central  integrating  area. 

Research  by  DeMott  with  multielcctrode  arrays  provide  additional 
Information  about  the  visual  system  (Ref  8).  He  placed  a  4  by  7  millimeters 
squared  array  of  400  electrodes  spaced  0.25  millimeters  apart  on  the 
primary  visual  cortex  of  a  raccoon.  The  animal's  visual  system  was 
stimulated  with  a  flash  of  light  subtending  about  three  degrees  of  the 
central  visual  field.  He  sampled  the  data  300  times  per  second. 

The  bioelectric  activity  consisted  of  highly  detailed  patterns 
in  a  specific  pattern  which  repeated  quite  reliably  when  the  same 
stimulus  was  repeated.  Although  a  diffuse  response  was  occasionally 
seen  in  less  than  10  milliseconds,  the  first  distinguishable  pattern 
acti''lty  usually  appeared  about  80  milliseconds  after  stimulus  onset. 

The  responses  consisted  of  a  "quickly  changing"  pattern  that  lasted 
30  to  50  milliseconds  followed  by  a  "slow  pattern"  which  occupied  about 
200  to  300  milliseconds.  A  3  db  reduction  in  stimulus  intensity 
increased  the  latency  of  the  fast  pattern  from  70  to  170  milliseconds. 
Recordings  from  the  secondary  visual  cortex  showed  no  response  to  the 
stimulus . 

DeMott 's  test  results  suggest  that  the  primary  visual  cortex 
responds  quite  well  to  uniform  light  stimulus,  but  the  secondary 
visual  cortex  does  not.  One  would  expect  such  results  if  the  secondary 
visual  cortex's  response  depended  on  specific  patterns  for  stimulation. 

Thus,  the  hypothesis  that  the  secondary  visual  cortex  accomplishes  some 
pattern  recognition  is  supported. 

DeMott  also  experimented  with  multielectrode  arrays  with  1.5 
millimeter  electrode  spacing.  The  bioelectric  patterns  were  not  observed. 


31 


He  ^lilies  that  the  maxinu'.ii  i nt ereloc t rode  distance  that  would  reveal 


even  crude  outiincs  of  this  activity  is  about  0.5  millimeters.  Such 
results  support  the  previously  discussed  chemical  neurorcsearch  which 
indicated  the  BCE  size  to  be  about  0.4  millimeters. 

Research  by  Hubei  and  Wiesel  consisted  of  inserting  tungsten 
microelectrodcs  into  a  single  neuron.  Tills  process  allowed  them  to  record 
action  potentials  from  only  one  neuron  at  a  time.  When  electrical  activity 
of  neighboring  neurons  was  compared,  they  found  that  neurons  in  a 
plane  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  cerebral  cortex  responded  to 
stimuli  that  originated  from  the  same  or  adjacent  visual  areas,  while 
neurons  in  a  plane  parallel  to  the  cortical  surface  responded  to  stimuli 
from  different  visual  areas.  The  horizontal  spacing  between  neurons 
responding  to  different  visual  areas  was  about  0.5  millimeters.  They 
theorize  that  most  data  transmission  in  the  primary  visual  cortex  occurs 
in  the  vertical  plane,  and  that  the  BCE  size  is  about  0.5  millimeters. 

This  theory  and  the  results  of  their  research  fit  well  with  research  by 
Cajal  (Ref  5)  and  DeMott  (Ref  8). 

Psychological  Neurorcsearch 

The  psychologist's  black  box  approach  to  examining  the  human  visual 
system  provides  some  clues  that  may  help  to  establish  the  mechanism  of 
human  visual  perception.  Two  areas  of  particular  interest  are  the  analysis 
of  visual  illusions  and  spatial-frequency  stimulus  research.  The  following 
paragraphs  describe  the  results  of  research  in  these  two  areas. 

The  perceptual  psychologists  have  extensively  studied  human  response 
to  various  visual  illusions  for  more  tlian  a  hundred  years  (Ref  19).  As  a 
result,  the  responses  of  the  human  visual  system  to  certain  stimuli  arc 


> 


32 


I 


well  knowTi.  One  would  expect  that  an  accurate  computer  model  of  the 


human  visual  system  would  react  similarly  to  such  stimuli.  A  primary 
objective  of  this  research  is  to  develop  a  mathematical  model  that, 
when  excited  with  a  visual  illusory  image,  will  retain  or  enhance  the 
illusion. 

Consider,  for  example,  the  Kanizsa  triangle  illusion  (Fig  6).  One 
perceives  a  whiter-than-whlte  triangle  made  up  of  lines  that  are  not  there. 
Since  some  theorize  that  the  human  visual  system  may  process  visual 
information  via  two-dimensional  Fourier  transforms  (Ref  71),  it  seems 
logical  to  process  the  Kanizsa  triangle  in  such  a  manner  to  determine 
if  the  illusion  is  retained.  Dr.  A.  P.  Ginsburg  conducted  such  an 
experiment.  The  following  paragraph  briefly  describes  the  procedure  and 
results. 

A  two-dimensional  discrete  Fourier  transform  of  the  original  picture 
was  made.  Since  previous  studies  have  shown  that  the  high  frequency 
components  of  such  a  transform  can  be  removed  without  destroying  a 
human's  ability  to  recognize  objects,  the  magnitude  of  the  spatial 
frequencies  were  attenuated  according  to  known  high  spatial  frequency 
characteristics  of  the  human  visual  system.  An  inverse  Fourier  transform 
reconstructed  the  frequency  attenuated  image.  The  filtered  picture 
enhanced  the  illusory  image,  but  the  experiment  did  not  provide  a 
clue  as  to  how  the  original  pattern  features  interact  to  produce  the 
Illusion.  When  the  picture  was  low  pass  filtered  directly,  the  resulting 
picture  clearly  showed  the  illusory  triangle.  This  result  suggests  that 
the  low  spatial  attenuation  characteristics  of  the  human  visual  system 
do  enhance  the  Kanizsa  illusion.  Thus,  it  is  possible  at  least  in 


33 


specific  instances  to  develop  matheinat leal  algorithms  that  respond  to 
illusions  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  human  visual  system  (Ref  20) . 


• 

Kazumara  Ozawa  (Ref  22)  conducted  a  similar  experiment.  Ozawa's 
research  is  based  on  some  observations  by  Koehler  (Ref  23).  Koehler 
states  that  to  understand  the  visual  perception  of  pictures,  a  field 
theory  of  perception  must  be  developed.  Thus,  the  image  would  be  perceived 
through  a  field  caused  by  the  picture.  Ozawa  proposes  that  such  a 
field  may  be  regarded  as  a  Fourier  transform  corresponding  to  a  spatial 
filter.  He  states  that  such  a  filter  must  have  the  following  characteristics 
common  to  the  visual  system: 

1.  Attenuation  of  lower  frequencies. 

2.  Cut  off  characteristics  for  the  higher  frequencies. 

3.  Webster's  Law  (the  minimum  separable  contrast  of  the  human 
visual  system  is  proportional  to  the  light  intensity). 

Ozawa  developed  a  fast  Fourier  transform  algorithm  within  the  con¬ 
straints  listed.  By  properly  selecting  the  necessary  parameters,  this 
algorltiim  retained  the  illusory  image  of  the  Mueller-Lyer  pattern 
(Fig  7),  among  others.  These  results  help  substantiate  Ginsburg's  findings. 

Lamberto  Maffei  and  his  research  assistants,  conducted  an  experiment 
which  seems  to  substantiate  the  theory  that  the  visual  cortex  performs 
a  spatial  frequency  analysis  (Ref  24).  A  spatial  square  wave  contrast 
grating  was  generated  on  an  oscilloscope.  This  square  wave  grating 
had  the  fundamental  component  removed.  Thus,  only  the  third  and  higher 
odd  harmonics  existed  in  the  image.  When  naive  human  subjects  viewed  this 
image  at  reading  distance,  all  reported  seeing  a  square  wave  image  at 
the  fundamental  frequency.  Each  subject  then  retreated  to  a  distance 

4 

where  the  image  spatial  frequency  appeared  to  change.  At  this  moment  the 


35 


1 

(After  Ref.  22:240) 

36 


I 


subject  adjusted  the  spatial  frequency  of  a  sinusoidal  spatial  presentation 
on  another  oscilloscope  until  it  matched  the  first.  In  every  case,  the 
subject  adjusted  the  second  linage  to  correspond  to  the  frequency  and  contrast 
of  the  third  harmonic  of  the  first  image.  The  distance  at  which  the 
frequency  of  the  initial  image  increased  corresponded  to  the  distance  at 
which  the  fifth  harmonic  of  the  picture  was  no  longer  detectable.  These 
results  can  be  explained  by  assuming  the  human  visual  system  processes 
perceptual  images  in  the  spatial  frequency  domain.  Should  such  processing 
occur,  a  modified  square  wave  image  consisting  of  only  the  third  harmonic 
above  threshold  would  certainly  appear  to  be  a  sinusoidal  contrast  grating 
equivalent  to  the  third  harmonic  of  the  original  square  wave.  Although  not 
conclusive,  these  experiments  seem  to  indicate  that  the  human  visual  system 
processes  visual  information  in  the  frequency  domain. 

Kabrisky’s  Theory  of  Visual  Perception 

In  1966,  Kabrisky  proposed  that  the  human  visual  perception  process 
is  accomplished  with  a  two-dimensional  Fourier  transform  (Ref  1:82). 

He  suggests  that  the  dense  interconnections  between  area  17  and  18 
of  the  visual  cortex  could  support  such  an  algorithm.  The  interconnections 
can  be  compared  to  an  optical  system  that  performs  two-dimensional  Fourier 
transforms  by  the  interference  and  reinforcement  of  various  portions  of 
sinusoidal  electromagnetic  fields  propagated  along  pathways  of  different 
lengths  with  a  system  of  lenses.  In  a  system  designed  to  emulate  this 
process,  propagation  times  in  the  individual  pathways  must  be  controlled  so 
that  the  proper  reinforcement  and  cancellation  can  be  accomplished. 

For  a  neuronal  system,  Kabrisky  suggests  that  it  would  be  necessary  to 
maintain  consistent  relative  propagation  times  in  axonal  pathways  to 


37 


s'lfficient  overall  synchronization  of  activity  in  order  for  the 
pcssihLlity  to  exist  that  EPSP  and  IPSP  interaction  provide  the  equivalent 
of  the  interference  found  in  the  optical  system.  Once  the  Fourier 
trans'^orm  has  been  accomplished  between  cortical  areas  17  and  18,  Kabrisky 
suggests  that  the  resulting  tiansform  is  compared  to  templates  which  consist 
of  learned  data  about  known  shapes.  Such  a  process  might  be  accomplished 
in  cortical  areas  19,  20,  or  beyond.  As  the  previous  sections  of  this 
chapter  indicate,  there  is  considerable  evidence  to  substantiate  such 
a  theory. 

A  Method  to  Test  Kabrisky ' s  Theory 

To  determine  the  validity  of  Kabrisky ’s  theory  requires  proof  that 
data  timing  requirements  between  cortical  areas  17  and  18  are  met.  In 
addition,  if  one  assumes  that  the  visual  perception  processing  algorithm 
is  some  form  of  frequency  domain  analysis,  then  research  into  this  process 
should  include  stimulation  of  the  visual  system  with  spatial  sine  wave 
gratings.  One  might  compare  the  research  of  the  visual  perception  process 
with  the  investigation  of  a  frequency  sensitive  electronic  circuit. 

The  circuit  characteristics  can  be  fully  described  by  its  input-output 
frequency  and  phase  relationships.  Inputs  of  varying  frequencies  and 
amplitudes  can  be  compared  to  the  resulting  outputs.  Should  the  device 
be  linear,  a  plot  of  amplitude  and  phase  versus  input  frequency  would 
completely  describe  its  transfer  function.  Should  the  device  be  nonlinear, 
the  problem  becomes  more  difficult,  but  the  same  approach  is  valid. 

Since  the  analog  to  sinusoidal  waveforms  in  an  electronic  circuit  is 
spatial  sine  wave  gratings  in  a  visual  processing  system,  one  might 

*  9 

try  to  determine  the  transfer  function  of  a  portion  of  the  visual  system 
by  observing  its  response  to  these  gratings  (Ref  25) . 


38 


Thus,  the  problem  of  determining  the  transfer  function  between 
cortical  areas  17  and  18  can  be  approached  from  a  control  theory  viewpoint. 
The  input  to  the  visual  system  is  stimulated  with  a  sinusoidal  input 
while  a  large  array  of  data  in  cortical  area  17  and  18  are  simultaneously 
recorded.  The  data  from  area  17  should  homeomorphically  map  the  sine  wave 
input  while  the  response  at  area  18  should  be  very  sparse  because  only 
a  single  frequency  mode  is  excited.  As  the  input  sinusoid  is  varied 
in  frequency,  the  response  in  area  18  should  remain  sparse  and  move  to 
a  new  location  representing  the  new  single  frequency. 

To  accomplish  this  experiment,  large  arrays  of  data  from  cortical 
areas  17  and  18  must  be  recorded  and  analyzed.  To  insure  individual 
BCEs  are  contacted,  the  electrode  spacing  must  be  at  least  as  small 
as  each  individual  computing  element.  The  objective  of  this  thesis  is 
to  develop  and  test  a  prototype  multielectrode  array  that  can  accomplish 


III.  Mill tlelcct rode  Array  Design  and  Fabrication 

Ini  rod ut_t_i oji_ 

This  chapter  deals  with  the  design,  fabrication  and  initial  evalua¬ 
tion  oi  the  mult iel ectrode  array  (Fig  8).  The  first  section  of  this 
chapter  will  review  Tatman's  design  so  that  the  significance  of  his  work, 
to  tliis  thesis  can  be  understood.  In  addition,  this  section  will  describe 
the  design  changes  made  so  that  the  multielectrode  array  better  accommodates 
this  research  project.  The  next  two  sections  discuss  the  solution  of  the 
three  major  fabrication  problems  encountered  by  Tatman  and  the  process 
schedule  which  results  from  these  solutions.  The  last  two  sections 
describe  the  initial  evaluation  of  the  multiclectrode  array  and  provide 
suggestions  that  will  improve  the  device. 

Multielectrode  A^ray  Design  (Ref  11) 

Overview.  Tatman's  primary  design  criterion  was  to  develop  an 
array  of  closely  spaced  electrodes  that  could  record  the  electrical  signals 
existing  over  a  large  surface  area  of  the  visual  cortex  to  investigate 
the  possibility  that  the  average  membrane  potentials  over  these  surfaces, 
a  summation  of  the  EPSP's  and  IPSP's,  perform  the  reinforcement  and  cancel¬ 
lation  necessary  to  accomplish  a  Fourier  transform  computation.  This 
design  goal  is  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  this  thesis.  There 
are  however,  some  differences  between  Tatman's  specific  design  requirements 
and  those  of  this  thesis.  The  following  paragraphs  describe  the  signifi¬ 
cant  requirements  and  differences. 


40 


41 


InLc^rc  U'cl  rode  SiKicing.  As  previously  reported,  the  size  o*  is 
basic  computing  elements  (BCEs)  appear  to  be  between  0.05  and  0.5 
mi  1 1  inete rs  .  To  as.sure  at  least  one  electrode  contacts  each  t 

electrode  spacing  should  be  about  half  the  estimated  width  of  the  id  !' 

Tor  the  initial  experiment  it  is  assumed  that  the  BCEs  are  0.5  milli:;'  ■ 
ap.art  .  Consequently,  the  electrodes  should  be  arranged  on  0.25  millimc  iei 
centers.  Tatman's  multielectrode  array  meets  this  requirement. 

To  accurately  determine  the  size  of  the  BCE  the  electrodes  sp-acing  cc: 
be  reduced  until  two  electrodes  contact  the  same  BCE.  When  this  occurs, 
bioelectric  data  from  adjacent  elctrodes  should  be  closely  correlated. 

This  particular  experiment  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  thesis,  but  should 
be  tried  in  following  research  efforts. 

Array  Size .  Tatman  limited  the  size  of  the  array  to  four  by  four 
in  order  to  keep  the  device  simple,  yet  adequate  to  test  the  feasibility 
of  the  multiplexing  n\atrix  design.  For  the  same  reason,  the  research 
conducted  by  this  thesis  will  be  limited  to  a  four  by  four  array.  If  one 
assumes  the  BCE  size  is  0.5  millimeters,  the  array  will  contact  only  four 
BCEs.  It  is  likely  that  the  data  from  four  BCEs  will  not  be  sufficient 
to  provide  insight  into  the  transfer  function  between  cortical  areas 
17  and  18.  Fortunately,  the  prototype  array  is  inherently  expandable 
to  several  thousand  electrodes  because  of  the  fact  that  its  physical 
realization  is  based  on  integrated  circuit  technology.  Future  research 
should  include  experimentation  with  an  expanded  version  of  the 
multielectrode  array. 

Contact  Resistance .  Tatman  selected  gold  as  the  metal  for  electrode 
fabrication.  Gold  was  selected  because  it  can  be  worked  using  standard 
integrated  circuit  techniques  and  causes  the  least  tissue  damage  during 


ch.ronic  implanting.  Histological  studios  indicate  that  tlie  extent  of 

tissue  damage  in  chronic  implants  is  a  direct  function  of  ionic  exchange 

current  densities  produced  by  the  metal  electrode.  Gold  has  a  low  exchange 

-9 

curmu  density  and  its  measured  value  is  about  10  amps  per  square 
centi'iioter .  As  a  comparison,  the  measured  exchange  current  density 
for  silver  is  greater  than  10  ^  amps  per  square  centimeter. 

Unfortunately,  the  high  contact  impedance  of  the  gold  electrodes 
caused  noise  and  multiplexing  problems  (see  chapter  5).  Electrode 
impedance  can  be  approximated  as  a  parallel  resistor-capacitor  combination 
whose  values  vary  slightly  with  frequency  (Ref  26:1068).  For  inert  metals 
such  as  gold  and  silver,  an  electric  double  layer  is  produced  when  an 
electrode  is  inmiersed  in  an  ionic  solution  such  as  the  saline-rich 
cerebral  spinal  fluid  (CSF).  This  double  layer,  called  the  Helmholtz 
layer,  is  about  two  to  four  angstroms  thick.  The  Helmholtz  layer  creates 
an  electrolytic  capacitor  whose  measured  value  is  about  20  microfarads  per 
square  centimeter.  Each  electrode  has  an  exposed  surface  area  of  approxi¬ 
mately  0.016  square  millimeters.  Thus,  the  calculated  capacitance  is 
3100  picofarads.  The  parallel  resistance  value  can  be  calculated  based  on 
the  exchange  current  density.  For  the  exchange  current  densities  previously 

mentioned,  gold  has  a  resistance  value  of  about  10^  ohm-square  centimeters 

3 

and  silver  has  a  resistance  value  of  about  2.5  x  10  ohm-square  centinicters 
(Ref  27;21A).  Thus,  the  parallel  resistor  value  for  the  gold  electrode 
is  about  6  x  10^^  and  for  silver  is  about  16  x  10^  ohms.  Chloriding 
can  further  reduce  the  resistance  value  of  a  silver  electrode  (Ref  28:422). 
To  chloride  the  silver  electrode,  it  is  placed  in  a  solution  of  sodium 
chloride  and  a  voltage  is  applied  to  cause  the  chlorine  ions  to  react 


43 


Contact  resistances  of  12.5  ohm-square  centimeters 


t’..'  .silcer  surface. 

typicaiiy  result  from  tills  process.  Tlius,  tlie  calculated  silver-silver 

3 

chloride  I'leetrode  resistance  value  is  about  78  x  10  ohms. 

in  view  of  the  problems  associated  with  the  higli  impedance  gold 
electrode  and  the  fact  that  acute  rather  tiian  chronic  implants  would  be 
done,  the  electrodes  were  silver  plated  and  then  chlorided.  Table  I 
compares  the  calculated  impedance  values  of  the  gold  electrode  and  the  silver- 
silver  chloride  electrode.  Note  that  a  significant  side  benefit  obtained 
from  tlie  silver-silver  cltloride  electrode  is  its  relative  frequency 
independence  in  t!ie  desired  recording  range  of  1  to  40  Hertz. 

Multiplexing  Requirements .  To  determine  the  transfer  function 
between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex  requires  simultaneous, 
fine  grained  bioelectric  data  from  large  areas  of  these  cortical  regions. 

Since  future  research  work  will  extend  the  prototype  four  by  four  array 
to  hundreds  or  thousands  of  electrodes,  one  output  lead  from  each  electrode 
becomes  infeasible.  These  facts  led  to  the  idea  of  a  multiplexed  array 
with  all  signals  from  a  column  of  electrodes  of  the  array  multiplexed 
onto  a  single  lead.  Multiplexing  is  accomplished  with  junction  field 
effect  transistor  (JFET)  switches  fabricated  on  the  same  silicon  substrate 
as  the  electrodes  (Fig  9). 

During  normal  multiplexing  operation,  an  external  drive  circuit 
will  pinch-off  three  of  the  four  rows  of  normally  on,  n-channel  JFET 
switches.  As  a  result,  each  column  lead  receives  a  bioelectric  signal 
from  one  of  its  four  electrodes.  The  drive  circuit  will  scan  through  the 
four  rows  so  that  every  electrode  is  sampled  at  a  rate  sufficient  to  obtain 
valid  data  from  the  highest  frequency  component  of  the  bioelectric  signal. 
Thus,  the  four  by  four  array  requires  a  minimum  sampling  rate  of  320 


44 


TABLE  I 

Calculated  Electrode  Impedances 


Frequency 

(Hertz) 

Impedance 

(ohms) 

Gold 

Silver- 

Silver  Chloride 

0.1 

5  X  10® 

78  X  10® 

0.2 

2.6  X  10® 

00 

X 

»-» 

o 

0.5 

1  X  10® 

78  X  10® 

1.0 

5  X  10^ 

o 

X 

00 

2.0 

2.6  X  10^ 

78  X  10® 

5,0 

1  X  10^ 

77  X  10® 

10.0 

5  X  10® 

77  X  10® 

20.0 

2.6  X  10® 

76  X  10® 

40.0 

1.3  X  10® 

74  X  10® 

f 

45 


I 


(Afi.r  i-.or.  n!55) 

Fig.  9.  Hultielectrode  array  circuit  diagram. 

46 


Hertz  to  assure  the  40  Hertz  hioelectric  signals  arc  scanned  at  thc'  80 
Hertz  Nyquist  sampling  rate.  In  practice  the  sampling  rate  should  be 
somewhat  higher  than  the  Nyquist  rate  (Ref  29:696).  Consequently,  thc 
research  conducted  tor  this  thesis  will  use  a  1000  Hertz  sample  rate. 

The  details  of  the  multiplexing  drive  circuitry  are  contained  in  chapter  four. 

Thc  Instil  at  ion  Layer .  The  insulation  layer  over  the  silicon  substrate 
must  protect  the  active  devices  from  sodium  ion  invasion  caused  by  the 
CSF  and  be  selectively  removable  by  photolithographic  methods.  Chemical 
vapor  deposited  (CVD)  silicon  dioxide  insulated  the  first  nine  multielectrode 
arrays.  Device  lifetime  tests  proved  it  v;as  ineffective  in  protecting 
the  active  devices  in  a  sodium  chloride  solution  environment  (details 
of  the  lifetime  tests  are  in  chapter  five).  Alternatively,  a  plasma  deposited 
silicon  nitride  was  used  for  the  insulation  layer.  The  4000  angstrom 
silicon  nitride  layer  protected  the  device  for  sufficient  time  to  allow 
an  acute  implant  and  about  16  hours  of  data  acquisition. 

Solution  of  the  Three  Fabrication  Problems 

Tatman's  initial  fabrication  run  resulted  in  nonfunctional  devices. 

The  reasons  were  poor  contacts,  leakage  paths  between  the  drain,  source, 
and  gate,  and  cracking  of  the  CVD  silicon  dioxide  insulation  layer. 

The  following  paragraphs  describe  these  problems  and  their  solutions. 

The  first  major  problem  encountered  during  the  initial  fabrication 
run  was  lack  of  ohmic  contact  between  thc  silicon  surface  and  the  chrome- 
platinum-gold  film.  Instead  of  ohmic  contact,  Schottky  diode  characteristics 
were  observed  across  the  n-type  FF.T  channel  connections.  Since  the  FET 
channel  must  pass  microvolt  level  elcctrocncephalic  signals,  such  rectifying 
barriers  are  unacceptable.  Metal-semiconductor  rectifying  barriers  formed 


47 


on  ii-ty;>o  sc-ia iconduc Lo rs  are  generally  caused  by  high  resistivity  semicon¬ 
ductor  materials  (Ref  30:416).  Reduction  of  the  semiconductor  surface 
resistivity  usually  eliminates  the  barrier.  The  design  goal  was  to  develop 

a  de:;(.'iiorate  semiconductor  by  increasing  the  surface  impurity  concentration 
19 

to  6  X  10  per  cubic  centimeter  or  greater  with  an  n-type  enhancement 
diffusion.  A  degenerate  semiconductor  has  the  Fermi  level  within  the 
conduction  band  which  greatly  Increases  the  likelihood  of  ohmic  contact 
with  a  thin  film  metal. 

The  original  fabrication  run  resulted  in  a  surface  resistance  of 
about  300  ohms  per  square  (8  x  10^^  per  cubic  centimeter  impurity  concen¬ 
tration).  After  diffusion  equipment  modification,  this  surface  resistance 

20 

was  lowered  to  6.8  ohms  per  square  (10  per  cubic  centimeter  impurity 
concentration).  To  determine  if  the  resulting  concentration  would  yield 
ohmic  contact,  the  following  test  was  conducted. 

The  final  enhancement  diffusion  test  was  evaluated  by  metalizlng 
the  test  wafer  surface  with  60  mil  aluminum  dots  and  measuring  the  electrical 
characteristics  between  two  dots  spaced  approximately  300  mils  apart. 

The  metal-semiconductor  contacts  had  a  linear  and  symmetrical  voltage- 
current  relationship  with  a  resistance  of  about  1.7  x  10^  ohms.  The  final 
enhancement  diffusion  procedure  appears  in  the  revised  process  schedule. 

The  second  major  problem  encountered  during  the  initial  fabrication 
run  was  leakage  paths  between  the  gate,  source,  and  drain  leads  of  the  JFET 
switches  (Ref  11:85).  Tnese  leakage  paths  prevented  the  turning  off  of 
the  JFET  switches.  It  was  suspected  that  impurities  in  the  passivation 
oxide  layer  created  the  leakage  paths  by  providing  free  ion  current 
carriers  between  the  JFET  leads.  Past  research  by  commercial  semiconductor 


manufacturers  indic:aLes  tliat  the  sodium  ions  in  the  oxide  layer  causes 
the  large  majority  of  leakage  current.  To  reduce  the  effects  of  sodium  ions 
in  tiie  oxide,  several  test  o.xidation  runs  were  accomplished  at  various 
times  after  purging  the  oxidation  furnace  tube  with  gdseous  hydrochloric 
acid  (hCl) .  The  HCl  purge  diffused  ntgative  chlorine  ions  into  the  furnace 
tube  which  outgassed  during  the  oxidation  growth  process.  Chlorine  ions 
absorbed  by  the  oxide  combined  with  sodium  ions  producing  non-ionic 
sodium  chloride.  Capacitor-voltage  (C-V)  bias-temperature  stress  measurements 
were  made  to  determine  the  effect  of  the  HCl  purge  on  oxide's  free  ion  content. 

The  C-V  bias-temperature  stress  test  consisted  of  first  growing  a 
1000  to  2000  angstrom  oxide  layer  on  a  test  wafer  and  rnetalizing  the 
oxide  surface  so  that  a  metal-insulator-semiconductor  (MIS)  structure 
was  created.  The  structure  was  then  subjected  to  an  initial  C-V  test 
which  determined  its  capacitance  as  a  function  of  a  potential  difference 
developed  between  the  semiconductor  and  metal  surface.  Following  the 
Initial  evaluation,  the  MIS  structure  was  subjected  to  approximately 
10  volts  per  1000  angstroms,  referenced  to  the  semiconductor  substrate. 

In  addition,  the  MIS  structure  was  heated  to  250  degrees  centigrade  for 
five  minutes.  As  a  result,  any  cations  in  the  oxide  moved  away  from  the 
metal  surface,  while  anions  moved  toward  the  metal.  After  the  bias- 
temperature  stress  application,  another  C-V  curve  was  obtained.  Then,  a 
reverse  voltage  stress  was  applied,  along  with  another  heating  cycle. 

Subsequent  to  this  second  bias-temperature  stress,  a  third  C-V  curve  was 
obtained.  The  C-V  curves  indicated  the  type  of  ion  current  carriers 
because  shifts  in  these  curves  were  caused  by  mobile  ion  activity  at  the 
silicon-insulator  interface.  The  direction  of  the  C-V  curve  shift 
identified  the  offending  ion. 


49 


# 


The  design  goal  was  to  produce  a  C-V  curve  shift  of  less  than 
two  volts  for  a  2000  angstrom  thick  oxide.  A  two  volt  shift  in  the  2000 
angstrom  oxide  indicates  approximately  2  x  10  ^  charge  drifts  per  square 
centimoter  (Ref  31). 

IlCl  purging  the  tube  immediately  before  the  oxide  growth  process 
resulted  in  C-V  stress  curves  which  indicated  approximately  7  x  10^^ 
negative  ion  current  drifts  per  square  centimeter.  It  was  suspected 
that  excessive  chlorine  ions  entered  the  oxide  surface  during  growth. 

C-V  testa  of  a  MIS  structure  whose  oxide  was  grown  eight  days  after  a 
four  hour  HCl  purge  showed  approximately  4.2  x  10^^  positive  ion  drifts 
per  square  centimeter,  i^dditional  testing  indicated  that  oxides  grown 
24  to  36  hours  after  an  HCl  purge  would  likely  yield  near  zero  C-V  curve 
shifts  during  bias-temperature  stress  tests.  In  other  words,  sufficient 
chlorine  ions  would  diffuse  into  the  oxide  during  thermal  growth  to  exactly 
negate  the  effects  of  sodium  ions  injected  during  the  metalization  process. 
Since  the  multielectrode  array  would  be  subjected  to  a  concentration  of 
150  millimoles  per  liter  of  sodium  ions  in  the  cerebral  spinal  fluid, 
the  passivation  oxide  layer  was  grown  in  a  chlorine  rich  environment. 

This  would  extend  the  lifetime  of  the  device  by  providing  free  chlorine 
ions  to  combine  with  the  sodium  ions  entering  the  passivation  layer  from 
the  CSF.  Thus,  the  revised  process  schedule  reflects  a  four  hour  HCl 
purge  and  a  fourteen  hour  nitrogen  purge,  followed  by  passivation  oxide 
growth . 

Test  wafers  that  accompanied  the  circuit  wafers  in  the  final  oxide 
growth  process  indicated  a  drift  of  6.8  x  10^^  negative  charges  per  square 
centimeter  which  was  well  within  the  desired  limit  of  2  x  10  charges 
per  square  centimeter. 


50 


Tile  thirc)  major  problem  encountered  during  the  initial  fabrication 
run  was  cracking  of  the  final  passivation  layer.  The  cracks  appeared 
along  the  gold  metalization  runs  which  indicated  that  the  chemical  vapor 
deposition  (CVD)  silicon  dioxide  was  too  brittle  to  witiistand  the  thermal 
expan.' i on  coefficient  differences  during  cool-down.  To  preclude  cracking, 
phosphorous  was  added  to  the  CVD  silicon  dioxide  during  deposition.  The  phos¬ 
phorous  produced  a  less  brittle  glass  passivation  layer.  After  several 
test  runs,  the  following  CVD  schedule  was  adopted: 

1.  10  minute  prelieat  to  435  degrees  centigrade. 

2.  5  minute  deposition  of  7000  angstroms  of  phosphorous  silicon 
dioxide . 

The  gas  flow  rates  during  deposition  were  as  follows: 

29  liters/minute  of  nitrogen 
255  cubic  centimeters/minute  of  oxygen 
610  cubic  centimeters/minute  of  4%  silane 
500  cubi/"  centimeters/minute  of  1%  phosphorous 
The  schedule  and  flow  rates  are  incorporated  into  the  revised 
fabrication  scliedule. 

Multielect rode  Array  Fabrication 

The  following  paragraphs  review  three  significant  aspects  of  the 
fabrication  schedule  contained  in  Appendix  B.  These  aspects  are:  boron 
glass  removal  after  the  isolation  diffusion,  wire  attachment  procedures, 
and  silver-silver  chloriding  the  electrodes.  For  a  more  complete  discussion 
of  the  fabrication  procedure,  the  interested  reader  is  referred  to  Appendix 
B  of  this  thesis. 


51 


After  the  110  minute  boron  isolation  diffusion,  the  boron  glass 
must  be  removed  in  preparation  for  the  gate  oxidation  step.  Considerable 
difficulty  was  experienced  in  removing  the  boron  glass.  It  is  believed 
that  two  factors  contributed  to  this  problem.  The  first  factor  is  the 
boron  source  wafers  were  new.  As  a  result,  the  source  wafers  provided 
high  levels  of  boron  dopant  during  the  diffusion  process.  The  second 
factor  was  an  insufficient  oxygen  flow  rate  during  the  diffusion. 

The  original  process  schedule  required  30  cubic  centimeters  per  minute 
of  oxygen  mixed  with  one  liter  per  minute  of  nitrogen.  The  boron  glass 
resulting  from  this  diffusion  could  not  be  removed  with  20  minutes  of 
soak  time  in  a  1:10  hydrofluoric  acid:deionized  water  bath.  Results  of 
diffusions  with  test  wafers  indicated  tliat  50  cubic  centimeters  per  minute 
of  oxyger  ’’mproved  the  removal  characteristics  of  the  boron  glass.  This 
glass  was  removed  in  about  15  minutes  of  soak  time  in  the  dilute  hydro¬ 
fluoric  acid. 

To  assure  improved  boron  glass  removal,  a  hot  nitric  acid  soak 
step  was  included  in  the  fabrication  schedule.  Tests  indicate  that  this 
modification  of  tlie  fabrication  schedule  improved  the  process,  but  did  not 
completely  remove  the  boron  glass.  The  electrical  tests  section  describes 
a  problem  caused  by  residual  boron  glass. 

A  novel  procedure  was  developed  to  attach  the  wire  leads  to  the  nine 
peripheral  bonding  pads  (Fig  10).  After  photoli thographically  removing  the 
silicon  nitride  on  the  bonding  pads,  the  multielectrode  array  was  placed 
on  a  thermal  chuck  and  heated  to  200  degrees  centigrade.  Each  pad  was 
tinned  with  60/A0  tin-lead  solder,  and  the  device  was  cooled  to  room 
temperature.  Then,  30  gauge  insulated  wires  were  individually  soldered  to 


52 


53 


the  bonding  pads  with  a  small  soldering  iron.  After  the  leads  were  attached, 
the  sc'ldcring  flux  was  removed  with  a  one  minute  bath  in  trichloroethylene 
followed  by  a  30  second  wash  in  methyl  alcohol.  The  device  was  then 
washed  in  deionized  water  for  five  minutes  and  dried  with  nitrogen  gas. 

For  extracellular  bioelectric  potential  measurements,  frequencies 
below  40  Hertz  are  of  interest.  To  reduce  the  low  frequency  contact 
impedance,  the  gold  electrodes  were  covered  by  silver  chloride.  First 
silver  was  electroly tically  deposited  with  a  200  microamp  current  for 
40  seconds  (Ref  28:422).  Electrical  contact  with  the  electrodes  was 
accomplished  by  tying  all  four  column  leads  together  and  attaching  them  to 
the  negative  lead  of  the  plating  power  supply.  The  positive  lead  of  the 
power  supply  was  connected  to  a  pure  silver  anode  which  was  immersed 
in  the  silver  plating  solution.  The  plating  solution  consisted  of  2  ounces 
of  potassium  silver  cyanide,  3  ounces  of  potassium  cyanide,  and  27  ounces 
of  distilled  water.  After  silver  plating  the  electrodes,  they  were 
chlorided.  The  chloriding  process  consisted  of  immersing  the  array  in  a 
sodium  chloride  solution  and  passing  320  microamps  of  current  through 
the  electrodes  for  10  seconds. 

Results  of  Electrical  Tests 

The  following  paragraphs  describe  the  results  of  curve  tracer  tests 
on  the  JFETs  in  the  multielectrode  array.  In  addition,  percent  yield  is 
discussed  along  with  the  two  primary  failure  modes  for  the  nonworking 
devices . 

To  determine  the  curve  tracer  characteristics,  40  JFETs  from  11 
circuits  on  2  wafers  were  tested.  Five  JFETs  from  three  different 


54 


circuits  on  the  same  wafer  were  tested  before  and  after  sintering  at 
435  degrees  centigrade.  In  every  case,  the  following  parameters  were 
measured:  channel  on-resistance  (R^) ,  pinch-off  voltage  channel 

on-current  (Ijgg) >  anti  channel  breakdown  voltage.  Figure  11  shows  a 
typical  curve  tracer  test  result. 

Pre-sintered  of  the  operational  devices  varied  from  1,600  to 
3,500  ohms  and  was  typically  2,200  ohms.  Within  a  particular  array, 
on-channel  resistance  of  the  16  JFETs  varied  less  than  25  percent.  After 
sintering  for  10  minutes  at  435  degrees  centigrade,  increased  to  values 
ranging  from  6,700  to  10,000  ohms.  As  with  the  pre-sintered  devices, 

R^  varied  less  than  25  percent  between  the  JFETs  within  a  particular  circuit. 

The  pinch-off  voltage  of  operational  circuits  varied  from  0.6  to 


2.2  volts.  The  typical  was  1.2  volts.  Sintering  did  not  significantly 
affect  pinch-off  voltage  and  of  the  16  JFETs  within  any  particular 
device  varied  less  than  10  percent. 


The  initial  design  requirements  called  for  R^  to  bo  about  650  ohms 

with  a  V  of  3  volts.  Since  the  JFET  switch  terminates  a  78  kilohm  elec- 
P 

trode  with  a  10  megohm  input  impedance  amplifier,  R^  is  not  critical, 
and  can  be  as  high  as  100  kilohms  without  seriously  degrading  system 
performance.  Thus,  even  though  the  devices  have  values  ten  times 
greater  than  the  initial  design  goal,  they  are  acceptable  for  use  in  this 
research  project.  The  pinch-off  voltage  is  also  quite  acceptable  in 


that  lower  values  reduce  the  gating  noise  created  by  the  multiplexing 
drive  circuitry.  It  appears  that  excessive  gate  diffusion  depth  increased 


R  and  reduced  V  . 
c  p 


55 


Fig.  11.  JFET  Curve  Tracer  Characteristics. 


I 


Pre-slntered  varicil  Ironi  80  to  400  microamps  with  a  typical 

value  of  200  microamps.  Sintering  reduced  the  I.  values  to  20-80 

dss 

mirroai'iiH  vji  th  a  typical  value  of  60  microamps.  While  not  critical, 
the  1^^^  changes  caused  by  sintering  reflect  the  inherent  increase  in  . 

In  all  cases  the  cltannel  breakdown  voltage  exceeds  the  requirements 
of  this  research  project.  Breakdown  voltages  ranged  from  6  to  50  volts 
with  a  typical  value  of  40  volts.  The  occasional  6  volt  breakdown  is 
probably  caused  by  surface  effects.  Even  6  volts  is  an  acceptable 
breakdouTi  limit  because  the  highest  applied  voltage  to  the  device  is  the 
pinch-off  voltage,  which  never  exceeds  2.2  volts. 

Percent  yield  was  estimated  by  caref\il  examination  of  each  device 
with  a  light  microscope.  Electrical  tests  substantiated  the  findings  of 
the  microscopic  examination.  Of  54  circuits,  37  were  considered  operational 
for  a  69  percent  yield.  Electrical  tests  confirmed  that  the  nonfunctional 
devices  experienced  two  primary  failure  modes. 

The  first  failure  mode  was  improper  etching  of  the  contact  windows 
through  the  final  oxidation  layer.  Several  nonfunctional  JFET  devices 
exhibited  electrically  open  channel  pathways.  Microscopic  examination  of 
these  devices  confirmed  that  the  metal  did  not  contact  the  silicon 
substrate.  In  every  case,  the  nonfunctional  devices  were  those  situated 
around  the  periphery  of  the  wafer.  It  appears  that  the  boron  glass  removal 
step  contributed  to  this  problem  because  the  residual  boron  glaze  along 
the  edge  of  the  wafer  prevented  firm  impingement  of  the  metalization 
contact  mask  with  the  wafer  surface  during  photolithographic  printing. 

The  second  failure  mode  was  a  lack  of  isolation  diffusion  between 
JFET  devices.  Four  circuits  on  one  wafer  exhibited  this  characteristic. 


57 


'  I'r.  'iliM  vM  ,  c  iu.si-d  by  i-.iipruj.or  ctchLrij;  through  the  initial  oxidation 
bi’\)ie  t!,e  isolation  ciiifusion. 

p_csig,n  I  niniovcnicnts 

A  review  of  tlic  ultimate  objective  of  this  research  project  and  the 
characti-ri St ics  of  the  prototype  multiclectrode  array  suggests  some  improve¬ 
ments  to  its  design.  These  improvements  are  beyond  the  scope  of  this  thesis 
project,  but  should  he  considered  for  future  research  work.  Some  of  these 
suggestions  have  appeared  in  previous  sections  of  this  thesis  and  all 
suggestion;  will  he  repeated  in  the  recommendations  section.  They  are 
placed  here  to  serve  as  a  summary  of  this  chapter. 

For  simplicity,  the  prototype  array  contains  only  16  electrodes.  It 
is  likely  that  this  four  by  four  array  will  not  provide  sufficient  coverage 
of  the  visual  cortex.  Future  research  should  include  50  by  50  or  larger 
arrays  so  that  the  activity  of  several  thousand  basic  computing  elements 
can  be  simultaneously  recorded. 

The  requiremcn;  to  use  silver-silver  chloride  electrodes  highlights 
the  need  for  a  buffer  amplifier  dedicated  to  each  electrode.  This  buffer 
amplifier  might  be  a  JFET  which  could  be  fabricated  directly  on  the 
silicon  substrate  along  with  the  JFET  switches.  The  JFET  amplifiers  could 
have  input  impedances  greater  than  100  megohms  and  output  impedances 
less  then  500  ohms,  virtually  eliminating  crosstalk  and  stray  noise 
pickup  from  the  system  (Ref  27:212). 

Once  large  arrays  with  buffer  amplifiers  are  available,  they  will 
be  able  to  recc rd  bioelectric  data  from  large  surface  areas  of  the  visual 
rortex.  To  reduce  the  effort  associated  with  implanting  these  devices  in 
test  animals,  chronic  implants  should  be  considered.  To  ensure  the  long 


58 


life  required  for  chronic  implants  however,  a  new  passivation  material 
must  be  developed.  Silicon  nitride  protected  the  prototype  divice  for 
about  16  hours.  It  is  desirable  to  extend  the  device  lifetime  to  weeks 
or  months.  The  problem  of  protecting  active  devices  in  a  sodium  chloride 
solution  environment  is  perhaps  the  most  difficult  problem  for  future 
researchers  (Ref  32)  . 

Once  the  passivation  problem  is  solved  and  chronic  implants  become  a 
reality,  one  should  consider  developing  a  hybrid  circuit  that  contains 
the  multielectrode  array,  buffer  amplifiers,  multiplexers,  multiplexing 
drive  circuitry,  and  RF  data  link  transmitter.  With  such  a  hybrid  circuit 
a  researcher  is  no  longer  tied  to  a  surgical  operating  room  for  the  experi¬ 
mental  process,  and  the  visual  perception  mechanism  can  he  analyzed  in 
its  natural  environment.  The  results  of  such  an  experiment  may 
provide  the  data  necessary  to  determine  how  the  mammalian  visual 
perception  system  works. 


IV .  Support  iMcctronlcs 


Introd.icLi^n^ 

Tliis  chapter  deals  with  the  design,  fabrication  and  operation  of  the 
cquIprAMit  required  to  support  the  mult iclectrode  array.  The  first  section 
contains  system  descriptions  of  the  equipment  used  for  the  data  recording 
and  play-back  modes.  In  addition,  it  discusses  the  functional  requirements 
for  the  various  components  of  these  systems.  The  second  section  contains 
a  detailed  diagram  of  the  drive  circuitry,  which,  except  for  the  multi¬ 
electrode  array,  is  the  only  fabricated  component  of  the  data  recording 
system.  The  second  section  also  discusses  the  major  design  decisions 
involved  in  its  development . 

To  facilitate  understanding  the  system  descriptions,  this  paragraph 
provides  an  overview  of  the  in  vivo  test  set-up  and  procedure.  Following 
anesthetization  of  the  test  animal,  the  skull  is  opened  over  the  visual  cor¬ 
tical  region  of  the  brain.  The  dura  is  incised  and  two  multielectrode 
arrays  are  placed  on  the  pia  of  the  cortical  surface.  The  first  array 
rests  on  the  primary  visual  cortex,  or  area  17,  while  tlie  second  array 
is  on  the  secondary  visual  cortex,  or  area  18.  Each  array  is  connected 
to  a  drive  circuit  that  provides  both  the  multiplexing  drive  signals 
and  the  load  resistors  for  the  column  lead  outputs.  A  master  clock  will 
strobe  the  drive  circuits.  The  experimenter  places  a  projection  screen  in 
the  visual  perception  area  of  the  test  animal.  A  projector  controlled  by  an 
electronic  shutter  displays  spatial  sine  wave  gratings  to  the  test  animal. 
During  visual  stimulation,  the  electronic  shutter  trigger  is  recorded  on 
one  channel  of  an  FM  tape  recorder.  In  addition,  the  clock  signals. 


fr.;:-.-  p.iilsi,'  from  ti>e  drive  circuit,  and  eight  column  lead  signals  are 
recorded  on  tlie  FM  tape  recorder. 

System  Descriptions 

Record  Mode .  The  objective  of  the  multielectrode  array  and  support 
electronics  operation  is  to  simultaneously  record  bioelectric  data  from 
areas  17  and  18  of  the  cerebral  cortex  (Fig  4).  The  stimulus  onset  event 
must  also  be  recorded  so  that  future  data  analysis  can  identify  electro- 
encephalic  events  as  a  function  of  time  after  visual  stimulation.  Figure  12 
is  a  block  diagram  of  the  multielectrode  arrays  and  support  electronics 
required  to  accomplish  this  task.  Except  for  the  multielectrode  array 
and  the  drive  circuitry,  all  equipment  is  commercially  available.  This 
fact  simplifies  experimental  equipment  set-up  and  maintenance.  The 
following  paragraph  describes  the  record  mode  operation  and  the  equipment 
required  for  this  mode. 

There  are  fifteen  pieces  of  equipment  required  for  recording  electro- 
encephalic  data:  the  clock,  the  drive  circuitry  for  each  multielectrode  array, 
two  multielectrode  arrays,  an  Ampex  1300  FM  tape  recorder,  eight  PAR  model 
113  low  noise  preamplifiers,  and  visual  stimulus  trigger.  The  clock 
provides  a  one  kilohertz,  -6  volt  square  wave  to  the  drive  circuitry  and 
to  channel  one  of  the  FM  tape  recorder.  Each  drive  circuit  converts  the 
clock  timing  signals  to  the  correct  voltage  levels  for  sequentially  scanning 
the  JFET  multiplexing  switches  in  the  two  multielectrode  arrays.  The  drive 
circuit  also  generates  a  frame  pulse  that  indicates  when  the  first  row  of 
JFETs  are  being  scanned.  This  frame  pulse  presets  the  area  18  drive 
circuit  to  scan  row  one  so  that  both  array  multiplexers  remain  in  synchro¬ 
nization.  The  frame  pulse  is  also  recorded  so  that  demultiplexing  operations 


61 


can  be  accomplished.  Figure  13  is  a  timing  and  voltage  level  diagram 
which  shows  the  relationship  between  the  master  clock  signals,  each  JFET 
row  controller  output,  and  the  frame  pulse. 

The  eight  preamplifiers  band-pass  filter  and  amplify  the  multiplexed 
microvolt  level  electroencephalic  signals  from  each  column  lead  of  the 
two  multielectrode  arrays.  The  preamplifiers  operate  from  a  self-contained 
battery  pack  so  that  60  Hertz  noise  levels  are  reduced.  The  PAR  113 
preamplifier  was  chosen  because  of  its  low  noise,  high  gain  and  common 
mode  rejection  capabilities.  The  amplifier  has  an  ambient  noise  level  of 
approximately  1.0  microvolt,  a  variable  gain  from  10  to  25,000,  and  120  dB 
common  mode  rejection. 

The  14  track  FM  tape  recorder  receives  the  amplified,  multiplexed 
bioelectric  signals  from  area  17  and  records  them  on  channels  two  through 
five.  Channels  six  through  nine  receive  bioelectric  signals  from  area  18. 
Channel  10  contains  voice  commentary  concerning  the  experiment  and  channel 
ll  receives  a  stimulus  onset  signal  from  an  electronic  shutter.  The 
electronic  shutter  controls  the  output  of  a  slide  projector  which  displays 
spatial  sine  wave  gratings  on  a  projection  screen  situated  in  the  visual 
perception  area  of  the  test  animal.  Channel  12  of  the  recorder  receives 
the  framing  pulse  from  the  drive  electronics. 

To  record  bioelectric  signals,  the  electronic  shutter  is  triggered 
and  a  spatial  sine  wave  grating  is  presented  to  the  test  animal.  The 
recorder  receives  the  stimulus  onset  pulse  along  with  the  appropriate  voice 
commentary.  This  procedure  is  repeated  for  several  different  spatial 
frequencies.  The  clock  and  framing  pulses,  and  the  stimulus  onset  trigger 


63 


Fig.  13.  Timing  and  voltage  level  diagram. 


allow  retrieval  of  the  multiplexed  bioelectric  signals  as  a  function  of  time 


from  stimulus  onset. 

Playback  Mode .  Data  retrieval  is  accomplished  in  the  playback 
mode  (Fig  14).  The  FM  tape  recorder  is  connected  to  the  input  port  of  an 
analog-to-dlgltal  (A/D)  converter.  To  insure  signal  synchronization  the 
stimulus  onset  pulse  is  used  to  initiate  the  A/D  conversion  process. 

The  process  consists  of  making  ten  passes  through  each  data  block,  where 
a  data  block  is  defined  as  the  information  recorded  after  a  single  stimulus 
onset.  In  each  pass,  a  single  recorder  channel  is  digitized.  Recorder 
channels  one  and  twelve  (clock  and  frame  pulses)  are  digitized  to  obtain 
timing  signals  required  for  demultiplexing  the  bioelectric  data.  Then, 
the  bioelectric  data  recorded  on  channels  two  through  nine  are  digitized  and 
stored  as  computer  record  blocks.  The  demultiplexing  and  filtering  operations 
are  accomplished  with  software. 

Drive  Circuitry 

The  drive  circuitry  was  designed  to  convert  master  clock  pulses  to 
properly  timed  drive  voltages  for  the  multielectrode  array  row  leads 
(Fig  15).  These  row  lead  drive  pulses  are  the  multielectrode  array  multi¬ 
plexing  drive  signals.  In  addition,  the  drive  circuit  produces  a  framing 
pulse  that  is  used  for  array  multiplexing  synchronization  during  the  record 
mode  and  signal  demultiplexing  during  the  playback  mode.  The  drive 
circuitry  also  contains  the  load  resistors  across  which  the  bioelectric 
signals  are  generated  for  input  into  the  preamplifiers.  Battery  operation 
of  the  preamplifier  minimizes  60  Hertz  noise  on  these  signals.  The  drive 
circuit  can  be  driven  by  the  master  clock  so  that  it  scans  the  entire 


Playback  system  block  diagram 


Fig.  15.  Drive  circuit  and  array. 


multielectrode  array,  or  be  preset  to  monitor  a  desired  row  of  electrodes. 
Since  the  pinch-off  voltage  of  the  multielectrode  arrays  can  vary  from 
0.6  to  2.2  volts  (see  Chapter  3),  the  drive  circuit  was  designed  to  provide 
a  pinch-off  voltage  level  which  is  adjustable  between  0.0  and  6.0  volts. 

CMOS  logic  devices  were  used  for  the  drive  circuitry  design.  CMOS  w 
chosen  to  reduce  noise  and  power  supply  current  requirements.  The  following 
paragraphs  describe  the  logic  circuitry  operation  and  the  major  design 
requirements . 

The  4029  presettable  up/do\TO  counter  is  used  to  produce  the  four 
bit  code  required  to  drive  the  display  and  switching  circuitry.  The 
4029  is  used  in  its  preset  mode  when  the  experimenter  wants  to  look  at  a 
particular  electrode  output.  The  preset  value  is  controlled  by  switches 
one  through  four.  V?hen  multiplexing  is  desired,  the  4029  is  driven  by  the 
master  clock  and  operates  in  the  binary  count-up  mode.  The  4502  strobed 
hex  inverter,  the  4001  quad  nor  gate,  and  the  two  4011  quad  nand  gate  circuits 
produce  the  logic  levels  required  to  control  the  two  4016  quad  bilateral 
switches  and  to  generate  the  frame  pulse.  The  area  17  drive  circuit  generates 
the  frame  pulse  which  is  sent  to  the  area  18  drive  circuit.  The  area  18 
drive  circuit  receives  the  frame  pulse  at  the  4029  preset  line.  With 
all  preset  data  switches  set  to  zero,  each  frame  pulse  forces  the  drive 
circuit  to  scan  the  first  row.  This  slave  operation  of  the  area  18  drive 
circuit  guarantees  synchronous  multiplexing  by  both  multielectrode  arrays. 
Synchronous  operation  is  necessary  to  allow  correct  demultiplexing  during 
the  playback  mode  operation. 


68 


The  ‘'(016-1  package  controls  the  pinch-off  voltage  levels  to  the  rov; 
leads  of  the  mult ielcctrode  array,  while  the  4016-2  package  scans  the 
column  leads  during  multiplexing.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  results 
of  in  vitro  testing  determined  that  strobing  the  column  leads  is  unnecessary. 
As  a  result,  the  4016-2  package  is  removed  from  the  drive  circuit  during  in 
vitro  tests. 

The  4016-1  quad  bilateral  switch  routes  the  pinch-off  voltages 

to  the  row  leads  during  multiplexing.  In  the  off  mode,  the  switch  impedance 

g 

is  approximately  10  ohms.  When  turned  on,  t!ie  switch  behaves  as  a  nearly 
linear  300  ohm  resistor.  To  provide  the  proper  pinch-off  voltage,  a 
variable  voltage  power  supply  is  connected  to  each  switch  output  lead 
througli  a  22  kilohm  resistor.  All  switch  input  leads  are  tied  to  ground. 

When  the  switch  is  on,  the  corresponding  row  of  JFETs  in  the  multielec- 
trodc  array  are  turned  on  because  the  gate  leads  are  forced  to  ground 
potential.  With  the  switch  turned  off,  the  pinch-off  voltage  is  supplied 
to  the  corresponding  row  of  JFETs  through  the  22  kilohm  resistors.  Note 
that  a  return  path  for  gate  leakage  current  is  supplied  by  the  10  megohm 
load  resistor  on  each  column  lead.  Measured  gate  leakage  current  is 
approximately  five  nanoamps  which  means  that  the  resulting  voltage  drop 
across  the  load  resistor  is  about  50  millivolts.  This  voltage  drop  creates 
an  offset  voltage  to  the  input  of  the  preamplifier.  To  preclude  amplifier 
saturation,  the  preamplifier  is  AC  coupled  to  the  column  lead.  AC  coupling 
does  not  degrade  low  frequency  respo.ise  of  the  amplifier  because  the 
three  dB  rolloff  point  is  0.03  Hertz,  which  Is  below  the  desired  signal 
bandwidth  of  1  to  40  Hertz. 


69 


Tluire  were  two  conflicting  design  constraints  for  selecting  the 
column  lead's  JO  megolim  load  resistor  value.  First,  the  load  resistor  must 


be  much  larger  in  value  than  the  electrode  source  impedance  to  minimize 
bioelectric  signal  voltage  loss.  Second,  it  must  be  much  smaller  in  value 
than  the  of f-resistance  of  the  JFET  switch  so  that  the  bioelectric  signal 
on-off  voltage  ratio  is  high  (Fig  16).  The  calculated  silver-silver  chloride 

4 

electrode  impedance  is  78  Icllohms  resistive  (approximately  10  ohms),  and 

4 

the  measured  characteristics  of  the  JFET  switch  indicate  10  ohms 

9 

on-resistance  and  10  olims  off-resistance.  Since  the  preamplifier  input 
9 

impedance  is  10  ohms,  one  can  assume  it  is  infinite  because  the  load 
resistor  value  is  several  orders  of  magnitude  smaller.  The  first  design 
constraint  was  to  require  at  least  99  percent  of  the  bioelectric  signal 
voltage  to  be  developed  across  the  load  resistor.  Using  the  voltage  divider 
equation , 

Vi/V^  - 

where 

=  voltage  across  the  load  resistor 

V  =  bioelectric  signal  voltage 

=  load  resistor  value 

R  =  electrode  resistance 
e 

R^  =  JFET  multiplexing  switch  on-resistance 
The  requirement  for  the  ratio  to  be  greater  than  0.99  results  in  a 

load  resistance  value  which  must  be  greater  than  10.9  megohms.  The 
second  design  constraint  was  to  require  that  less  than  one  percent  of 
the  bioelectric  signal  be  developed  across  the  load  resistor  when  the  JFET 
multiplexing  switch  was  off.  A  similar  calculation  with  the  voltage 
divider  equation  Indicated  that  the  load  resistor  must  be  less  than  10.1 
megohms.  Both  constraints  could  not  be  simultaneously  met,  but  10  megohms 


1 


70 


Fig.  l6.  JFET  switch  equivalent  circuit. 


is  sufliciently  close  to  allow  successful  operation  of  the  multielectrode 
array.  In  fact,  signal  voltage  on-off  ratio  resulting  from  the  10  megohm 
load  resistor  is  about  40  dB. 

The  4050  hex  buffer  provided  drive  current  to  the  TTL  hexadecimal 
indicator.  This  indicator  showed  the  electrode  that  was  being  interrogated 
in  the  preset  mode.  Since  the  TTL  display  consumed  considerably  more  current 
than  the  CMOS  devices,  a  switch  was  added  to  turn  off  the  display  during 
clocked  multiplexing  operation. 


72 


V.  In  Vitro  Mul  t  ielectrocle  Arrav  Evaluation 


Int  roiEict  i  on 

A  series  of  in  vitro  tests  were  conducted  to  determine  how  well  the 
multiel  i  ctrode  array  performed  in  obtaining  and  multiplexing  p‘:eudo- 
bioelectric  data.  The  primary  motivation  for  tliis  evaluation  wa.s  to 
identify  any  operational  anomalies  before  a  live  animal  was  used  for  testing. 
An  in  vitro  evaluation  procedure  was  established  that  tested  both  the 
multielectrode  array  and  the  support  electronics.  This  chapter  contains  an 
explanation  of  the  evaluation  procedures,  success  criteria,  and  the 
results  of  these  tests. 

For  all  in  vitro  tests  except  those  conducted  in  a  saline  t)ath 
environment,  the  multiclectrode  array  was  placed  on  a  vacuum  chuck  in 
a  probe  station  of  the  type  commonly  found  in  the  microelectronics  industry. 

A  microscope  v;as  used  to  observe  needle  probe  placement  on  the  electrodes. 

The  multiclectrode  array  on  test  had  all  w’re  leads  attached  and  terminated 
to  the  support  electronics  or  test  equipment  required  for  evaluation.  The 
microscope  light  was  turned  off  to  minimize  test  artifacts  due  to 
photoelectric  effects. 

The  first  section  describes  the  static  FET  pinch-off  tests  and 
compares  the  test  results  to  previous  curve  tracer  data.  The  second 
section  describes  the  column  lead  crosstalk  evaluation,  defines  the 
predetermined  crosstalk  limits,  and  reports  the  results  of  the  crosstalk 
evaluation.  The  third  section  explains  the  ambient  noise  tests,  and  the 
results  of  lifetime  tests  are  covered  in  the  fourth  section.  Some  interesting 
observations  concerning  multiplexing  speed  as  a  function  of  electrode 


73 


i::'pt  tlaiicf  arc  presented  in  section  five.  In  addition,  this  section 
describes  the  effects  of  the  pinch-off  voltage  on  device  lifetime  in  a 
saline  bath  environment.  Section  six  covers  frequency  response  tests  with 
both  p'ld  and  silver-silver  chloride  electrodes.  This  section  also  presents 
the  rationale  for  silver  plating  the  gold  electrodes. 

Static  Pi nch-of f  Tc.sts 

Test  Set-up.  In  preparation  for  the  static  pinch-off  tests,  the 
electrode  associated  with  the  JFET  on  test  was  contacted  with  a  needle  probe. 
An  audio  oscillator  was  connected  to  the  JFET  drain  lead  through  the  needle 
probe.  The  audio  oscillator  signal  ground  was  connected  to  the  preamplifier 
signal  grotind  and  the  JFET  source  lead  was  terminated  across  a  10  megohm 
load  resistor  to  signal  ground.  The  resulting  voltages  developed  across 
the  load  resistor  were  input  to  a  PAR  113  preamplifier.  The  preamplifier 
gain  was  set  at  100  and  the  3  dB  rolloff  points  for  the  low  pass  and  high 
pass  filters  were  set  at  0.03  and  3000  Hertz  respectively.  The  preamplifier- 
output  was  monitored  -with  an  oscilloscope.  Signal  source  input  impedance 
to  the  JFET  switch  was  varied  from  600  ohr s  to  1  megohm  resistive,  and  data 
were  also  recorded  with  a  3300  picofarad  capacitor  coupling  the  signal 
generator  to  the  drain  lead.  Pinch-off  voltage  was  provided  by  a  drive 
circuit  (see  Chapter  4  for  details  of  the  drive  circuit). 

Test  Procedure .  The  test  procedure  consisted  of  injecting  a  100 
millivolt,  peak-to-peak  sinusiod,  varying  from  500  to  1  Hertz,  into  the 
electrode  through  a  signal  source  resistor  (or  in  one  case,  a  3300  picofarad 
capacitor)  .  The  output  voltage  was  recorded  with  the  JFET  on  (the  gate  lead 
grounded  by  the  drive  circuit)  and  with  the  JFET  pinched  off.  The  test 


74 


^  f rc’tjuciu' i Ld  Were  500,  200,  100,  50,  40,  30,  25,  20,  15,  10,  5,  2,  and  1 

Hertz.  The  ti'st  source  resistances  were  600  ohms,  10.6,  56.6,  100.6 

kilohmd,  and  1  megohm.  In  addition,  one  test  was  conducted  using  a 

capaci'ively  coupled  input  signal  through  a  3300  picofarad  capacitor. 

A  total  of  63  tests  at  different  combinations  of  signal  input  impedance  and 

frequency  were  conducted  on  one  JFHT.  The  JFET  output  on-off  voltage 

ratio  and  of f-resist?.nce  were  calculated. 

Test  Results .  Initially,  data  for  the  pinched  off  test  condition 

was  obtained  while  applying  the  predetermined  1.2  volt  value  for  V^. 

Calculated  channel  resistance  for  the  pinched  off  device  varied  between 

718  megohms  at  500  Hertz  and  105  megohms  at  5  Hertz,  a.s  compared  to  the 

9 

design  goal  channel  off-resistance  of  10  ohms.  There  was  no  significant 
channel  reslstanc.e  change  as  a  function  of  input  impedance.  These  test 
results  indicated  that  the  of f-rcsistance  of  the  channel  was  unacceptably 
low.  It  was  discovered,  however,  tiiat  th.e  predetermined  pinch-off  voltage 
was  not  completely  turning  off  the  JFKT,  With  approximately  1.5  volts 
applied  to  the  JFF.T  gate,  channel  off-resistance  increased  asymptotically 
to  approximately  1290  megolims.  The  off-resistance  did  not  vary  as  a 
function  of  frequency  once  complete  pinch-off  occurred. 

Plnch-off  voltage  did  vary,  however,  as  a  function  of  input  impedance. 
As  the  input  impedance  Increased,  a  larger  pinch-off  voltage  was  required. 
For  the  capacitively  coupled  case,  the  pinch-off  voltage  increased  to 
1,75  volts  compared  to  1.5  volts  in  the.  resistive  input  cases.  It  is 
believed  that  this  phenomenon  is  associated  with  the  resistance  of  the  gate 
leakage  current  pathway.  When  relatively  low  input  impedances  exist,  the 

f 


75 


gate  leakage  current  can  travel  from  the  drain  lead  through  the  audio 
amplifier  to  signal  ground.  Thus,  the  voltage  drop  associated  with  the 
leakage  current  is  low  and  tlie  JFET  "sees"  almost  all  of  the  gate 
pinch-off  voltage.  UTien  the  input  is  capacitively  coupled,  all  gate 
leakage  current  must  travel  through  the  source  lead  and  across  the  10  megohm 
load  resistor.  As  a  result,  some  of  the  pinch-off  voltage  is  dropped  across 
the  load  resistor  and  tlie  JFET  requires  a  higher  applied  for  pinch-off 
to  occur.  The  results  of  this  test  indicate  that,  to  assure  pinch-off 
when  the  78  kilohm  silver-silver  chloride  electrodes  are  used,  the 
multiel cc trode  array  must  be  driven  with  a  Vp  set  about  0.3  volts  higher  than 
the  curve  tracer  indicated  pincli-off  voltage. 

To  determine  on-off  voltage  output  characteristics  of  the  gold 
electrode  and  the  silver-silver  chloride  electrode,  static  pinch-off  tests 
were  conducted  with  input  impedances  set  to  the  values  calculated  for  the 
two  metals.  Based  on  those  tests,  the  on-off  ratio  for  a  gold  electrode 
terminated  with  a  10  megohm  load  resistor  is  about  7  dB  while  the  silver- 
silver  chloride  electrode  yields  .about  60  dB.  The  design  goal  for  tlie 
signal  to  noise  and  crosstalk  ratio  was  10  dB.  The  gold  electrode  does 
not  meet  this  requirement.  Thus,  the  silver-silver  chloride  electrode  must 
be  used  to  meet  the  design  constraint. 

Crosstalk  Tests 

Test  Set-up .  To  determine  the  amount  of  crosstalk  between  column 
leads,  the  multielectrode  array  on  test  was  placed  on  a  vacuum  chuck  and 
connected  to  the  drive  circuitry.  An  audio  oscillator  was  connected  to 
column  four  and  columns  one  through  three  were  connected  one  at  a  time  to 


76 


a  preamplifier.  The  preamplifier  gain  was  set  at  100  and  the  3  dB 
bandpass  frequency  rolloff  values  were  set  at  0.03  and  3000  Hertz. 

The  preamplifier  output  was  connected  to  an  oscilloscope. 

^ost  Procedure .  A  100  millivolt  sinusoid  varying  from  5000  to  5 
He)'tz  was  injected  into  column  four  of  the  multielectrode  array  on  test. 

The  crosstalk  signals  on  column  leads  one  through  three  were  recorded 
at  each  of  twelve  frequencies.  The  tested  multielectrode  array  was  not 
driven  with  multiplexing  signals.  Thus,  all  JFET  switches  were  on.  Two 
different  multielectrode  arrays  were  tested. 

Test  Results.  As  expected,  the  column  lead  closest  to  the  one 
receiving  the  signal  had  the  largest  amount  of  crosstalk.  At  5000  Hertz, 
crosstalk  was  -42,  -40,  and  -28  dB  on  columns  one,  two,  and  three  respectively. 
Crosstalk  decreased  witti  frequency  and  was  approximately  -60  to  -54  dB 
between  5  and  50  Hertz  on  column  three.  These  results  indicate  that 
Interlead  coupling  is  primarily  capacitive  and  the  interlead  capacitance 
it  less  than  one  picofarad.  Thus,  for  the  bioelectric  signal  bandwidth  of 
1  to  40  Hertz,  the  signal-to-crosstalk  ratio  is  at  least  33  dB,  which 
exceeds  the  10  dB  design  goal. 

Ambient  Noise  Tests 

Test  Set-up.  Ambient  noise  levels  were  evaluated  in  two  different 
environments.  The  first  environment  was  an  Isotonic  sodium  chloride 
solution  and  the  second  environment  was  in  free  air. 

The  test  set-up  for  the  saline  bath  test  consisted  of  immersing 
a  multielectrode  array  into  a  saline  bath  and  connecting  the  leads  to 
the  drive  circuitry.  The  column  lead  outputs  were  connected  one  at  a 
time  to  a  preamplifier.  The  preamplifier  gain  was  set  at  1000  and  the 
bandwidth  was  set  at  1  to  100  Hertz.  The  preamplifier  output  was  connected 


77 


to  an  oscilloscope.  For  the  free  air  test,  the  test  set-up  was 

identical  to  the  saline  bath  evaluation  except  the  preamplifier  gain  was 

reduced  to  100  and  the  multlelectrode  array  was  attached  to  a  vacuum  chuck. 

The  electrodes  were  not  electrically  terminated. 

Procedure .  Ambient  noise  levels  on  each  column  lead  were  recorded 

while  the  drive  circuitry  provided  pinch-off  voltages  varying  between  zero 

and  V  plus  0.5  volts.  For  the  saline  bath  evaluation,  the  coaxial 
P 

leads  between  the  multielectrode  array  and  the  drive  circuitry  were 

physically  moved  about  until  a  minimvim  ambient  noise  level  vjas  obtained. 

Test  Results .  The  saline  bath  test  resulted  in  minimum  ambient  noise 

levels  of  about  30  microvolts.  lUien  the  multielectrode  array  row  leads 

were  strobed  with  a  voltage  level  equivalent  to  the  JFET's  V  ,  4  millivolt 

P 

spikes  were  observed  at  the  multiplex  switching  times.  When  the  array  was 
scanned  with  plus  0.5  volts,  the  spikes  increased  to  80  millivolts. 

These  tests  indicate  that  it  is  Important  to  drive  the  multlelectrode 
array  with  a  pinch-off  voltage  no  greater  than  so  that  the  switching 
spikes  do  not  saturate  the  preamplifier.  Fortunately,  the  spikes  occur 
at  the  leading  and  traliing  edge  of  the  sample  times.  As  a  result,  the 
bioelectric  data  is  not  vitiated  since  subsequent  circuitry  can  be  used 
to  gate  the  true  data  in  the  interval  between  the  spikes.  This  test 
demonstrates  the  importance  of  using  data  samples  in  the  center  50  percent 
of  sample  time  so  that  the  switching  transients  do  not  color  the 
bioelectric  data. 

Tests  in  free  air  resulted  in  approximately  100  millivolts  peak-to- 
peak,  60  Hertz  noise.  Such  noise  levels  will  saturate  the  preamplifier. 


78 


Tho-  noise  source  was  isolated  to  the  multielectrode  array.  It  is  believed 


# 

that  when  the  elctrodcs  experience  a  virtual  open  circuit,  the  omnipresent 
60  Hertz  electric  field  impresses  a  large  voltage  gradient  across  the 
10  megohm  load  resistor.  For  the  in  vivo  test,  the  electrodes  must 
remain  in  electrical  contact  with  tlie  cerebral  spinal  fluid  so  that  this 
problem  does  not  occur.  These  test  results  suggest  that  saturating  the 
multielectrode  array  with  saline  solution  prior  to  implanting  may  be  required. 

Lifetime  Tests 

Test  Set-up .  The  set-up  for  the  lifetime  tests  required  the  use  of 
the  drive  circuitry,  preamplifier,  oscilloscope,  curve  tracer,  and  probe 
station.  The  multiclectrode  array  on  test  was  attached  to  a  microscope 
slide  and  held  by  the  vacuum  chuck  in  the  probe  station.  For  the  JFET 
characteristics  tests,  a  needle  probe  provided  electrical  contact  between 
the  drain  lead  and  the  curve  tracer.  For  the  crosstalk  tests,  the  drive 
circuitry  provided  the  load  resistor  termination  and  the  connections 
to  the  preamplifier  input.  The  oscilloscope  was  connected  to  the 
preamplifier  output. 

Test  Procedure .  The  multielectrode  array  on  test  was  first  evaluated 
to  determine  its  JFET  characteristics  and  crosstalk  values.  After  this 
initial  evaluation,  it  was  immersed  in  an  isotonic  saline  solution.  After 
Immersion  for  a  prescribed  time,  the  device  was  washed  in  deionized  water, 
and  JFET  operating  characteristics  and  crosstalk  levels  were  again  tested. 

This  procedure  was  repeated  until  the  device  on  test  failed  to  operate. 

Crosstalk  tests  were  conducted  by  injecting  a  100  millivolt  peak- 
to-peak  sine  wave  into  the  column  one  lead  while  crosstalk  on  column  two 

? 


79 


was  recorded.  The  input  sinusoid  test  frequencies  were  5000,  500,  and 
25  Hertz.  Jl'ET  operating  characteristics  were  evaluated  with  a  curve  tracer. 
In  every  test  case,  the  following  data  were  recorded  or  calculated: 
pinch-off  voltage,  channel  on-current,  channel  breakdown  voltage,  gate 
pinch-off  current,  channel  on-resistance,  and  channel  off-resistance. 

This  procedure  was  used  to  test  a  chemical  vapor  deposited  (CVD)  silicon 
dioxide  passivated  device  and  a  plasma  deposited  silicon  nitride  passivated 
device . 

Test  Results .  The  multielectrode  array  insulated  with  CVD  silicon 
dioxide  showed  serious  degradation  after  only  ten  minutes  immersion  in 
the  isotonic  saline  bath.  The  pinch-off  voltage  increased  from  3  to  A 
volts  and  pinch-off  gate  current  increased  from  25  nanoamps  to  90 
microamps.  In  addition,  the  JFETs  in  row  two,  three,  or  four  could  be 
pinched  off  with  a  voltage  applied  to  row  one.  Channel  on-reslstance  In¬ 
creased  from  17  kilohms  to  20  kllohms  and  channel  on-current  decreased  from 
70  to  55  microamps.  Crosstalk  noise  increased  and  interlead  leakage 
path  characteristics  became  frequency  independent  (Fig  17).  This  change 
indicates  that  sodium  ions  permeating  the  passivation  layer  provided  a 
current  path  between  the  column  leads.  The  ions  also  provided  a  current 
path  between  the  row  leads.  The  results  of  these  tests  prove  that 
CVD  silicon  dioxide  is  unfit  for  use  as  insulation  on  an  implantable 
multielectrode  array. 

Tests  with  a  plasma  silicon  nitride  insulated  multielectrode  array 
were  more  promising.  Crosstalk  remained  well  within  design  limits  after 
28  hours  of  total  saline  bath  immersion  time.  The  JFETs  on  test  survived 
16  hours  of  total  immersion  time  before  failure  occurred.  The  failure 


81 


Immersion  Time  (Hou: 


mode  was  two-fold.  First,  the  contacts  to  the  JFET  channel  exhibited 
Schottky  junction  characteristics.  Additional  immersion  time  caused  the 
JFF.T  channel  to  become  open.  Even  though  16  hours  is  sufficient  time 
for  acute  implant  testing,  future  research  should  Include  work  to  identify 
an  insulating  material  that  can  survive  several  weeks  or  perhaps  indefi¬ 
nitely  in  a  saline  bath  environment. 

The  multiplexing  tests  identified  a  problem  with  the  nitride  passivation 
layer.  The  results  of  these  tests  are  contained  in  the  next  section. 

Multiplexing  Tests 

Tost  Set-up .  As  with  the  ambient  noise  evaluation,  this  test  was 
conducted  both  in  a  saline  bath  and  in  free  air.  The  set-up  for  the 
free  air  test  will  be  discussed  first. 

The  multielectrode  array  on  test  was  attached  to  a  microscope  slide 
and  placed  on  the  vacuum  chuck  in  the  probe  station.  Needle  probes  contacted 
electrodes  one  and  five  in  column  one.  An  audio  oscillator  was  attached  to 
each  needle  probe  so  that  signals  could  be  injected  into  the  drain  lead 
of  the  JFETs  to  be  tested.  The  drive  circuitry  provided  pinch-off 
voltages  to  the  row  leads  and  terminated  the  column  leads  with  ten  megohm 
load  resistors.  Column  lead  one  was  attached  to  a  preamplifier  and  the 
preamplifier  output  was  monitored  on  an  oscilloscope. 

The  saline  bath  multiplexing  test  set-up  was  identical  to  the 
free  air  test  except  the  multielectrode  array  was  immersed  in  isotonic 
saline  and  a  signal  generator  used  to  create  input  slnusiods  was 
terminated  to  a  pair  of  wires  immersed  in  the  saline  bath. 


82 


Te;u  Procedure .  For  the  free  air  test,  the  electrode  was  subjected 
to  a  100  millivolt  peak-to-peak  input  sinusoid  while  varying  the  input  Impedance 
and  multiplexing  frequency.  The  objective  of  this  test  procedure  was  to 
determine  multiplexing  frequency  limits  as  a  function  of  input  impedance. 

The  second  free  air  multiplexing  test  consisted  of  impressing  two 
different  sinus iods  on  two  electrodes  in  the  same  column.  The  column 
lead  was  monitored  with  an  oscilloscope  to  determine  how  well  the  multi- 
electrode  array  could  multiplex  two  different  signals. 

The  saline  bath  test  consisted  of  injecting  a  sinusoid  into  the 
saline  bath  while  monitoring  the  column  lead  output.  The  objective  of 
this  test  was  to  assure  the  multielectrode  array  could  pinch-off  the  signals 
in  the  saline  bath. 

Test  Results .  The  free  air  multiplexing  tests  show  a  direct 
correlation  between  the  multiplexing  frequency  limit  and  electrode  input 
impedance.  The  multiplexing  frequency  limit  was  defined  as  the  frequency 
at  which  ten  percent  of  the  sample  time  was  required  for  the  JFET  to 
switch.  With  a  600  ohm  input  impedance,  the  multiplexing  frequency  limit 
was  about  20  kilohertz  while  an  input  impedance  of  100  kilohms  reduced 
the  maximum  multiplexing  rate  to  about  1  kilohertz.  A  3300  picofarad 
coupling  capacitor  further  reduced  the  maximum  multiplexing  speed  to 
300  Hertz.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  gold  electrodes  were  silver- 
silver  chloride  plated.  By  changing  the  equivalent  3300  picofarad 
capacitive  signal  coupling  to  a  78  kilohm  resistive  coupling,  the 
multiplexing  frequency  limit  was  increased  from  300  Hertz  to  more  than 
one  kilohertz.  The  one  kilohertz  multiplexing  rate  was  the  design  goal. 


83 


Multiplexing  two  different  signals  onto  one  column  lead  proved 
possible.  With  a  one  kilohertz  sampling  rate  and  a  100  kilohm  input 
impedance,  two  phase  shifted  20  Hertz  input  signals  were  successfully  time 
multiplexed.  In  actual  operation,  each  column  lead  will  carry  four  time 
multiplexed  signals  instead  of  two.  The  test  with  two  time  multiplexed 
signals,  however,  indicates  that  multiplexing  four  signals  is  feasible. 

The  results  of  the  saline  bath  tests  were  inconclusive.  Immediately 
after  immersion  in  the  isotonic  saline  solution,  the  test  sinusoid  was 
picked  up  by  the  electrodes  and  displayed  on  an  oscilloscope.  When  the  drive 
circuit  ouput  voltage  was  adjusted  to  the  pinch-off  value  of  the  device 
on  test,  the  amplitude  of  the  sinusoid  decreased  significantly,  indicating 
pinch-off  was  occurring.  Unfortunately,  precise  measurements  of  the  output 
signal  at  pinch-off  could  not  be  made  because  in  less  than  30  seconds,  the 
sinusoid  returned  to  the  same  amplitude  that  was  observed  before  pinch-off. 
Careful  electrical  examination  of  the  device  on  test  revealed  that  a 
leakage  path  had  developed  between  the  row  three  lead  and  column  leads  one 
and  four.  A  two  hour  immersion  in  isotonic  saline  solution  caused  the 
leakage  path  resistance  value  to  decrease  from  approximately  5  megohms  to 
less  than  100  kilohms.  Microscopic  examination  of  the  device  showed 
several  pinholes  in  the  nitride  coating  over  the  gold  leads.  Subsequent 
evaluation  of  the  nitride  coating  indicated  a  pinhole  density  exceeding 
50  per  square  centimeter.  It  is  believed  that  these  pinholes  allowed 
sodium  ions  to  enter  the  silicon  dioxide  insulation  layer.  In  addition,  the 
device  failure  appears  to  be  greatly  accelerated  when  pinch-off  voltages  are 
applied  during  saline  solution  Immersion.  Where  static  lifetime  was 
approximately  16  hours,  active  lifetime  was  less  than  30  seconds.  It 


84 


appt>;5rs  that  pinch-off  voltage  application  accelerates  failure  by 
greatly  increasing  the  sodium  ion  absorption  rate.  This  mechanism  is 
not  well  understood,  but  the  writer  hypothesizes  that  the  electric  field 
developed  by  the  pinch-off  voltage  attracts  sodium  ions  through  the  pinholes 
over  the  gate  leads.  As  a  result,  the  silicon  dioxide  insulating  layer 
beneath  the  metal  is  compromised  and  leakage  paths  occur  between  the 
metal  leads.  The  following  facts  support  this  hypothesis.  Calculations 
based  on  circuit  geometry  show  that  pinch-off  voltages  between  one  and  tvjo 
volts  generate  an  electric  field  strength  of  50,000  to  100,000  volts 
per  centimeter  across  the  silicon  dioxide  insulating  layer  at  the  row- 
gate  lead  crossunder  resistor.  Capacitor-voltage  (C-V)  bias-temperature 
stress  measurements  conducted  during  the  fabrication  process  showed  that 
a  100,000  volt  per  centimeter  electric  field  easily  transported  sodium 
ions  through  the  silicon  dioxide  passivation  layer.  The  pinch-off  voltage 
creates  a  positive  to  negative  electric  potential  gradient  between  the 
silicon  dioxide  layer's  outer  surface  and  the  silicon-silicon  dioxide 
interface.  Thus,  sodium  ions  will  be  attracted  through  the  silicon 
dioxide  to  the  surface  of  the  crossunder  resistor. 

The  fact  that  pinch-off  actually  occurred,  however.  Indicates  that 
the  fundamental  circuit  design  is  sound.  With  a  high  quality  nitride 
coating,  the  device  should  function  properly.  Unfortunately,  a  high 
quality  nitriding  process  was  not  available  for  additional  testing 
during  the  immediate  course  of  this  investigation.  If  future  lifetime  tests 
with  a  low  pinhole  density  nitride  do  not  result  In  sufficient  devict’ 
lifetime,  parylene  may  be  used  as  an  alternative  pa ss  i  vai  i en  lU.  i  ,1 


(Ref  33:7). 


AO-AlOb  763 
UNCLASStFieO 


AIR  FORCC  IMST  OR  TCCH  MtOMT-RATtCRSON  ARB  OH  SCHOO— ETC  R/6  6/5 
IS5  •M.nCLCCTAOOe  AMAV  Ron  V— €TC(. 

OKw  60  6  H  FIT46CRALO 

AFIT/6e/K/600-tl 


Elec trode  Impedance  Tests 

Test  Set-up .  The  electrode  impedance  tests  required  a  multielectrode 
array,  a  signal  generator,  a  preamplifier,  and  an  oscilloscope.  The  multi- 
electrode  array  on  test  was  immersed  in  an  isotonic  sodium  chloride  solution. 
The  signal  generator  output  lead  was  connected  to  a  two  square  centimeter 
silver-silver  chloride  electrode  which  was  also  immersed  in  the  saline 
bath.  Column  one  output  lead  of  the  multielectrode  array  on  test  vjas 
connected  across  a  load  resistor  and  the  load  resistor  was  connected 
across  the  input  leads  of  the  preamplifier.  The  signal  generator  ground  lead 
was  connected  to  the  preamplifier  ground.  The  oscilloscope  vertical 
input  was  connected  to  the  preamplifier  output  leads  (Fig  18). 

Test  Procedure .  A  100  millivolt  peak-to-peak  sine  wave  was  injected 
into  the  saline  solution  through  the  large  silver-silver  chloride  elec¬ 
trode.  The  resulting  voltage  across  the  load  resistor  was  measured 
and  the  impedance  of  the  four  column  one  electrodes  was  calculated  and 
recorded.  It  was  assumed  that  the  impedance  of  the  large  electrode  was 
negligible  when  compared  to  the  load  resistor  and  the  electrode  impedance. 

This  procedure  was  repeated  at  signal  frequencies  from  0.1  to  200,000 
Hertz.  The  multielectrode  array  on  test  was  evaluated  before  and  after 
silver  plating  and  silver  chloride  treatment. 

Test  Results .  Figure  19  shows  the  measured  impedance  of  a  single 
gold,  silver,  and  silver-silver  chloride  electrode.  Silver  electrode  impedance 
is  typically  one-fourth  the  gold  electrode  impedance  in  the  1  to  AO  Hertz 
bioelectric  signal  bandwidth.  The  silver-silver  chloride  impedance  is 
about  two  orders  of  magnitude  less  than  the  gold  electrode.  The  20  to  80 
kilohm  impedance  for  the  silver-silver  chloride  electrode  fits  well  with 


86 


Fig.  19.  Electrode  impedaince. 


the  predicted  78  kilohra  value.  A  cursory  examination  of  phase  angle 
associated  with  the  silver-silver  chloride  electrode  indicates  that  it 


is  essentially  resistive.  The  reduction  of  electrode  impedance  by  the 
silver-silver  chloride  plating  reduces  noise  and  increases  multiplexing 
speed  capability. 


89 


VI .  In  Vivo  Multielectrode  Array  Evaluation 


Intro d u  ctl on 

Problems  associated  with  the  nitride  passivation  layer  (see  Chapter  5) 
precluded  conducting  the  in  vivo  test.  To  provide  assistance  to  future 
researchers,  this  chapter  describes  the  suggested  procedure  for  this 
important  test. 

The  objective  of  the  in  vivo  evaluation  is  three-fold.  First  the 
implant  procedures  must  be  evaluated  to  determine  their  feasibility 
and  to  identify  any  problem  areas  that  require  additional  research. 

Second,  the  multielectrode  array  and  all  support  electronics  must  be 
evaluated  to  determine  if  they  can  receive  and  multiplex  electroencephallc 
signals  from  the  visual  cortex.  Third,  the  bioelectric  data  must  be 
examined  to  determine  some  operating  characteristics  of  the  visual  system. 

The  first  section  of  this  chapter  contains  the  details  of  the  support 
equipment  set-up.  It  should  be  noted  that  only  one  multielectrodc  array 
is  proposed  for  this  test.  Other  experiments  that  will  obtain  data  for 
more  detailed  evaluation  of  the  visual  processing  mechanism  will  require 
two  multielectrode  arrays.  One  array  must  be  implanted  on  the  surface 
of  area  17  and  the  other  on  area  18  of  the  visual  cortex.  The  use  of  two 
arrays  will  enable  the  simultaneous  collection  of  data  from  both  the  input 
visual  cortex  (area  17:  presumably  a  homeomorphic  mapping  of  the  retinal 
pattern)  and  the  secondary  visual  cortex  (area  18:  by  which  time  some 
analysis  and  evaluation  of  the  visual  data  have  occurred) .  The  second 
section  of  this  chapter  describes  the  proposed  implant  protocol  which 
Includes  subject  preparation  and  surgical  implant  procedures.  The  third 


90 


section  summarizes  the  baseline  tests,  the  fourth  section  describes  the 
data  acquisition  procedures,  and  the  final  section  outlines  the  suggested 
data  processing  and  analysis  methods. 

Test  Equipment  Set-up  (Fig  20) 

The  equipment  for  the  in  vivo  test  should  consist  of  the  multielec¬ 
trode  array,  four  PAR  113  preamplifiers,  an  Ampex  1300  FM  tape  recorder, 
an  oscilloscope,  the  drive  circuitry,  a  square  wave  generator,  an  electronic 
shutter,  a  slide  projector  with  the  appropriate  visual  stimulus  slides, 
and  a  projection  screen. 

Before  the  surgical  implant  procedure,  the  proposed  setting  of  the 
PAR  113  preamplifiers  includes  a  gain  of  2000  and  a  bandwidth  of  0.03 
to  3000  Hertz.  The  gain  of  2000  provides  a  200  to  1000  millivolt 
output  level  when  the  anticipated  200  to  500  microvolt  electroencephallc 
signals  are  received  (Ref  8).  This  output  level  is  compatible  with  the 
FM  recorder  input  level  requirements.  The  3000  Hertz  bandwidth  ensures 
that  the  multiplexed  bioelectric  data  can  be  recorded.  After  the  pre¬ 
amplifiers  are  adjusted  as  above,  the  inputs  to  each  must  be  connected 
to  the  four  column  lead  outputs  of  the  drive  circuitry.  The  preamplifier 
output  leads  will  be  connected  to  channels  five  through  eight  of  the  FM 
tape  recorder. 

The  recorder  input  modules  for  channels  five  through  eight  will  be 
adjusted  so  that  a  100  millivolt  input  sinusoid  develops  a  lOj  millivolt 
output  signal  at  the  reproduce  module.  This  one-to-one  correspondence  between 
recorder  input  and  output  amplitude  simplifies  the  process  of  maintaining 
faithful  reproductions  of  the  electroencephallc  data.  The  recorder  input 


91 


t 


modules  for  tracks  three  and  four  will  be  adjusted  so  that  the  twelve 


volt  pr-ak-t o-peak  clock  and  frame  signals  generate  a  two  volt  peak-to- 
peak  r-  produce  module  output  signal.  This  attenuation  adjustment  will 
prevent  saturation  of  the  input  and  output  modules  of  the  FM  tape 
recorde  r . 

The  four  row  lead  multiplexing  lines,  the  four  column  input  leads, 
and  the  ground  for  the  drive  circuit  will  be  connected  to  a  14  pin  dual 
inline  package  (DIP)  socket  which  interfaces  with  the  14  pin  DIP  connector 
attached  to  the  multielectrode  array  wires.  The  square  wave  generator  out¬ 
put  will  be  adjusted  to  12  volts  peak-to-peak,  and  connected  to  the  drive 
circuit  clock  input  and  channel  three  of  the  FM  tape  recorder.  The  frame 
output  from  the  drive  circuit  will  be  connected  to  channel  four  of  the 
FM  tape  recorder. 

The  electronic  shutter  drive  signal  output  will  be  connected  to 
channel  nine  of  the  FM  tape  recorder,  and  the  input  module  will  be  adjusted 
to  prevent  saturation.  The  slide  projector  and  screen  must  be  arranged 
so  that  a  large  portion  of  the  test  animal's  visual  area  will  be  stimulated 
by  the  projected  image.  To  maximize  the  probability  that  the  projected 
image  stimulates  a  portion  of  the  visual  cortex  that  the  multielectrode  array 
is  monitoring,  the  projected  image  should  cover  at  least  ten  degrees  of 
the  central  visual  area  of  the  test  animal.  To  ensure  that  the  visual 
cortex  is  receiving  fine  grained  images  (high  spatial  frequency  data), 
the  projected  slides  should  consist  of  sine  wave  gratings  with  a  frequency 
range  of  5  to  15  cycles  per  degree.  In  addition,  preliminary  analysis 
should  Include  a  slide  which  depicts  a  two-dimensional  square  wave  grating 
f  (checkerboard)  with  the  fundamental  frequency  at  about  five  cycles  per  degree. 


93 


This  pattern  is  selected  because  the  spatial  step  functions  generated 
by  the  square  wave,  grating  should  be  highly  observable  in  the  electro- 
encephalic  data  recorded  from  area  17  of  the  visual  cortex. 

Once  the  slide  projector  and  screen  are  arranged,  the  projected 
image  brightness  must  be  measured  with  a  photometer  so  that  the  level  of 
visual  stimulus  Intensity  is  known. 

Implant  Protocol 

Since  the  visual  cortex  of  mammals  with  good  visual  acuity  possess 
characteristics  similar  to  those  of  the  human  visual  cortex,  many  species 
of  test  animals  are  potential  test  subjects.  The  primates,  cats,  or  dogs 
are  all  possible  choices.  The  primate,  of  course,  is  preferrable,  if 
available,  because  of  the  great  similarity  of  its  visual  system  with 
that  of  man.  Once  an  animal  is  selected,  the  following  implant  procedure 
is  advised. 

Under  a  general  anesthetic  such  as  halothane,  the  skin  and  muscle 
tissue  over  the  posterior  portion  of  the  cranium,  just  left  of  the  lateral 
midline,  must  be  incised  and  retracted.  Once  an  area  approximately 
three  centimeters  by  three  centimeters  of  the  posterior  skull  is  exposed, 
a  two  centimeter  diameter  craniostoray  must  be  performed.  In  many  animals, 
such  as  the  baboon,  there  exists  a  cranial  crest  directly  over  the  occipital 
lobe  of  the  cerebrum.  In  this  case,  the  craniostomy  can  be  performed 
just  superior  to  this  crest  to  reduce  the  difficulty  of  the  surgery  and 
the  trauma  to  the  test  animal. 

Once  the  cranium  is  open,  the  dura  must  be  Incised  and  retracted. 

If  the  cranial  opening  is  above  the  occipital  pole,  the  brain  must  be 


94 


depressed  away  from  the  cranium  so  the  multielectrode  array  can  be  si ip[>cd 
downward  between  the  cortex  and  the  dura  until  it  rests  on  the  surface 
of  the  pole  of  the  left  occipital  lobe.  The  brain  can  then  be  released 
and  tlic  pressure  exerted  by  the  brain  on  the  multielectrode  array  should 
hold  it  in  place  as  long  as  the  animal  remains  sessile.  If  the  cranial 
opening  can  be  made  over  the  occipital  pole,  the  multielectrode  array 
can  be  placed  directly  on  the  cortex.  The  second  procedure  is  preferable 
to  the  first  because  the  array  can  be  more  easily  moved  about  on  the  cortex 
until  satisfactory  electroencephalic  signals  are  obtained.  In  both  cases, 
the  multielcctrode  array  must  be  perfused  with  isotonic  saline  solution  before 
implanting  so  that  good  electrical  contact  is  made  with  the  surface  of 
the  cortex. 

Once  the  multielectrode  array  is  in  place,  the  animal  must  be 
physically  situated  so  that  the  projection  screen  is  located  slightly 
to  the  right  of  the  center  of  its  visual  field.  The  array  leads  are  then 
to  be  connected  to  the  drive  circuitry.  At  this  point,  the  incisions 
must  be  locally  anesthetized  and  the  animal  allowed  to  completely  recover 
from  the  general  anesthetic.  To  maintain  sessllity,  the  test  animal 
should  be  either  firmly  restrained,  or  treated  with  a  drug  that  creates 
muscular  relaxation.  Curare,  or  curarine  type  alkaloids  can  be  used  as  long 
as  vital  functions  are  mechanically  maintained.  The  drug  used  must  not 
depress  the  central  nervous  system. 

Baseline  Test  Procedures 

Data  acquisition  should  begin  with  a  series  of  baseline  tests  that 
will  ensure  integrity  of  the  multielectrode  array  and  the  support 


95 


equipmenl.  These  tests  will  consist  of  two  parts:  non-rault iplex.cd 
electrode  ev  :luation,  and  multiplexed  system  evaluation.  The  following 
paragraphs  describe  these  procedures. 

For  the  non-mul t iplexed  baseline  tests,  the  drive  circuit  shall  be 
set  in  the  preset  mode,  and  the  preset  switches  set  to  select  electrodes 
1,  5,  9,  and  13.  The  oscilloscope  will  be  attached  to  the  reproduce 
modules  for  the  FM  tape  recorder  channels  five  through  eight,  one  at  a 
time.  With  the  oscilloscope  first  attached  to  channel  five,  the  Fli  recorder 
will  be  set  to  record  and  the  oscilloscope  trace  will  be  monitored  for 
cortical  electrical  activity.  This  same  test  will  be  accomplished  with 
recorder  channels  six,  seven,  and  eight.  This  test  will  ensure  that  the 
electrodes  on  the  raultielectrode  array  are  being  stimulated  by  electrical 
cortical  signals.  In  addition,  the  test  will  verify  that  the  bioelectric 
data  are  passing  through  the  drive  circuitry  and  being  recorded. 

The  next  baseline  test  will  check  for  proper  operation  of  the 
multiplexing  drive  circuitry  and  clock.  This  test  will  begin  by  setting 
the  drive  circuit  to  run,  and  adjusting  the  clock  frequency  to  one 
kilohertz.  The  oscilloscope  should  be  triggered  with  the  frame  pulse, 
and  channel  two  of  the  oscilloscope  should  be  adjusted  to  display 
sixteen  clock  pulses.  Channel  one  of  the  oscilloscope  will  be  connected 
to  the  FM  recorder  reproduce  modules  for  channels  five  through  eight, 
one  at  a  time.  The  oscilloscope  trace  should  depict  the  four  multiplexed 
signals  from  each  of  the  four  electrodes  of  the  column  being  monitored. 
Pinch-off  voltage  to  the  multielectrode  array  must  be  adjusted  to  minimize 
spikes  at  the  leading  and  trailing  edge  of  each  electrode  interrogation 
time,  while  still  ensuring  that  the  electrode  JFETs  are  being  completely 


96 


pinched  off.  Once  these  adjustments  are  made,  the  experimental  system  can 


be  considered  ready  for  data  acquisition. 

Data  Acquisition  Procedures 

The  data  acqLiisition  procedures  will  consist  of  stimulating  the 
animal  v^ith  five  different  projected  images  while  recording  at  three 
different  multiplexing  frequencies.  The  three  frequencies  are  240  Hertz, 

320  Hertz,  and  1000  Hertz.  Two  reasons  suggest  the  need  for  using  these 
three  frequencies.  First,  the  exact  maximum  frequency  of  the  electroen- 
cephalic  data  is  not  know.  It  is  thought  to  be  about  30  to  40 Hertz. 

By  multiplexing  at  Nyquist  rates  for  30,  40,  and  125  Hertz,  any  aliasing 

or  distortion  that  might  occur  should  be  evident.  Thus,  an  approximate 

I 

maximum  frequency  of  the  clectroencephalic  data  should  be  observed. 

Tiie  second  reason  for  the  various  multiplexing  speeds  is  to  establish 
the  multiplexing  rate  limit  for  the  array.  If  the  array  cannot  multiplex 
at  the  1000  Hertz  rate,  the  recorded  data  should  show  improper  pinch-off 

I 

» 

'  of  the  multiplexing  JFETs.  If  the  array  successfully  multiplexes  at  the 

^  1000  Hertz  rate,  future  tests  should  increase  the  multiplexing  speed 

I 

until  the  maximum  limit  is  established.  The  maximum  multiplexing  speed 
,  is  important  for  future  work  because  larger  arrays  will  require  faster 

!  multiplexing  speeds. 

The  first  data  acquisition  test  will  consist  of  visual  stimulation 
by  a  light  flash  of  25  milliseconds  duration.  This  test  will  be  repeated 

1 

30  times  at  each  multiplexing  frequency.  By  accomplishing  the  test  30  times, 

I 

I) 

visual  evoked  response  signal  averaging  can  later  be  accomplished 
I  (if  necessary)  to  increa.se  signal  to  noise  ratio. 


97 


The  next  four  tests  involve  stimulation  with  projected  images. 

# 

Each  image  will  be  projected  for  25  milliseconds  and  the  test  will  be 
repeated  30  times  at  each  multiplexing  speed.  The  four  Images  are;  a 
two-dimensional  square  wave  grating  with  a  fundamental  spatial  frequency 
of  approximately  five  cycles  per  degree,  and  three  sine  wave  gratings  with 
spatial  frequencies  of  approximately  5,  10,  and  15  cycles  per  degree. 

The  sine  wave  gratings  should  be  projected  both  in  the  horizontal  and 
the  vertical  direction. 

It  would  be  useful  to  Improve  the  system  so  that  in  the  future, 
the  various  test  conditions  could  be  established  by  digitally  controlling 
and  generating  the  visual  stimuli  on  a  television  or  oscilloscope  screen. 
Such  a  stimulus  generator  could  be  used  to  spatially  move  the  gratings 
while  electroencephalic  data  are  recorded.  By  comparing  the  location 
of  the  grating  pattern  with  the  bioelectric  data,  information  concerning 
the  spatial  resolution  of  the  primary  visual  cortex  could  be  determined. 

In  other  words,  as  a  single  cycle  of  the  sine  wave  grating  passes  across 
the  visual  field  associated  with  the  visual  cortical  area  being  monitored, 
one  would  expect  to  see  variations  in  the  electroencephalic  data.  Cor¬ 
relation  of  these  data  variations  with  the  movement  rate  of  the  stimulus 
would  determine  the  number  of  degrees  of  visual  area  serviced  by  the 

I  visual,  cortical  area  being  monitored. 

Another  method  to  improve  the  data  quality  of  future  tests  would  be 

to  impress  an  electrical  stimulus  directly  onto  the  primary  visual  cortex. 

The  multielectrode  array  developed  by  this  thesis  is  capable  of  transmitting 

I 

'  as  well  as  receiving  electrical  signals.  If  the  researcher  desires  better 

f 

control  over  visual  stimulus,  he  can  deliver  an  electrical  signal  to  the 

98 

\\ 


r 


primary  visual  cortex  with  the  mul t ielectrode  array.  The  effects  of  this 
stimulus  can  then  be  monitored  in  area  18  with  a  recording  multielectrode 
array.  Thus,  tiie  ambiguity  associated  with  assumptions  concerning  the 
precise  location  of  visual  stimulation  of  the  retina  are  eliminated. 

Once  tile  support  electronics  for  this  test  are  developed,  the  data 
acquisition  process  would  be  greatly  simplified  because  the  experimenter 
no  longer  needs  to  arrange  the  test  animal  so  that  the  visual  stimulus 
can  excite  the  retina.  This  procedure  should  prove  to  be  a  very  powerful 
research  tool,  but  it  should  be  conducted  only  after  the  previous 
experimental  techniques  have  well  described  the  typical  signals  found  on 
the  primary  visual  cortex.  In  fact,  previously  recorded  signals  from 
the  primary  visual  cortex  should  be  used  as  the  model  for  electrical 
stimulus.  This  procedure  raises  the  question  as  to  whether  a  signal 
recorded  from  the  primary  visual  cortex  during  the  time  that  the  test 
animal  is  observing,  say,  a  checkerboard,  can  elicit  the  image  of  that 
same  checkerboard  when  used  as  a  stimulus  to  the  primary  visual  cortex. 

The  same  question  may  be  asked  about  signals  from  the  secondary  visual  cortex. 
Future  tests  with  animals  trained  to  respond  to  particular  visual  stimuli 
might  answer  these  questions. 


Data  Processing  and  Analysis 


After  the  time  multiplexed  electroencephalic  information  and  its 


associated  timing  signals  are  recorded  in  an  analog  format  on  the  FM 
tape  recorder,  data  processing  and  analysis  must  be  accomplished.  The 


analysis  must  concern  both  test  equipment  operation  and  function  of  the 
visual  system.  To  accomplish  this  goal,  data  processing  must  consist 


99 


of  analog  to  digital  (A/D)  conversion,  demultiplexing,  filtering,  and 
presentation  of  the  data  in  a  form  amenable  to  careful  scrutiny  by  the 
researcher.  Data  analysis  will  then  consist  of  determining  signal  to 
noise  ratios,  effects  of  multiplexing  on  data  quality,  bandwidth  of  the 
bioelectric  signals,  time  delays  between  the  retina  and  primary  visual 
cortex  and  between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex,  and  ultimately, 
the  transfer  function(s)  between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex. 
The  following  paragraphs  describe  the  various  steps  in  the  data  processing 
and  analysis  phases. 

As  previously  mentioned,  the  first  step  in  data  processing  is  A/D 
conversion.  The  conversion  process  can  be  accomplished  on  each  FM 
recorder  channel  containing  electroencephalic  data,  one  at  a  time. 

To  ensure  timing  integrity  between  channels  of  the  FM  recorder,  care 
must  be  taken  to  maintain  a  constant  tape  speed  for  all  passes  through 
the  tape.  This  can  be  accomplished  by  observing  the  FM  recorder  phase 
indicator.  For  each  pass,  the  phase  indicator  should  be  centered. 

This  guarantees  that  the  capstain  drive  motor  speed  is  synchronized  to 
the  60  Hertz  line  frequency.  Fortunately,  data  framing  periods  are 
relatively  short  (16  clock  pulses)  so  that  for  small  variations  in  tape 
speed,  the  accumulated  amount  of  timing  error  between  frame  pulses 
should  be  small.  If  one  desires  to  maintain  the  total  error  less  than 
fifteen  percent  of  a  multiplexing  sample  period,  some  straightforward 
calculations  show  that  the  total  timing  error  must  not  exceed  0.93  percent 
of  a  16  bit  frame  period.  The  FM  recorder  specification  states  that 
short  term  tape  speed  drift  (low  frequency  flutter)  does  not  exceed  0.6 
percent  and  long  term  tape  speed  variations  are  less  than  0.25  percent. 


100 


Thus,  worst  case  timing  errors  (a  combination  of  flutter  and  long  term 
variations)  are  0.85  percent  of  a  sample  period  which  is  adequate  for 
the  present  research.  Future  tests  may  require  much  smaller  tolerances 
in  timing  errors  because  larger  multiplexing  arrays  will  have  relatively 
longer  frame  periods.  To  preclude  significant  timing  errors  in  these 
tests  may  require  parallel  digitizing  of  the  electroencephalic  signal 
and  the  clock  pulses  so  that  data  synchrony  can  be  maintained. 

To  guarantee  start-time  integrity  between  A/D  conversion 
passes,  the  conversion  process  can  be  initiated  with  the  stimulus  onset 
pulse  (channel  nine  of  the  FM  tape  recorder).  Thus,  each  of  the  four 
A/D  conversion  passes  for  one  experiment  will  start  at  the  same  time. 

Once  all  electroencephalic,  frame  pulse,  and  clock  pulse  records 
arc  digitized,  demultiplexing  must  be  accomplished.  The  demultiplexing 
operation  will  be  primarily  a  synchronous  sampling  and  prefiltering  task, 
sampling  will  be  accomplished  by  first  determining  the  number  of  A/D 
samples  per  clock  period  and  identifying  the  total  number  of  samples 
in  each  frame.  This  can  be  easily  accomplished  with  a  software  routine 
that  counts  the  number  of  data  points  that  exist  in  each  clock  period. 

The  clock  period  start-stop  times  can  be  identified  by  observing  the 
low  to  high  voltage  transition.  Once  a  record  of  A/D  samples  per  clock 
period  are  identified,  the  same  procedure  can  be  used  to  identify  the 
number  of  samples  in  each  frame  period.  With  these  two  pieces  of  information, 
the  sample  periods  for  each  electrode  in  the  multielectrode  array  can  be 
identified.  For  example,  assume  that  the  A/D  converter  sampled  each 
clock  period  10  times  and  the  associated  frame  period  had  160  samples. 


101 


By  levie'.'ing  the  samples  bioelectric  data  from  the  FM  recorder  track 
five,  the  operiraenter  would  know  that  the  first  ten  samples  occurred 
during  the  on-time  for  the  JFET  associated  with  electrode  one.  The  second 
ten  samples  were  from  electrode  five,  the  third  ten  samples  from 
electrode  nine,  and  the  fourth  ten  samples  from  electrode  thirteen. 

This  sequence  woiild  repeat  three  more  times  until  a  new  frame  began. 

It  is  important  to  restart  the  A/D  sample  counting  process  at  each  new 
frame  pulse  so  that  long  term  tape  speed  errors  do  not  cause  asynchronous 
demultiplexing. 

Once  A/D  samples  are  Identified  with  a  particular  electrode,  these 
samples  along  with  timing  information  would  be  placed  in  a  separate  file. 
This  process  must  be  repeated  for  each  channel  of  bioelectric  data. 

Channel  six  is  associated  with  electrodes  two,  six,  ten,  and  fourteen. 
Channel  seven  and  eight  contain  data  for  electrodes  three,  seven,  eleven 
and  fifteen,  and  four,  eight,  twelve,  and  sixteen  respectively. 

After  sampling  is  complete  and  each  electrode's  data  are  stored 
in  a  separate  file,  prefiltering  should  be  accomplished.  Prefiltering 
will  consist  of  ignoring  the  A/D  samples  from  the  leading  and  trailing 
25  percent  of  each  sample  period.  This  process  should  reduce  the  effects 
of  the  multiplexing  spikes  and  ensures  that  tape  speed  errors  do  not 
cause  erroneous  sampling.  Next,  the  center  50  percent  of  the  samples  will 
be  averaged  to  eliminate  the  high  frequency  noise  components.  This 
prefiltering  process  will  yield  one  averaged  sample  for  each  electrode 
sample  period.  It  is  believed  that  a  multiplexing  rate  of  one  kilohertz 
coupled  with  these  prefiltering  techniques  will  provide  an  accurate 


102 


representation  of  the  electroencephalic  data.  This  belief  is  based  on 
the  assumption  that  the  data  bandwidth  does  not  exceed  forty  Hertz. 

Should  future  evaluations  show  that  wave  front  propagation  or  data 
bandwilth  exceeds  the  limits  of  the  nominal  one  kilohertz  multiplexing 
speed,  the  sampling  and  prefilteriiig  techniques  remain  valid,  but  miltiplexing 
and  A/D  conversion  rates  must  be  Increased. 

One  copy  of  the  demultiplexed  data  generated  by  the  process  previously 
described  must  be  retained  in  its  original  form  so  that  future  data 
analysis  can  be  conducted  to  determine  the  effects  of  multiplexing  (if  any) 
and  the  bandwidth  of  the  electroencephalic  data.  A  second  copy  of  these 
data  can  be  processed  with  the  filtering  algorithm  described  below 
so  that  the  low  frequency  bioelectric  signal  to  noise  ratio  will  be 
increased . 

The  filtering  operation  to  increase  the  signal  to  noise  ratio  may 
not  be  required.  If,  however,  the  bioelectric  data  are  vitiated,  the 
Wiener  filtering  technique  solved  by  the  Bodo-Shannon  method  should 
improve  signal  to  noise  ratio  (Ref  34:267).  The  assumptions  required 
for  this  filtering  method  are:  stationary  signal  and  noise,  and  knowledge 
of  the  power  spectral  densities  for  the  signal  and  noise  input.  The 
Wiener  filter's  disadvantage  is  that  it  must  be  discretized  before  use 
in  a  digital  machine.  A  discrete  time  Kalman  filter  can  also  be  used 
to  enhance  signal  quality  by  assuming  the  wanted  signal  is  the  output  of  a 
linear  system  driven  by  white  Gaussian  noise  and  the  corruptive  noise 
is  the  sum  of  time  correlated  and  white  noises  (Ref  34:275).  By  varying 
the  noise  and  signal  parameters,  one  could  observe  the  condition  at  which 
electroencephalic  data  quality  is  maximized.  At  this  time,  the  parameters 


103 


in  the  Kelman  filter  would  also  convey  information  about  the  noise  and 
signal  statistics. 

To  prepare  for  the  analysis  procedures,  the  demultiplexed  and  filtered 
data  must  be  displayed  in  a  spatially  correct  form.  It  is  recommended  that 
the  data  from  each  electrode  be  printed  so  that  the  first  row  of  values 
represent  electrode  numbers  one  through  four  and  the  subsequent  three 
rows  of  values  represent  the  next  three  sets  of  four  el  tetrodes.  In 
this  manner,  the  experimenter  can  glance  over  this  matrix  of  numbers 
and  identify  the  spatial  characteristics  of  the  electroencephalic  signals. 
To  simplify  analysis,  contour  line  mappings  or  three-dimensional  plots 
may  be  used.  Initially,  the  data  should  be  printed  out  every  four  clock 
periods  so  that  the  maximum  sample  rate  for  each  multiplexing  frequency 
will  be  maintained. 

Now  that  the  data  are  in  a  form  that  can  be  easily  scrutinized, 
data  analysis  must  begin.  The  two  objectives  of  the  analysis  procedures 
are;  to  evaluate  the  ability  of  the  multielectrode  array  and  support 
electronics  to  obtain  electroencephalic  data,  and  to  determine  some 
operating  characteristics  of  the  visual  processing  system.  The  following 
paragraphs  suggest  some  methods  to  accomplish  these  tasks. 

To  determine  if  the  multielectrode  array  and  its  support  equipment 
operates  properly,  the  data  must  be  reviewed  for  multiplexing  effects, 
bandwidth,  and  reproducibility.  To  reduce  artifacts  introduced  by  the 
filtering  operation,  the  following  analysis  procedure  must  be  accomplished 
with  the  unfiltered  data. 

To  determine  multiplexing  effects,  the  researcher  should  observe 
the  data  for  spikes  and  step  changes  during  the  "no  visual  stimulus" 
acquisition  periods.  If  spikes  are  present,  they  are  likely  caused  by 


104 


JFET  on-off  transitions.  Step  changes  in  the  data  may  be  caused  by 
asynchronous  demultiplexing.  After  miiltiplcxing  effects  are  determined, 
the  data  bandwidth  should  be  evaluated. 

The  bandwidth  tests  should  also  be  accomplished  with  unfiltered 
data.  These  tests  should  consist  of  first  comparing  the  30  data  segments 
recorded  during  identical  multiplexing  frequency  and  stimulus  periods. 

If  these  data  appear  reproducible,  then  electroencephalic  bandwidth 
can  be  evaluated  by  observing  signals  recorded  at  different  multiplexing 
frequencies.  If  any  of  the  multiplexing  frequencies  are  below  the  Nyqulst 
sampling  rate,  the  data  at  the  slower  multiplexing  frequency  will  differ 
from  data  recorded  at  a  higher  multiplexing  frequency.  If  data  at  all 
multiplexing  frequencies  are  comparable,  then  the  original  hypothesis 
that  the  electroencephalic  data  bandwidth  is  less  than  30  Hertz  will 
be  supported. 

The  next  data  analysis  procedure  will  involve  identifying  some 
characteristics  of  the  visual  system.  The  first  characteristic  to  be 
analyzed  is  the  data  transfer  time  from  the  retina  to  the  primary  visual 
cortex.  This  information  can  be  obtained  by  measuring  the  time  delay 
between  stimulus  onset  and  the  visual  cortical  response.  The  second  charac¬ 
teristic  to  be  analyzed  is  the  approximate  size  of  the  basic  computing 
elements  (BCEs)  in  the  cortex.  Highly  time  correlated  data  from  adjacent 
electrodes  might  suggest  that  the  electrodes  are  recording  data  from  the 
same  BCE.  Uncorrelated  data  suggest  the  opposite.  Additional  characteristics 
such  as  wave  front  propagation  (if  any)  may  also  be  investigated. 


Till'  data  analysis  procedures  previously  described  are  not  inclusive, 
but  should  provide  a  strong  basis  for  additional  research.  The  initial 
procedures  described  maintain  conformity  with  past  research  by  initially 
duplicating  tlieir  results.  The  writer  feels  that  a  primary  consideration 
is  that  future  research  should  build  on  past  analysis  so  that  this  continuity 
is  maintained. 


VII.  Conclusions  and  Recommendations 


Introduction 

An  investigation  of  past  research  and  theories  of  the  function  of 
the  mammalian  visual  perception  system  was  conducted.  This  investigation 
suggests  that  fine  grained  electroencephalic  data  recorded  from  the  surface 
of  the  visual  cortex  will  enhance  understanding  of  the  visual  perception 
process.  To  obtain  these  data,  a  multiplexing  multielectrode  array 
was  developed  and  tested.  This  chapter  contains  the  conclusions  and 
recommendations  resulting  from  the  investigation  of  past  research,  and 
the  development  and  test  of  the  multielectrode  array. 

Conclusions 

The  mammalian  primary  visual  cortex  contains  a  homeomorphic  mapping 
of  the  visual  image.  Due  to  the  lack  of  lateral  data  transfer  in  this  area, 
the  visual  vield  interaction  necessary  for  spatial  pattern  analysis  cannot 
occur  in  the  primary  visual  cortex.  Thus,  visual  perception  occurs 
elsewhere.  Each  point  on  the  primary  visual  cortex  connects  to  many 
points  on  the  secondary  visual  cortex.  These  complex  connections  allow, 
for  the  first  time  in  the  processing  of  visual  information,  interaction 
between  elements  in  the  two-dimensional  visual  field.  It  is  likely  that 
the  perception  process  begins  here.  Thus,  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the 
connections  between  the  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex  should 
enhance  the  knowledge  of  the  visual  perception  process. 

The  complexity  and  number  of  cortico-cortical  interconnects  between 
the  primary  and  secondary  visual  areas  preclude  a  detailed  anatomical 


107 


I 


napping.  An  alternate  research  method  is  to  map  the  data  flow  instead 


of  the  anatomical  structure.  This  mapping  could  be  accomplished  by 
simultaneously  recording  electrical  signals  from  large  areas  of  the  primary 
and  secondary  visual  cortex  so  that  a  transfer  function  could  be  determined. 

The  primary  and  secondary  visual  cortex  regions  appear  to  consist 
of  blocks  of  neural  tissue,  called  basic  computing  elements,  that  accomplish 
similar  tasks.  Their  size  is  estimated  to  be  between  0.05  and  0.5 
millimeters  in  diameter.  Simultaneously  recording  elec troencephalic 
data  from  many  of  these  small  blocks  might  yield  sufficiently  fine 
grained  data  to  determine  the  transfer  function  between  the  primary  and 
secondary  visual  cortex. 

The  multielectrode  array  developed  by  this  research  project  can 
record  these  data.  In  vitro  tests  of  the  multielectrode  array  reveal 
that  gold  electrodes  plated  with  silver-silver  chloride  provide  a  60  dB 
on-off  ratio  during  multiplexing  operations.  Worst  case  column  lead 
crosstalk  is  -54  dB  between  adjacent  leads.  Thus,  for  the  electroencephalic 
signal  bandwidth  of  1  to  40  Hertz,  the  signal  to  crosstalk  ratio  exceeds 
33  dB.  The  design  goal  was  10  dB.  Ambient  noise  levels  are  approximately 
30  microvolts  which  allow  at  least  a  16.5  dB  signal  to  noise  ratio  with 
the  anticipated  200  to  500  microvolt  electroencephalic  signals.  Lifetime 
tests  indicate  that  a  silicon  nitride  passivation  layer  can  protect  the  device 
for  approximately  16  hours  in  an  Isotonic  saline  environment.  High 
pinhole  density  nitrides,  however,  caused  failure  of  the  device  in  less 
than  30  seconds  when  pinch-off  voltages  were  applied.  It  is  believed 
that  the  electric  field  developed  by  the  pinch-off  voltage  attracts 


108 


sodium  ions  through  the  pinholes  over  the  gate  leads.  As  a  result, 
the  silicon  dioxide  insulating  layer  beneath  the  metal  is  compromised  and 
leakage  paths  occur  between  metal  leads.  A  high  quality  nitriding  process 
was  not  available,  but  low  pinhole  density  silicon  nitride  should  solve 
this  problem.  Tests  indicate  that  the  multielectrode  can  successfully 
time  multiplex  electroencephalic  signals.  The  maximum  multiplexing 
rate  for  this  device  appears  to  be  about  one  kilohertz,  which  is  sufficient 
for  the  four  by  four  array.  This  multiplexing  rate  is  about  four  times 
the  Nyquist  sampling  rate  for  thirty  Hertz  bandwidth  electroencephalic 
signals . 

Recommendations 

Future  researchers  must  obtain  and  evaluate  a  high  quality  silicon 
nitride  passivation  layer  to  ensure  that  device  lifetime  is  sufficient 
for  in  vivo  tests  (about  two  hours  should  be  sufficient).  If  the 
silicon  nitride  coating  is  inadequate,  an  organic  polymer  such  as  parylene 
may  be  used.  Tantalum  as  a  metaiization  may  also  improve  lifetime 
characteristics  because  of  its  ability  to  develop  an  organic  oxide  that 
has  excellent  Insulative  properties.  Device  lifetime  research  should 
continue  until  a  chronic  implant  is  feasible.  Such  an  implant  would 
reduce  in  vivo  test  complexity  and  allow  acquisition  of  electroencephalic 
data  while  the  test  animal  functions  in  its  natural  environment. 

After  solving  the  passivation  problem,  numerous  in  vivo  tests 
must  be  conducted  to  evaluate  the  multielectrode  array  and  its  support 
electronics.  In  addition,  the  electroencephalic  data  must  be  reviewed 
to  obtain  information  about  the  visual  system’s  operating  characteristics. 


109 


The  multlelcctrode  array  developed  by  this  thesis  is  inherently 
expandable  to  a  larger  array.  The  device  should  be  expanded  to  a  50 
by  50  or  larger  array  so  that  the  activity  of  several  thousand  basic 
computing  elements  can  be  simultaneously  recorded.  If  multiplexing  speeds 
limit  the  size  of  the  array,  several  arrays  simultaneously  implanted 
could  serve  the  same  purpose. 

The  requirement  to  use  silver-silver  chloride  electrodes  highlights 
the  need  for  a  buffer  amplifier  dedicated  to  each  electrode.  This  buffer 
amplifier  might  be  a  JFF.T  which  could  be  fabricated  directly  on  the  silicon 
substrate  along  with  the  JFET  multiplexing  switches.  The  JFET  amplifiers 
could  have  input  impedances  greater  than  100  megohms  and  output  impedances 
less  than  500  ohms,  virtually  eliminating  crosstalk,  stray  noise  pickup, 
and  multiplexing  speed  problems. 

A  hybrid  circuit  that  contains  the  multielectrode  array (s)  buffer 
amplifiers,  multiplexers,  multiplexing  drive  circuitry  and  RF  data  link 
should  be  developed.  With  such  a  hybrid  circuit,  a  researcher  is  no 
longer  tied  to  a  surgical  operating  room  for  the  data  acquisition  process, 
and  the  visual  perception  mechanism  can  be  analyzed  in  its  natural 


environment . 


Bibliography 


1.  Kabrisky,  M.  A  Proposed  Model  J^or  Vi siial  Processing  in  the  Human 
Brain .  L'rbana:  University  of  Illinois  Press,  1966. 

2.  Brindley,  G.  S.  and  W.  S.  Lewin .  "The  Gensations  Produced  by 
Electrical  Stimulation  of  the  Visual  Cortex,"  Journal  of  Pliysiologv, 
196:  479-493  (1968). 

3.  Donaldson,  P.  E.  K.  "Experimental  Visual  Prosthesis,"  lEE 

Proceedings  of  Control  Science ,  120  (2):  125-132  (February  1973)  . 

4.  Dobelle,  W.  H.,  a_l.  ".Artificial  Vision  for  the  Blind:  Electrical 

Stimulation  of  Visual  Cortex  Offers  Hope  for  a  Functional  Prosthesis," 
Science,  183  (4123):  440-444  (February  1974). 

5.  Hubei,  D.  H.  and  T.  N.  Wiesel .  "Brain  Mechanisms  of  Vision," 

Scientific  American,  241  (3):  150-162  (September  1979). 

5.  - "Receptive  Fields,  Binocular  Interaction  and  Functional 

Architecture  in  the  Cat's  Visual  Cortex,"  Journal  of  Physiology, 

160:  106-154  (1962). 

7.  Jeffreys,  D.  .A.  and  J,  G.  Axford.  "Source  Locations  of  Pattern- 

Specific  Components  of  Human  Visual  Evoked  Potentials,"  Experimental 
Brain  Research ,  16 :  1-21  (1972)  . 

8.  DeMott,  D.  W.  "Cortical  Microtopscopy , "  Medical  Research  Engineering, 

4:  23-29  (1966). 

9.  Mercer,  H.  D.  and  R.  L.  Wiite.  "Photolithographic  Fabrication  and 

Physiological  Performance  of  Microelectrode  Arrays  for  Neural 
Stimulation,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Biomedical  Engineering,  BME-25 
(6):  494-500  (November  1978). 

10.  Wise,  K.  D.,  ejt  "An  Integrated  Circuit  Approach  to  Extracellular 

Microelectrodes,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Biomedical  Engineering, 

BME-17  (4):  238-247  (July  1970). 

11.  Tatman,  J.  A,  ^  Two-Dimensional  Multielectrode  Microprobe  for  the 
Visual  Cortex.  MS  Thesis.  Wright  Patterson  AFB  Ohio:  School  of 
Engineering,  Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology,  December  1979. 

(AD  A080378) . 

12.  Animals  and  DoD  Research  and  Training.  Air  Force  Regulation,  AFR 

169-2.  12  August  1977. 

13.  Guyton,  A.  C.  Textbook  of  Medical  Physiology.  Philadelphia: 

W.  B.  Saunders  Company,  1976. 


Ill 


14. 

Iverson,  L.  L. 
(3):  134- 

"The  Chemistry  of  the  Brain,"  Sclent 
149  (September  1979) . 

ific  Arnt.-rican, 

15. 

Geschwind,  N. 
American,  241 

"Specializations  of  the  Hunan  Brain," 
(3):  180-199  (September  1979). 

Scientlf ic 

16. 

Penfield,  W.  Tlie  Excitable  Cortex  in  Conscious  Man. 
Charles  C.  Thomas,  1958. 

Springfield : 

17. 

Netter,  F.  H. 

The  Nervous  System.  New  York:  Ciba, 

1958. 

18. 

Mountcastle,  V 
Neurons  of  Cat 

.  B.  ".Modality  and  Topograpliic  Properties  of  Single 
’s  Somatic  Sensory  Cortex,"  Journal  of  Neurophysiology, 

20:  408-434  (1957)  . 


19.  Robinson,  J.  0.  The  Psychology  of  Visual  1 1 luslon .  London; 

Hutchinson,  1972. 

20.  Ginsburg,  A.  P.  "Is  the  Illusory  Triangle  Physical  or  Imaginary?" 

Nature,  257 :  219-220  (September  1975). 

21.  Kabrisky,  M.,  ^  "A  Theory  of  Pattern  Perception  Based  on 

Human  Physiology,"  Contemporary  Problems  in  Perception,  A.  T.  Welford, 
Editor  (129-147).  London:  Taylor  and  Francis  ltd.,  1970. 

22.  Ozawa,  K.  "Simulation  of  the  Optical  Illusions  Using  a  Spatial 

Filter,"  Pattern  Recognition,  10:  237-242  (1978). 

23.  Koehler,  W.  Dynamics  in  Psychology,  Liverright  Publishing  Co., 

1939. 

24.  Maffei,  L.,  £t  "A  Perceptual  Phenomenon  and  its  Neuro¬ 
physiological  Correlate,"  Perception,  _5:  43-46  (1979). 

25.  Campbell,  F.  W.,  Comparison  of  Threshold  and  Supra- 

threshold  Ajipcarance  of  Gratings  with  Components  in  the  Low  and 
High  Spatial  Frequency  Range,"  Journal  of  Physiology,  284:  193-201 

(1978) . 

26.  Robinson,  D.  A.  "The  Electrical  Properties  of  Metal  Microelectrodes," 

Proceedings  of  the  IEEE.  ^  (6):  1065-1071  (June  1968). 

27.  Wise,  K.  D.  and  J.  B.  Angell.  "A  Low  Capacitance  Multielectrode 

Probe  for  use  in  Extracellular  Neurophysiology,"  IEEE  Transactions 
on  Biomedical  Engineering,  BME-22  (3):  212-219  (May  1975). 

28.  Prohaska,  F.,  al .  "A  Multielectrode  for  Intracortical  Recordings 

Produced  by  Thln-Fllm  Technology,"  Electroencephalography  and 
Clinical  Neurology ,  42:  421-422  (1977)  . 


112 


29.  Arv,  J.  p,,  ca  "A  Multiplexing  System  for  Multlclinnnel  Signal 

Averaging  of  the  Visual  Evoked  Response,"  IEEE  Transactions  on 
IHonied  j  caj  Engineering,  BME-26  (6):  696-699  (December  1979). 

30.  S.-e,  S.  M.  Physics  ci^f  Semiconductor  Devices .  New  York:  John 
Wiley  and  Sons,  1969. 

31.  /'iininger,  K.  H.  and  F.  P.  Heiman.  "The  C-V  Techniques  as  an 

Analytical  Tool,"  Solid  State  Technology ,  13 :  5-6  (May-June  1970). 

32.  Donaldson,  P.  E.  K.  "The  Encapsulation  of  Microelectronic  Devices 

for  Long-Term  Implantation,"  IEEE  Transactions  on  Biomedical 
Engineering,  BME-23  (4):  281-285  (July  1976). 

33.  White,  R.  L.  "The  Stanford  Artificial  Ear  Project,"  The  Stanford 

Engineer ,  3  (1):  3-10  (Spring/Summer  1980). 

34.  Maybeck,  P.  S.  Stochastic  Models ,  Estimation,  and  Control  Volume  1. 
New  York:  Academic  Press,  1979. 


113 


A.  Initial  Fabrication  Procedure 


This  appendix  contains  the  initial  fabrication  process  schedule 
which  was  derrived  from  research  by  Tatman  (Ref  11).  The  research  of 
this  thesis  revised  the  process  schedule.  The  revised  process  schedule 
is  contained  in  appendix  B  of  this  thesis. 

Initial  Process  Schedule 

1.  Starting  material:  substrate:  p-type  (100),  20-60  ohm-cm. 

Epitaxial  layer:  n-type,  0.91  ohm-cm. 

2.  Initial  clean: 

A.  Schedule:  10  min.  in  TCE,  10  min.  in  acetone,  10  min.  in 
methanol,  UIW  rinse  (10  min.  above  14  megohms). 

3.  Initial  oxidation: 

A.  Standard  clean,  CLl. 

B.  Oxidation:  1050  degrees  C. 

C.  Cycle:  10  min.  dry  O2,  60  rain.  H2O,  10  rain,  anneal  in  N2. 

D.  Nominal  thickness:  5000  angstroms. 

4.  Mask:  Apply  mask  1  (isolation  diffusion);  back  side  protection 
unnecessary. 

5.  Isolation  Diffusion: 

A.  Standard  clean  CL3. 

B.  Diffusion:  1100  degrees  C.:  boron"*^  sources. 

C.  Cycle:  110  min.  in  1  liter/min.  N2  +  30  cc/mln.  O2,  10  min. 
in  500  cc/min.  O2. 

D.  Strip  all  oxide  in  10:1  DIW:HF. 

E.  Standard  clean  CL3. 


F.  Oxidation:  1000  dc'groos  C. 

G.  Cycle:  5  min.  In  dry  O^-,  10  min.  in  H2O,  5  min.  in  N2. 

H.  Nomina]  parameters:  depth  is  3.5  microns,  oxide  is  1400 
angst  r^ihis  . 

6.  Mask:  Apply  mask  2  (gate  diffusion);  back  side  protection 
unnecessary. 

7.  Gate  diffusion: 

A.  Standard  clean  CL 3. 

B.  Diffusion:  1050  degrees  C.;  boron"*^  sources. 

C.  Cycle:  25  min.  in  1  llter/min.  +  30  cc/min.  O2,  5  min. 
in  500  cc/min.  0^ . 

D.  Strip  all  oxide  in  10:1  DIW:HF. 

E.  Standard  clean  CL3. 

F.  Oxidation:  950  degrees  C. 

G.  Cycle:  5  min.  in  dry  O^,  25  min.  in  H2O,  5  min.  in  N2. 

H.  Nominal  parameters:  depth  Is  0.9  micron,  oxide  thickness  is 
1500  angstroms. 

8.  Mask:  apply  mask  3  (enhancement  diffusion);  back  side  protection 
unnecessary. 

9.  Enhancement  diffusion: 

A.  Standard  clean  CL3. 

B.  Diffusion:  1000  degrees  C.;  POCl^  source. 

C.  Cycle:  5  min.  soak,  10  min.  diffusion,  5  min.  purge. 

D.  Flow  rates:  N2  source  70  cc/min.,  N2  bypass  500  cc/min.,  O2  150 
cc/min . 

E.  Nominal  parameters:  resistivity  is  10  ohms/square,  depth  is  0.4 
micron . 


115 


10.  Final  oxidation: 


f 

A.  KCl  flush  of  oxide  tube  (overnight  or  about  8  hours) . 

B.  Strip  all  oxide  in  10:1  DIW:HF. 

C.  Standard  Clean  CL3. 

1).  Oxidation:  950  degrees  C. 

E.  Cycle:  5  min.  dry  O2,  25  min.  H2O,  5  min.  N2. 

F.  C-V  measurement  of  oxide  impurity  content. 

G.  Nominal  parameters:  oxide  thickness,  2000  angstroms,  gate 
depth,  1.0  micron,  adequate  C-V  measure  to  be  determined. 

11.  Mask:  apply  mask  A  (contacts);  back  side  protection  unnecessary. 

12.  Mask:  apply  mask  5  (metal  liftoff);  back  side  protection 
unnecessary. 

13.  Metallization: 

A.  Evaporate  500  angstroms  of  chromium,  700  angstroms  of  platinum 
and  2000  angstroms  of  gold. 

B.  Liftoff, 

C.  Alloy  at  500  degrees  C.  for  5  min. 
lA .  Insulating  oxidation: 

A.  CVD  oxidation  (add  aproximately  2  percent  phosphorous) . 

B.  Nominal  thickness:  1  micron. 

15.  Mask:  apply  mask  6  (exposure  windows);  protect  back  side. 

16.  Packaging:  hand  solder  wires  to  bonding  pads. 

Standard  Procedures 
CLl: 

1.  3:2,  H2S0^:  11202  (self  heating)  for  15  min. 

f 


116 


2.  DIW  rinse  for  10  min.  above  14  meg. 

3.  10:1  DIWiHF  for  15  sec. 

4.  DIW  rinse  for  10  min.  above  14  meg, 

5.  Spin  dry  for  2  min. 

CL3: 

Same  as  CLl  except  100:1  DIW:HF  for  20  sec. 

PRl: 

All  mask  steps  except  for  liftoff 

1.  2  hour  bake,  220  degrees  C.,  flow. 

2.  Waycoat  (-) ,  spin  on  at  4000  rpm. 

3.  Prebake,  70  degrees  C.,  20  min.,  N2  flow. 

2 

4.  Exposure  appr  4  sec.,  0.6  mw/cm  . 

5.  Develop,  butyl  acetate,  then  xylene. 

6.  Postbake  at  150  degrees  C.,  30  min.,  N2  flow. 

7.  Etch  in  buffered  HF:NH^F,  1:6. 

8.  Photoresist  strip  (O2  plasma),  10  min. 

PR2: 

For  liftoff  mask 

1.  2  hour  bake,  220  degrees  C.,  N2  flow. 

2.  KTI  +  2,  30  cs,  spin  on  at  3000  rpm. 

3.  Prebake  at  90  degrees  C.,  30  min.,  N2  flow. 

2 

4.  Exposure,  10  sec.,  0.6  inw/cm  . 

5.  Develop,  KTI  developer :DIW,  1:1. 

6.  Postbake  at  90  degrees  C.,  30  min.,  flow. 

7.  Liftoff,  boiling  acetone  55  degrees  C. 


117 


B.  Revised  Process  Schedule 


Introduction 

This  appendix  describes  the  fabrication  process  for  the  multielectrode 
array  concomitant  to  this  research  project.  It  is  a  modified  form  of  the 
process  schedule  information  found  in  reference  11.  The  major  steps 
in  the  process  will  be  stated,  followed  by  a  more  detailed  description 
of  the  process.  The  original  detailed  process  schedule  is  found  in 
appendix  A.  The  last  section  of  this  appendix  contains  the  process  , 
schedule  arrived  at  through  the  research  of  this  thesis. 

Fabrication  Process 

The  major  steps  of  the  fabrication  process  are  listed  below. 

1.  Formation  of  the  Initial  oxide  layer  on  the  substrate. 

2.  Three  photolithographic  masking  and  diffusion  steps  to 
construct  the  junction  field  effect  transistor  (JFET)  devices. 

3.  Formation  of  the  final  thermal  oxide  insulating  layer  over  the 
probe  surface, 

4.  Contact  windows  opened  through  the  final  thermal  oxide  layer. 

5.  Metallization  and  liftoff. 

6.  Overcoating  with  a  silicon  nitride  insulation  layer. 

7.  Exposure  windows  opened  to  the  bonding  pads  and  electrodes. 

8.  Lead  attachment  and  final  insulation. 

9.  Silver-silver  chloride  plating  the  electrodes. 

The  starting  material  is  a  p-type  silicon  substrate,  13  mils  thick 
with  a  (100)  orientation,  and  a  2  micron  n-type  epitaxial  layer  grown 
onto  it.  Substrate  resistivity  is  20  to  60  ohm-cm.  Epitaxial  wafers 


118 


were  chosen  to  simplify  the  fabrication  of  the  JFET  devices,  the  n-type 
epitaxial  layer  provides  n-channel  JFETs  which  have  a  lower  on-resistance. 

The  major  steps  of  the  fabrication  sequence  are  shown  in  figure  A-1. 
Stand.trd  photoresist  procedures  are  used  throughout  the  diffusion  steps 
to  selectively  etch  windows  through  the  silicon  dioxide  through  which 
the  dopants  will  diffuse.  In  this  fashion,  the  geometries  of  the 
diffusions  are  controlled.  These  same  photoresist-etching  steps  are  used 
to  define  geometries  in  the  contact  windows,  metallization,  and  exposure 
windows  processes.  For  ease  of  fabrication  and  for  yield  considerations, 
five  micron  design  rules  have  been  used  throughout  the  design  of  the  device 
This  means  no  feature  of  the  probe  can  be  closer  together  than  five  microns 

The  first  step  of  the  fabrication  sequence  is  to  thermally  grow  0.5 
micron  of  silicon  dioxide  onto  the  surface  in  wet  oxygen  at  1050  degrees 
centigrade.  This  oxide  is  then  selectively  etched  using  photolitho¬ 
graphic  techniques  with  photoresist  to  open  windows  in  the  oxide  over 
the  areas  where  the  dopant  is  to  diffuse  into  the  wafer.  A  p-type 
dopant,  boron,  is  then  diffused  at  1100  degrees  centigrade  through  the 
epitaxial  layer  to  a  depth  of  3.5  microns,  to  join  with  the  p-type  sub¬ 
strate.  This  forms  isolated  pockets  across  the  wafer.  Each  of  these 
pockets  will  contain  a  single  JFET  device.  Through  these  isolation 
regions,  each  jFET  is  electrically  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the  probe  by 
two  back  to  back  p-n  junctions.  Following  the  isolation  diffusion,  the 
remaining  oxide  layer  is  completely  removed  through  another  etching  step 
and  a  new  1400  angstrom  thermal  oxide  layer  is  grown  to  prepare  the  surface 
for  the  gate  diffusion. 

The  above  steps  result  in  the  structure  shown  in  figure  A-le.  Steps 
C  and  D,  shown  in  figure  A-1  and  discussed  in  the  above  paragraph  arc 


a)  starting  material 


n-type  epitaxial  layer 


— p-type 

substrat? 
l - thermal  SiO, 

b)  initial  oxide  / 


c)  isolation  mask 


» 


d)  isolation  diffusion 


c)  gate  mask  oxide 


(After  Ref.  11:7^) 


Fig.  A-1.  The  Fabrication  Procens  Sequence. 


120 


Fig.  A-l(continued) . 


121 


now  repeated  for  the  gate  diffusion  and  then  for  the  enhancement  diffusion. 


A  final  1500  angstrom  thermal  oxide  layer  is  grown  in  wet  oxygen  to  produce 
the  JFET  structure  shown  in  figure  A-lf. 

The  gate  diffusion  is  another  p-type,  boron  diffusion.  It  is 
diffused  to  a  junction  depth  of  1.0  micron.  The  resulting  n-type  layer 
sandwiched  between  the  p-type  gate  diffusion  and  the  substrate  forms  the 
channel  of  the  field  effect  transistor.  The  gate  diffusion  also  forms 
the  10  ohms  per  square  crossover  structures.  The  shallow  n-type 
enhancement  diffusion,  using  a  POCl^  source,  increases  the  surface 
Impurity  concentration  of  the  n-type  source  and  drain  regions  to  ensure 
ohmic  contacts  of  the  metal  leads  to  these  regions.  Since  the  high 
surface  impurity  concentrations  resulting  from  the  isolation,  gate,  and 
enhancement  diffusions  do  not  degrade  device  performance,  and  are 
actually  desirable  in  the  enhancement  and  crossover  regions,  drive-in 
diffusions  are  not  necessary  in  the  fabrication  of  this  device. 

The  contact  windows  are  next  etched  through  the  final  silicon 
dioxide  layer.  These  windows  expose  areas  of  the  source,  drain,  gate, 
and  crossover  regions  to  allow  the  metallic  leads  to  make  contact  to 
these  active  regions. 

A  liftoff  technique  is  used  to  define  the  device  metal  pattern. 

A  positive  photoresist  is  spun  onto  the  wafer  and  the  metal  mask  applied. 
The  metal  evaporation  is  then  performed  followed  by  the  liftoff  of  the 
photoresist  and  the  unwanted  metal. 

The  metallization  involves  a  three  step  chromium,  platlnim,  and 
gold  vacuum  evaporation  process.  An  initial  base  layer  of  250  angstroms 
of  chromium  is  first  applied  to  the  surface.  The  chromium  acts  as  a 


4 


122 


f 


"glue"  as  the  gold  does  not  adhere  well  to  silicon  or  silicon  dioxide. 

A  layer  of  platinum,  sandwiched  between  the  chromium  and  the  gold, 
prevents  the  gold  from  diffusing  through  the  chromium  to  the  silicon. 

This  would  defeat  the  adhesive  effect  of  the  chromium.  A  layer  of  gold, 
2000  angstroms  thick,  is  then  vacuum  evaporated  onto  the  platinum.  The 
liftoff  is  now  performed  by  placing  the  wafer  in  an  acetone  solution. 

After  this  step,  a  cross  section  of  one  of  the  JFET-clectrode  cells  is 
as  shown  in  figure  A-2 . 

The  final  silicon  nitride  layer  is  now  plasma  deposited  over  the 
entire  multielectrode  array.  This  layer  Insulates  the  array  structure 
from  the  cerebral  spinal  fluid.  Windows  are  etched  through  the  layer  to 
expose  the  metal  electrode  sites,  the  ground  plane,  and  the  bonding 
pads . 

The  lead  wires,  which  will  attach  the  multielectrode  array  to  the 
support  electronics,  are  hand  soldered  to  the  bonding  pads.  These  wires 
must  be  hand  soldered  to  give  the  bonds  and  lead  wires  sufficient  strength 
for  handling  during  surgical  implantation  and  testing.  Thermocompression 
bonds  would  not  provide  this  strength. 

To  Insulate  the  bonding  areas  from  the  saline  bath  of  the  cerebral 
spinal  fluid,  the  entire  structure,  except  the  center  area  containing 
the  electrodes,  is  coated  with  moisture-proof  epoxy. 

Once  the  epoxy  layer  had  hardened,  the  electrodes  are  silver-silver 
c'nloride  plated.  This  process  consists  of  immersing  the  entire  multi¬ 
electrode  array  into  a  silver  plating  bath.  All  column  leads  and  the 
ground  plane  connection  are  tied  together  and  attached  to  the  plating 
power  supply.  Thus,  all  electrodes  and  the  ground  plane  are  simultaneously 


123 


124 


silver  plated.  Once  silver  plating  is  complete,  the  array  is  washed 
in  deionized  water  and  then  immersed  in  a  saline  solution  for  the 
chloriding  process.  An  electric  current  is  passed  througli  all  electrodes 
and  the  ground  plane  until  the  surface  of  the  silver  plating  is  converted 
to  silver  chloride.  The  device  is  again  washed  in  deionized  water  and 
placeii  in  a  dry  nitrogen  environment  to  await  the  surgical  implant 
procedure . 

Revised  Process  Schedule 

1.  Starting  material: 

A.  Substrate:  p-type,  (100),  20-60  ohm-cm. 

B.  Epitaxial  layer:  n-type  0.91  ohm-cm. 

2.  Initial  clean: 

A.  Xylene,  120  degrees  C.  for  10  min. 

B.  1:1  TCE:acetone  for  5  min. 

C.  Methanol  for  5  rain. 

D.  Spin  dry. 

E.  Standard  clean,  CLl . 

F.  Solution  A,  80  degrees  C.  for  15  min.  (6:2:1  of  DIW: H2O2 : NH^OH) . 

G.  Solution  B,  80  degrees  C.  for  15  min.  (7:2:1  of  DIVJ:H202:HC1)  . 

H.  DIW  rinse  for  10  min. 

I.  Spin  dry. 

3.  Pre-oxidation  furnace  preparation: 

A.  HCl  purge  at  1050  degrees  C. 

B.  Cycle:  A80  min.  in  10:1  02:HC1,  480  ndn.  in  N2 • 

C.  C-V  test  on  pilot  wafer,  require  voltage  shift  be  less  than  5 

volts  for  2000  angstrom  oxide. 


125 


A.  IsoKition  oxidation: 


A.  include  one  test  wafer. 

B.  Standard  clean,  CLl . 

C.  1050  degrees  C.  pyrolytic  steam. 

D.  Push-pull  at  2  inches  per  min. 

E.  Cycle:  10  min.  in  O2,  60  min.  in  H2O,  10  min.  in  N2 . 

F.  Measure  thickness  on  test  wafer,  must  be  5000  -  1000  angstroms. 

5.  Mask  1  -  isolation  diffusion: 

A.  Standard  photoresist,  PRl. 

B.  Back  side  protection  for  isolation  diffusion  unnecessary. 

6.  Isolation  diffusion: 

A.  Include  one  test  wafer. 

B.  Standard  clean,  CL3. 

C.  Boron"^  source  at  1100  degrees  C. 

D.  Push-pull  at  2  inches  per  min. 

E.  Cycle:  110  min.  in  1  liter/min.  N2  +  AO  cc/min.  O2,  10  min. 
in  500  cc/min.  02- 

F.  Measure  surface  resistivity  and  junction  depth  on  test  wafer. 
Surface  resistivity  should  be  less  than  15  ohms  per  square.  Junction 
depth  should  be  3.5  -  0.5  microns. 

7.  Gate  oxidation: 


A. 

Nitric  acid,  80 

degrees  C.  for  15  min. 

B. 

DIW  wash  for  10 

rain. 

C. 

10:1  DIW:HF  until  wafers  are  hydrophobic 

D, 

Standard  clean. 

CLl. 

E. 

1000  degrees  C. 

pyrolytic  steam. 

126 


F.  Push-pull  at  2  Inches  per  min. 

G.  Cycle:  5  rain,  in  O^,  15  min.  in  H^O,  10  min,  in  N2. 

H.  Measure  oxide  thickness:  should  be  1400  ^  300  angstroms. 

I.  Measure  surface  resistivity:  must  be  less  than  230  ohms  per 
squaie . 

8.  Mask  2  -  gate  diffusion: 

A.  Standard  photoresist,  PRl. 

B.  Back  side  protection  unnecessary. 

9.  A.  Include  two  test  wafers. 

B.  Standard  clean,  CL3. 

C.  Boron"*”  source  at  1050  degrees  C. 

D.  Cycle:  20  rain,  in  1  liter/min.  N2  +  40  cc/min.  0^,  5  min. 
in  500  cc/min.  0^ . 

E.  Push-pull  at  3.2  inches  per  min. 

F.  Measure  surface  resistivity:  must  be  less  than  25  ohms  per 
square . 

10.  Enhancement  oxidation: 

A.  Include  one  test  wafer  from  step  8. 

B.  10:1  DIW.’HF  until  wafer  is  hydrophobic. 

C.  Standard  clean,  CLl. 

D.  950  degrees  C.  in  pyrolytic  steam. 

E.  Push-pull  at  2  inches  per  min. 

F.  Cycle:  5  min.  in  0^,  30  min.  in  H2O,  10  min.  in  N2. 

G.  Measure  oxide  thickness:  must  be  1500  -  200  angstroms. 

H.  Measure  surface  resistance:  must  be  less  than  100  ohms  per 
square. 


127 


I.  Measure  Rate  depth:  should  be  1  -  0.2  micron. 

11.  Mask  3  -  enhancement  diffusion: 

A.  Standard  photoresist,  PRl. 

B.  Back  side  protection  is  necessary. 

12.  Enhancement  diffusion: 

A.  Include  two  test  wafers. 

B.  Standard  clean,  CL3. 

C.  POCl^  source  at  1000  degrees  C. 

D.  Cycle:  5  min.  Soak,  4  min.  Diffuse. 

E.  Flow  rates:  70  cc/min.  source,  500  cc/min.  N2  bypass,  150 
cc/mln.  O^’ 

F.  Measure  surface  resistivity:  must  be  10  i  5  ohms  per  square. 

13.  Pre-oxidation  furnace  preparation: 

A.  HCl  purge  at  950  degrees  C. 

B.  Cycle;  240  min.  in  10:1  02:HC1,  14  hours  in  N2. 

C.  C-V  test  on  pilot  wafer:  voltage  shift  less  than  2  volts  for 

2000  angstrom  oxide. 

14.  Final  oxidation: 

A.  Include  two  test  wafers:  one  from  step  12  and  one  unused. 

B.  10:1  DIW'.HF  until  phosphorous  glass  is  removed. 

C.  Standard  clean,  CLl, 

D.  950  degrees  pyrolytic  steam. 

E.  Push-pull  at  2  inches  per  min. 

F.  Cycle:  5  min.  0^,  30  min.  H^O,  10  min  N2. 

G.  Measure  diffusion  depth:  must  be  0.4  ^  0.2  microns. 

H.  C-V  test:  voltage  shift  less  than  2  volts  for  2000  angstroms. 


128 


I.  Measure  oxide  thickness:  should  be  2000  -  200  angstroms. 

15.  Mask  A  -  contacts: 

A.  Standard  photoresist,  PRl- 

B.  Back  side  protection  unnecessary. 

16.  Mask  5  -  liftoff: 

A.  Standard  photoresist,  PR2 , 

B.  Back  side  protection  is  necessary. 

17.  Metallization: 

A.  Evaporate  500  angstroms  chromium,  700  angstroms  platinum,  2000 
angstroms  gold. 

B.  Liftoff. 

18.  Electrical  check: 

Check  for  ohmic  contacts,  pinchoff  voltage,  on-resistance,  and 
leakage  paths  between  column  leads  and  gate  leads.  Nominal  pinchoff 
voltage  is  3  volts.  Nominal  on-resistance  is  1000  ohms. 

19.  Insulating  nitride: 

A.  Standard  clean,  CL3. 

B.  Plasma  deposition  parameters:  preheat  to  300  degrees  C. 

C.  Set  Rr  output  to  35  watts,  evacuate  to  0.A5  torr. 

D.  Flow  20  cc  per  min.  2  percent  silane  in  argon  and  20  cc/piin. 
N2.  Deposition  time  is  one  hour. 

20.  Mask  6  -  electrode  exposure: 

A.  Standard  photoresist,  PRl. 

B.  Back  side  protection  is  necessary. 


■4 


129 


21.  Wire  lead  comiection; 


A.  Preheat  device  to  200  degrees  C. 

B.  Molt  60/^0  solder  on  each  bonding  pad  and  cool  device  to  room 
temperature . 

C.  With  small  soldering  iron,  hand  solder  each  wire  to  pad. 

22.  Insulation  of  bonding  pads: 

A.  TCE  wash  for  10  min. 

B.  Acetone  wash  for  10  min. 

C.  Methyl  alcohol  wash  for  10  min. 

D.  DIW  wash  for  10  min. 

E.  Blow  dry  with  nitrogen. 

F.  Visually  inspect  to  insure  soldering  resin  is  removed. 

G.  Apply  moisture-proof  epoxy  to  bonding  pads  and  back  of  device. 

23.  Silver-silver  chloride  plating: 

A.  Connect  all  column  leads  and  ground  plane  lead  together. 

B.  Immerse  in  silver  plating  solution. 

C.  Plate  for  40  seconds  with  200  microamps  of  current. 

D.  DIW  wash  for  10  min. 

E.  Immerse  in  saline  solution. 

F.  Chloride  by  applying  320  microamps  of  current  for  10  seconds. 

G.  DIW  wash  for  10  min. 

H.  Blow  dry  with  nitrogen. 

Standard  Procedures 
CLl: 

I.  3:2  H2S0^:H202  (self  heating)  for  15  min. 


130 


2.  DlW  rinse  (start  time  when  resistivity  above  14  megohms)  10 

min. 

3.  10:1  DIWiHF  for  15  sec. 

4.  DIW  rinse  (start  time  when  resistivity  above  14  megohms)  for  10 

min. 

5.  Spin  dry  for  2  min. 

CL3: 

Same  as  CLl  except  100:1  DIW:HF  for  20  sec. 

PRl: 

All  mask  steps  except  for  liftoff 

1.  2  hour  bake,  220  degrees  C. 

2.  Waycoat  (-)  43  cs,  spin  on  at  4000  rpra. 

3.  Prebake,  70  degrees  C.,  20  min. 

2 

4.  Expose  for  4  seconds,  0.6  raw/ cm  . 

5.  Develop,  xylene,  then  butyl  acetate,  40  sec.  each. 

6.  Postbake  at  150  degrees  C.  30  min. 

7.  Etch  in  buffered  HF:NH,F,  1:6. 

4 

8.  Photoresist  strip  0^  plasma,  10  min. 

PR2: 

For  liftoff  mask 

1.  2  hour  bake,  220  degrees  C. 

2.  KTI  +2,  30  cs,  spin  on  at  3000  rpm. 

3.  Prebake  at  90  degrees  C.,  30  min. 

2 

A.  Expose,  10  sec.,  0.6  mw/cm  . 

5.  Develop,  KTI  developer:DIW,  1:1. 

6.  Postbakc  at  90  degrees  C.,  30  min. 

7.  Liftoff,  boiling  acetone. 


131 


Gary  Howard  Fitzgerald  was  born  on  January  25,  1946  in  Oklahoma 
City,  Oklahoma.  He  graduated  from  Harrah  High  School,  Harrah,  Oklahoma 
in  May  of  1964.  He  enlisted  in  the  United  States  Air  Force  in  .Tune  of 
1964  and  received  technical  training  at  Lackland  AFB,  Texas,  to  perform 
duties  as  a  Cryptographic  Electronics  Communication  Systems  Repairman. 
Subsequent  duty  stations  include  Carswell  AFB,  Texas;  Sunnyvale  Satellite 
Test  Center,  Sunnyvale,  California;  Korat  Royal  Thai  Air  Force  Base, 

Korat,  Thailand;  and  Elmendorf  AFB,  Alaska.  He  was  accepted  into  the 
Airman  Education  and  Commissioning  Program  in  December  of  1971  and  received 
a  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  from  Oklahoma  State  University  in  May  of  1975. 
He  was  commissioned  a  Second  Lieutenant  via  Officer  Training  School  in 
August  1975  and  assigned  to  Edwards  AFB,  California,  as  a  flight  test 
engineer.  He  was  assigned  to  the  Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology  in 
June  1979. 

Permanent  address;  Route  3,  Box  128 

Harrah,  Oklahoma  73045 


UNCLASSIFIED _ 

security  classification  of  this  PAOF  fWht^n  Duta  Fnttfred) 

REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

I.  REPORT  NUMBER  |2.  GOVT 

AFIT/GE/BE/80D-2 1  A  Pi  J 


3  Arp  READ  INSTRUCTIONS 

_ BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

2.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO.  3-  RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 


)  Aloo 


4.  TITLE  land  SubIK/oJ 

THE  DEVELOIWENT  OF  A  TWO-DIMENSIONAL 
MULTIELEGTRODE  ARRAY  FOR  VISUAL  PERCEPTION 
RESEARCH  IN  THE  MAMMALIAN  BRAIN 


S.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  A  PERIOD  COVERED 

MS  Thesis 


6.  PERFORMING  ORG.  REPORT  NUMBER 


1 7.  AUTHORfaJ 


Gary  H.  Fitzgerald 
Gapt 


B.  CONTRACT  OR  GRANT  NUMBERCa; 


9.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Air  Force  Institute  of  Technology  (AFIT-EN) 


10.  PROGRAM  element.  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  a  WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 


Itt.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 


12.  REPORT  DATE 

Beceinber  1980 


Aerosi^ce  Medical  Research  Laboratory  ^ 

afwal/heg-  f  ia.  NUMBER  OF  pages 

Wrlght-Patterson  AFB,  Ohio  45433 _ ^ _ 

14.  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  4  A OG R ESSi'i/ c/:7/erenr  from  ConttotUng  Office)  IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (of  this  report) 

Aerospace  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Unclassified 

afwal/heg 

Wrlght-Patterson  AFB|  Ohio  45^33  i$a.  declassification. down  grading 

SCHEDULE 

16.  distribution  statement  fo/ dl/a  Repof(> 


Approved  for  public  release?  distribution  unlimited 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  the  ebeteect  entered  in  Btock  20.  If  different  from  Report) 


18.  SUPPLEMENT  ARY  NOTES 


16JUN  1981 


L  Approved  for  public  release 
lAW  AFR  190-17 

Fredric  C.  Lynch,  Major,  USAF 
Director,  Public  Affairs 


19.  key  WORDS  (Continue  on  reverse  side  if  neceasmry  end  identity  by  block  number) 

Bioelectrode  array,  multiplexed  multielectrode  array,  implantable  electronics 
microprobe,  visual  perception  system,  biomedical  integrated  electronics. 


20.  ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  reverse  side  If  neeessery  end  Identity  by  block  number) 

a  review  of  previous  mammalian  visual  system  neurological  and  psychological 
research  is  presented.  Results  of  previous  research  motivated  the  development 
of  a  device  that  would  record  fine  grained  electroencephalic  data  from  the 
surface  of  a  living  mammalian  cortex. 

A  multiplexing  multielectrode  array  has  been  developed  and  tested  for  this 
purpose.  The  device  consists  of  a  four  by  four  array  of  electrodes  and  sixteen 
junction  field  effect  transistors  fabricated  on  a  silicon  substrate  using 


DD  1  JAN  73  1473  EDITION  OF  1  NOV  65  |S  OBSOLETE 


security  classification  of  This  page 


UNGLASS IFISD 

teCUniTY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGefHTiAn  Dmim  Enltfd> 


integrated  circuit  manufacturing  techniques.  In  vitro  tests  Indicated  the 
device  is  capable  of  detecting  and  multiplexing  fine  grained  cortical 
signals.  Technical  problems  with  the  passivation  material  precluded 
in  vitro  evaluation.  A  solution  to  this  problem  is  presented  and  an 
in  vivo  test  procedure  recommended. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECuSITy  cl  ASSIFICATIOK  of  rL..>-  PAaE(lfh*n  Dmtm  Enitrtd) 


END 

DATE 

FILMED 

7.- 81 
DTIC 


