DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 278 358 



IR 012 458 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
JOURNAL CIT 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Lesgold, Alan M. 

Human Skill in a Computerized Society: Complex Skills 
and Their Acquisition. 

Pittsburgh Univ., Pa. Learning Research and 
Development Center. 

Department of Education, Washington, DC; Office of 
Naval Research, Arlington, Va. Personnel and Training 
Research Programs Office. 
86 

13p. 

Journal Articles (080) Viewpoints (120) —Reports 
- Research/Technical (143) 

Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers; 
vl6 n2 p79-87 1984 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Apprenticeships; Artificial Intelligence; 
♦Automation; *Cognitive Psychology; *Computers; 
Correlation; *Epistemology; Interpersonal Competence; 
Learning Theories; Longitudinal Studies; Path 
Analysis; *Prof essional Training; *Radiology; 
Research Needs; Research Tools 

ABSTRACT 

This paper discusses some of the issues raised for 
cognitive psychologists by the computer revolution together with the 
role that psychologists with computer training ought to play, 
especially in the study of how people acquire complex skills. The 
issues addressed include: (1) the competition between humans and 
intelligent machines; (2) the destruction of apprenticeship 
opportunities by automation; (3) the flexibility of human 
intelligence and transfer of skills to different situations; and (4) 
the use Of the computer as a research tool in the study of learning 
and thinking. A research project on the acquisition of radiological 
diagnostic skills is then described as an example of research on the 
learning processes involved in acquiring expertise in complex 
domains. This description includes the types of skills involved in 
diagnostic radiology, the methodologies used, and the findings of 
several related studies. A discussion of the need for the large scale 
longitudinal studies now possible with the use of computers to verify 
theories about complex skill learning concludes the paper. Several 
tables present data from the project and five references are listed. 
( D JR ) 



********************************** ************************************ 
* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document. 
********************************* AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkJkjk 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION ^ 

Ottjp ol Educational Research and Improvement ©; 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 61 

J CENTER (ERIC) |fy 

"This document has been reproduced as |r, 
received from in* person or organization 

originating it .. 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve |i§ ? 

reproducl ion quality. VJ 



HUMAN SKILL IN A COMPUTERIZED SOCIETY: 
COMPLEX SKILLS AND THEIR ACQUISITION 



Alan M. Lesgold 



Learning Research and Development Center 
University of Pittsburgh 



1986 



Reprinted with permission from Behavior Research Methods. Instruments. 
& Computers, 16(2). 79-87. Copyright 1984. Psychonomlc Society. Inc. 

The research reported herein was conducted at the Learning Research and 
Development Center, and was supported by the Office of Naval Research 
Personnel and Training Group, The National Institute of Education (NIE), 
U. S. Department of Education and the Air Force Human Resources 
Laboratories. The opinions expressed do not necessarily reflect the position 
or policy of the sponsors and no official endorsement should be Inferred. 



Behanor Research Methods, Instruments. <t Computers 
1984, 16 (2), 79-87 



SESSION I 
PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESS 

Russell M. Church, Presider 



Human skill in a computerized society: 
Complex skills and their acquisition 



ALAN M. LESGOLD 

University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 

<J° ioaueapooedto cognitive psychologists by too computer revolution ore explored. 
SSfJjSS! * <80, ?? tttl !? between humane and machines, destruction of apprenticeship oppor- 
tunitieeby automation, the issue of flexibility of intaUigsace, ami related issues. This is followed 
y ? d Z?H Mi0Q of a Program of work on the acquiaitlon of a complex skill radiological die* 
nos^D^ereacea and slmilaritiea of that domain to other recently studied detains we dS- 

^a^r 0 Si&i^t^ ** nrod for l0D8l£udiaal appreftchw * vorifyifl e 



In preparing for this talk, I studied the discourse 
structure for presidential addresses to see what one is 
supposed to do. The following rule emerged as the first 
rule for an address generator: 

presAddr -» vuionaryStatcmcnt + talkAboutYourRcscarch 

So, I first have some thoughts to offer afrout the com- 
puter revolution and the role we psychologists with com- 
puter training ought to play. After that, 111 turn my 
attention to some work I have been doing on the acquisi- 
tion of complex skills, an endeavor in which people and 
machines now compete. 

IMPLICATIONS OF THE COMPUTER REVOLUTION 
FOR PSYCHOLOGY 

It is almost a cliche by now to proclaim that we are 
about to undergo a socioeconomic revolution in which 
information will be a major item of trade and will be 



This address reports work supported by the Office of Naval 
Research Personnel and Trainini Group, the National Institute 
of Education, and the Air Force Human Resources Laboratory. 
The research results all come from collaborations with Bob 
Giaser, Dale Klopfer, Harriet Rubinson, Paul Feltovich, Carol 
White, Uoyci Bond, Lauren Resnick, Kathleen Hammond, 
Christopher Roth* and other LROC colleagues. I take complete 
responsibility for the assertions made in this paper, with which 
neither sponsors nor collaborators necsssarily agree, but the 
work would have been impossible without them. My mailing 
address is: Learning Research and Development Center, Uni- 
versity of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260. 



packaged in small containers, not human heads. Indeed, 
for the members of this Society, who have relied on 
computer software for many aspects of their work, the 
revolution is almost at hand. At least a few of us -have 
been in positions in which what we needed most was a 
particular software system, not a human assistant or a 
piece of hardware. Tile computer has changed our lives 
in a manner reminiscent of the effects of the printing 
press or the steam engine. As students of human be- 
havior and cognition, surely we need to attend to the 
effects of the computer on our fellow human beings, 
too. Indeed, the problems we pick to study will be 
driven by the needs of society as always, and society 
now needs to understand and prepare for the computer 
revolution. 

Some effects of widespread computer usage are now 
painfully apparent. Many factory workers are being re- 
placed by robots, and others are finding their skills 
devalued as they compete with robots. I am concerned 
in this presentation, though, with a second displace- 
ment that is also beginning, in the white-collar work 
force. Many routine jobs were necessary to the running . 
of large-scale companies but were also a cause of overly 
complex management structures. Competitive companies 
will gain greatly by trimming management positions, 
especially those that contribute information processing 
skill only at the expense of introducing further layers 
of authority into the management hierarchy. People 
who thought they were set for life will be out of work 
and in need of retraining. 

Obviously, there will be Luddite reactions to these 
events, and thus the effects of the computer revolution 



9 

ERLC 



Copyright 1984 fcychonomtc Society, Inc. 



80 LESGOLD 



will be slowed slightly. However, the changes I just 
mentioned are already starting to happen, and we can 
make an important contribution by studying issues re- 
lated to training of valued workers for the computer age. 
This concern has motivated much of the research my 
colleagues and 1 have been doing. We have been trying to 
better understand the nature of complex cognitive 
skills and how they are acquired. As artificial intelligence 
techniques improve, there will be both an snlargmg of 
the total range of intelligent tasks people and their 
machines can perform and some natural selection of 
human and machine intelligence for different productive 
roles. This will result in a number of situations that are 
problems for society, as well as in opportunities for 
psychologists to do useful research. Here are a few ex- 
amples of what 1 mean. 

Humans and intelligent machines will compete. People 
select into different occupations in part on the basis of 
their ability or inability to learn from inadequate in- 
struction. Indeed, some have defined intelligence as that 
ability. Instruction in many schooling and training en- 
vironments is inadequate for at least some students. As 
a result, some people, lacking appropriate learning skills, 
are likely to end up in jobs that require minimal training. 
These are exactly the jobs most likely to be automated 
away. The dilemma 1 see is that those least able to leam 
from inadequate instruction will be most likely to have 
to undergo such instruction frequently, as they move 
from one job to another under chase from automation. 
This suggests that efforts to improve instruction and 
training in order to assist poor learners will be worth- 
while. 1 It also suggests that we might devote resources 
to research on the skills of learning and on efforts to 
teach these skills. A panel that Fred Reif and I chaired 
has recently published recommendations for federally 
funded research on possible roles for intelligent com- 
puter systems in solving these problems (Lesgold & Reif, 
1983). 

Automation destroys apprenticeship opportunities. 
Most knowledge is acquired after a combination of learn- 
ing by being told and learning through practice. One 
solution for those who have trouble learning from 
lectures is the apprenticeship, in which learning is gradual 
and combined with practice. The apprentice starts with 
the simplest chores and gradually is allowed to assume 
more and more of the range of. performances that 
characterize expert or master status. Unfortunately, 
progress in building intelligent computer systems also 
proceeds from the simple to the complex. In many 
skill areas, some of the apprenticeship opportunities are 
being destroyed by advancing automation. 

One example involves the training of electronics 
technicians. Once, technicians did serious problem solv- 
ing from the first day they were on the job. They had 
to understand how the devices they were servicing 
worked and how to diagnose them, and this under- 
standing was reinforced by regular opportunities to solve 
problems. Today, new technicians are. prevented from 



having many cf the learning experiences that were once 
possible. They are taught procedures that test for faults 
in order of probability of occurrence, not in groupings 
that relate to the structure of the system. They use 
diagnostic programs that can suggest which circuit 
board should be replaced. These programs are likely to 
be accurate most of the time, but their suggestions 
provide no clues about diagnosis strategy. Often there is 
not even an explanation of why a board should be 
swapped. "Swaptronics" is economically effective so 
long as there remain master diagnosticians to take over 
from ths poorly trained first-line people: I worry about 
how we will build a next generation cf such masters, 
though, when the on-the-job learning environment in 
which they are being trained is so impoverished. 

Human expertise is flexible. Following the lead of 
expert systems developers, most psychologists studying 
cognitition have concentrated on specific bodies of 
expertise and on how that expertise is acquired. How- 
ever, if we are concerned with areas in which people are 
especially important, then we should be taking a broader 
approach. Expertise captured in a thousand-rule pro- 
duction system is likely to be very specific, very brittle. 
Human expertise, in contrast, is often more flexible, 
more capable of transfer to new situations. We need to 
understand this flexibility and find ways to build it in 
the course of training people in skills. We need to 
emphasize transfer in our studies of learning. 

Skills may not lead to virtues. Finally, we must recog- 
nize that cognitive psychology is generally ignoring an 
area in which machines are least likely to tread. Machines 
will acquire intellectual skills; it is less likely that they 
will acquire certain social skills and virtues. When we 
glibly say that automation leads to expansion of the ser- 
vice sector of our economy, we are ignoring the extent 
to which interpersonal skills may be more important to 
an average person in an automated society than modest 
intelligence. A look at our governmental institutions and 
at the problems of our larger businesses quickly tells us 
that research on leadership skills and on collaboration 
skills is sorely needed. Perhaps as computer scientists 
learn to build parallel system architectures in which 
multiple intelligent entities work together, they can spin 
off a few metaphors to energize new work on social 
skill and its acquisition. After all, a few computer meta- 
phors drove cognitive psychology a long way. 

Computer tools will allow us to do such work. As 
psychologists who are a bit ahead of the pack in adapt- 
ing to the availability of computer assistance, we are the 
people who should be pioneering work on these prob- 
lems. We now have computer tools that allow us to 
study learning and thinking on an appropriate scale. 
Intelligent machine extensions of our theoretical reason- 
ing and mental modeling, capabilities, database systems, 
and graphics tools, among others, make it possible for 
us to attempt to do good science that is also relevant to 
serious social concerns. This Society exists largely to 
promote the use of such tools, hopefully in research 

6 



COMPLEX SKILLS AND THEII 

that can eventually heip humankind learn to live in 
automated settings. 

ACQUIRING EXPERTISE IN COMPLEX DOMAINS 

Continuing to follow the structure I mentioned at the 
beginning of this talk, it's now time to remove the mitre 
and put on the lab coat. I want to talk about some 
research on the acquisition of radiological skill and then 
briefly about an approach to studying learning that I 
think is very promising. This work relates to the point 
I just made about the need to understand expert flexi- 
bility and how it is acquired. 

Radiological' Expertise 

In the last few years, several colleagues and I have 
been trying to understand how the skill of radiological 
diagnosis is acquired (Lesgold, 1983a; Lesgold, Feltovich, 
Glaser, & Wang, 1981). Radiology was chosen for two 
important reasons. First, it requires the ability to access 
a complex mental representation (of a patient's innards) 
in response to highly ambiguous visual displays and the 
ability to tune that representation to specific cases. 
Second, it involves several domains of knowledge that 
have very complex interfaces. Visual patterns learned by 
prototype learning do not map cleanly onto disease varia- 
tions; often two examples of the same disease look more 
different than two examples of different diseases. 
Similarly, the interrelationships among structural 
anatomy, the physiology of normal function, and the 
nature of disease are also complex. To the knowledge 
engineer, it looks like thousands of separate rules are 
required to capture such a skill. However, having only 
such a large and cumbersome rule set would leave an 
expert with very brittle knowledge, knowledge that 
does not adapt readily to new situations. We were 
interested in the general flexibility of radiological 
expertise as well as specific diagnostic knowledge. 

I can't provide a complete account of this work in 
this talk. Rather, I want to present a few highlights, in 
the form of assertions presented with snippets of the 
empirical support we have seen for them. The empirical 
support comes from two sources. First, we have con- 
ducted a naturalistic study of expert and resident 
radiologists, in which we took verbal protocols as they 
performed a slightly modified version of the diagnosis 
work that constitutes much of their daily activity (see 
Lesgold et al, 1981, for details). We later conducted 
modified study in which we tried to verify what subjects 
were seeing in our test films by having them draw on the 
film itself. This way, they could indicate what they were 
seeing in the film. We also prompted them to draw struc- 
turn that pilot work had shown were sources of possible 
skill differences. Here *re a few of our conclusions. 

The forest-tites problem. 

Novices hare difficulty constructing representations 
in which the same stimulus feature is mapped onto 
two different objects* 



ACQUISITION IN A COMPUTERIZED SOCIETY 81 

The first assertion is a variation on the old problem 
of not being able to see the forest for the trees. We have 
strong evidence that radiology residents can only assign 
a particular region of an x-ray film to one piece of 
structure. As a result, they often misapprehend the 
true shape of abnormalities. In some cases, surrounding 
structures "recruit" parts of the film that also include 
an abnormality. This makes the abnormality seem 
smaller than it really is, leading to misdiagnosis. In other 
cases, abnormal regions grow by recruiting normal 
regions they abut. We saw both phenomena in the draw, 
ings and verbal protocols of our subjects. 

A particularly nice example comes from a film 
showing a collapse of the middle lobe of the right lung. 
This film showed a large, sail-shaped wedge in the part 
of the lung that is near the heart (the wedge is produced 
by the increased density of the lung material after it 
collapses). Unfortunately, even though this pattern is a 
relatively common variant of the classic pattern dis- 
played by such a collapse, not every instance of the 
pattern is caused by collapse. Certain tumors and several 
other disorders can produce the same appearance. In 
fact, our residents sometimes interpreted the sail-shaped 
region in a way that precluded a conclusion of collapsed 
lung. 

Figure 1 shows overlaid tracings of the sail-shaped 
region drawn by several expert and resident subjects. 
The experts saw a region bounded by the pulmonary 
artery, and it was the right size to be considered as a 
collapsed lung. In fact, they only saw a small collateral 
of the artery as actually entering the region of high 
density. The residents tended to follow various bits of 
noise and to recruit much of the critical region into 
their representation of the pulmonary artery, leaving 























^^^^^^^^^^^ 





























A SHOW? 



Ftgwt 1. Over laid trump of the stf-steped region drawn 
ttf snvnl experts tod efteial ratten ts» 



82 LESGOLD 



very little to be an unaccounted-for abnormality. They 
were incapable of seeing both blood vessel ai\d some 
other density in the same space. Left with a small mass 
to explain, they tended to call it a tumor. In capsule 
summary, residents have not yet formed the automatic 
and complex recognition skills that would keep diagnoses 
like these from becoming embedded-figures tests in which 
the Gestalt laws of general stimulus organization play a 
bigger role than recognition for specific features. 

The don't-bother-me-Pm-busy problem. 

Experts are opportunistic planners. They have rich, 
flexible disease schemata. In contrast, novices have 
classic, less tunable schemata and are more likzly to 
maintain bad film interpretations in the face of 
discrepant evidence from the patient's clinical history. 

This second broad assertion could itself bi the topic 
of an hour or two of discussion. Instead, I will present 
only some hints of what the data we have been gather- 
ing suggest. First, there is the issue of schema flexibility. 
Earlier, I discussed the issue of flexibility versus brittle- 
ness in expertise. Our experts showed a number of 
examples of flexibility in their diagnoses. They were fast 
because they were able to quickly recognize general film 
features that could trigger an appropriate schema to 
guide further viewing, a matter 111 turn to shortly. On 
the other hand, when some aspect of what they saw 
conflicted with the invoked schema, they were able to 
tune the schema or abandon it, as appropriate. 

Table 1 provides some protocol extracts for an expert 
who showed this capability. The case concerned a patient 
who was currently healthy but whose right upper lung 
lobe had been removed a decade earlier. Becaute-organs 
shifted to fill the space left over from the missing lung 
lobe, the film had many abnormal features— things in 
the wrong place, densities that were unusual The film 
seems to show a collapsed lung, when actually the lung 
lobe was surgically removed Even some experts were 
fooled and tended to diagnose the patient as having a 
disease-induced lung collapse. Most residents reached 
a similar conclusion, although some concluded that the 
patient had congestive heart failure. However, one 
expert put on a virtuoso performance. 



Almost immediately after his 2-sec first look at the 
film, the expert drew a conclusion that many subjects 
failed to reach. He decided that the film showed a 
chronic problem, one that did not suddenly appear. He 
then tried to find an appropriate schema into which he 
could fit what he was seeing. To make schemata fit, he 
tried applying rotational transformations, considering 
the possibility that the subject had not been facing 
directly toward the x-ray plate. However, that didn't 
help. Finally, he began to let the collapsed-lung schema 
guide his thinking. 

However, he didn't just accept that schema; he kept 
trying to both test and elaborate it. Soon, he noticed 
the irregularities of some ribs that had been broken a 
decade ago by the surgeon. He then very quickly 
changed schemata and cracked the case. Even then, 
though, he kept testing his new conclusion and seeking a 
hybrid of the collapse and lobectomy schemata. This 
was quite reasonable, since a collapse of a lobe has many 
of the same long-term effects as removal of a lobe. 

Throughout, the expert displayed flexibility, the 
ability to push, tune, and retreat from a schema that was 
guiding his thinking. In contrast, some residents held to 
their pessimistic diagnoses of congestive heart failure 
even after we told them that the patient was perfectly 
well, had had a similar-appearing film done a year ago, 
and had had a lobectomy performed long ago. They still 
said she had heart failure, even though we had just told 
them she felt fine. They seemed unable to test the 
schemata or the specific hypotheses they had invoked 
or to take account of new data we provided. 

Does learning always mean improvement? 
Trainee performance in nonckssical cases may not 
vary monotonicalfy with experience. This is because 
the tuning of diagnostic schemata both improves 
their potential accuracy and temporarily increases 
the conscious processing load they impose. 

Table 2 shows another finding, one a bit more surpris- 
ing for us. Our naturalistic studies involved films that 
were quite difficult. Indeed, it is close to impossible to 
make an absolutely definite diagnosis from some of our 
films without additional data. With several of these 



Table 1 

Expert Domestic flctformaace ' 

Something ts wmng, and it's chronic: "We may be dealing with a chronic process here ... . 

Trying to get a schema: "I'm trying to work out why the mediastinum and the heart is displaced into the right chest. There is not 
enough rotation to account for this. I don't set displacement of fissures. 

EMperimma *tth collapse scimma: "There may be a collapse of the right lower lobe but the diaphragm on the right side is well 
visualized and that's a feature against it 

Dots some tasting; schema domt fit without a lot of tuning: "I come back to the right chest. The ribs are crowded together 

The crowding of the rib cage can, on some occasions, be due to previous surgery. In fact, ... the third and fourth ribs are narrow and 
irregular to he's probably had previous surgery .... 

Creeks the cm: "He's probably had one of his lobes resected. It wouldn't be the middle lobe. It may be the upper lobe. It may 
not necessarily be a lobectomy. It could be a small segment of the lung with pleural thickening at the back. 

Cheeks to be sun: "I don't see the right hilum ... [this] may, in fact, be due to the postsurgery state I'm postulating Loss 

of visualization of the right hilum is... seen with collapse... 



8 



COMPLEX SKILLS AND THEIR ACQUISITION IN A COMPUTERIZED SOCIETY 



Table 2 

The Get-Worse Phenomenon (in Percent) 



Case 


1,2 Yean 


3,4 Yean Expert 


1.3 


100 


57 100 


1.8 


27* 


14 80 


n.9 


50 


0 75 



films, we noticed that subjects with 3 or 4 years of 
training did worse than 1st- and 2nd-year residents; 
perf Drmance was not a monotone function of training. 
Now, we had only 23 subjects in this study and only 
10 films, so this finding should be treated as very tenta- 
tive. Indeed, our efforts to replicate it in the training 
research I will discuss in a moment have thus far pro- 
duced plateaus but not reversals. However, the finding 
is consistent with a view of skill acquisition that I 
happen to like, so I will press on. 

The interpretation we have been toying with in our 
research group 2 is that the apparent accuracy reversal 
is due to a progression from probabilistic to reason* 
supported decision making. New residents learn classic 
schemata first. When they examine a film, they try to 
fit it to a schema they have already learned. Generally, 
this is equivalent to making the high-probability guess 
for a set of noticed surface features. As they become 
more skilled, they are able to do deeper analyses of the 
feature details that do not quite fit the classic schema- 
decision making becomes more rational and complete. 
However, until they become more proficient at this 
deeper level of analysis, they make errors, perhaps even 
more than would be made by simply picking the high* 
probability bet based on a few features. This analysis 
would lead us to expect a nonmonotone relationship 
between experience and accuracy for more complex 
films. 

Planning: Knowing where to look and what to see. 

The precise, rapid recognition skill that characterizes 
expertise involves interactions between higher and 
lower processes. It is not purely top-down or bottom* 
up. 

Experts recognize constraints on problem solution 
early but defer decisions until they are necessary. 

Again, Tve made a very broad claim, and we have 
only begun to gather an appropriate range of data. Let 
me present three bits of data that help to support the 
assertions Tve just made. First, I want to show you 
more evidence that expertise involves more rapid shaping 
of diagnostic behavior by a preliminary schema. The 
data rve already presented alio showed related effects. 
Second, I will show you evidence that such schemata 
are triggered very early, even in the first 2 sec of viewing. 
Third, Pli show you evidence that experts know where 
in the film to look. Schemata triggered during the first 
seconds of scanning a film guide their subsequent search 
of the film. 



83 

The first piece of data is in Table 3. For a film 
involving chronic lung disease, we tabulated the propor- 
tion of subjects in each condition who mentioned find- 
ings that were either consistent or inconsistent with a 
chronic lung disease schema. As you can see from the 
table, the consistent findings were more probable in 
experts' protocols, and mention of some findings that 
are neutral or inconsistent with the chronic lung 
disease schema was more frequent for residents. Now, 
you may wonder about an MJ>. with an internship who 
says the hilar area is overly prominent when it is actually 
less prominent than usual. In fact, it is not that easy to 
decide what is hilum and what is extra mass, and what 
is other structure. This decision is what a schema helps 
drive. 

The second piece of relevant data is meant to show 
that schemata are triggered earlier in experts. We looked 
at protocols from another chronic lung disease case 
(not the same one as in the previous figure) and tabu- 
lated the frequency with which various schema-consistent 
features were mentioned after seeing the film for only 
2 sec. As you can see from Table 4, experts were more 
likely to report these features after only 2 sec than 
were residents; indeed, they seldom failed to report 
any of the four features listed. Even in a final diagnosis 
after extensive viewing, the residents are not all that 
likely to include chronic lung disease in their diagnoses. 

The third piece of relevant data is meant to show that 
schemata help determine which film regions the expert 
will examine further. Our collapscd-lung film had many 
general signs of chronic lung disease along with the 
signs of collapse. One clear indication of schema-driven 



Table 3 

Eariy Interpretations Show Schema Invocation (fa Percent) 

1.2 3,4 Ex* 

Feature Mentioned Years Ycais p ert 

Consistent with Chronic Lung Disease Schema 

Small heart ig i4 +q 

Heart shifted to left 0 14 40 

Right hilum less prominent o 14 60 

Right hilum medially displaced 0 0 40 

Neutral or Opposed to Schema 

Normal heart size 73 71 40 

Density in heart region 36 43 0 

Normal hilar appearance 73 57 * 0 

Increased hilar prominence or hilar density 45 43 0 



Table 4 

Two-Second Encodings of Film With 
Tumor and Chronic LungDtseaes 

U 3,4 Ex* 

Observation Yean Yean pert 

Chronic Lung Disease or Emphysema 18 29 80 

Hyperexpandcd lung 27 57 100 

Low diaphragms 18 43 100 

Small heart or narrow sup mediastinum 0 29 80 

final decision includes Chronic Lung Disease 36 57 100 



84 UESCOLD 



T»W«5 



Region 


U Years 


3,4 Years 


Expert 


Lungs and Pleurae 


41 


41 


93 


Other Regions 


60 


59 


8 


Total 


100 


100 


100 



processing would be for looking, and therefore noticing 
and ascribing of features, to be concentrated in the 
lungs. Table 5 shows that, for experts, almost all reports 
of things seen, normal or abnormal, were about the 
lungs and the pleurae (which are the sacs that surround 
the lungs). In contrast, residents actually talked more 
about nonlung observations than about the lungs them- 
selves. Again, we see that expertise involves procedures 
that are schema driven. Of course, when the schema is 
inadequate, or overly classic, experts also are able to 
patch it, to tailor a generic set of procedures to the case 
at hand. 

The Need for Longitudinal Research on Training 

I view the radiology work as an accommodation 
of a perceptually driven domain into a scheme that 
other researchers bad already proposed. We've said a 
few things ^hat are new about expertise, but we've 
mainly shown how previous findings by others could be 
extended to a very different domain. What we're now 
trying to do is to go beyond studying expertise to 
studying its acquisition. Thus, we've created an artificial 
domain in which the films are baaed upon a computer 
model and a replicable and controllable set of abnormal 
perturbations are pcrfomied to produce films of 
"disease." 

PscudQ»x-riy training studies. Figure 2 shows an ex- 
ample of a film that we're calling "normal," and Fig* 
ure 3 shows our version of a collapsed lung. The severity 
of the "diseases" we employ is vailed by using a numeric 



cal parameter to determine the extent of a perturbation. 
For example, a raised diaphragm on the patient's right 
side (viewer's left side) is one symptom of collapsed 
right middle lobe. We simply make the extent of per- 
turbation of the diaphragm from its normal location a 
function of the severity parameter. Basically, the com- 
puter model has a "political" map of the chest showing 
organ boundaries and a "physical" map of the chest 
showing the gray levels those organs project onto an 
x-ray film. The levels are approximately authentic, but 
medical authenticity i* irrelevant to our experimental 
approach. A "disease" is manufactured by specifying a 
set of features, where each feature is a distortion of 
either a boundary in the "political" map. a density level 
in the "physical" map, c?r both. The exact shape of a 
perturbation, and the way in which density levels are 
represented by combinations of black and white dots, is 
randomly varied over instances of the film types. In 
addition, we can vary "exposure" by multiplying all the 
density values by a constant. The programs that develop 
files of graphics commands for these stimuli are simple 
and relatively short FORTRAN programs. 3 

We've now given a group of college students exten- 
sive training in recognizing four different pseudodiseases 
in these pseudo-x-ray pictures. They've thus far had 
about as many hours with us as they would get in a 
two-credit course-not expert-level training, but much 
more than the usual learning experiment. Some have 
been taught mechanistic explanations for the four 
diseases and the film features that signal them, whereas 
others have only been taught the physical features to 
watch for. In the training, we ask them to mention 
any disease features they see in a film, and after each 
diagnosis, we ask them to tell us which features were key 
sources for their decisions. 

We are trying to understand the retention and trans- 
fer effects of the two forms of training, which tend, in 
the short term, to produce approximately equal recog* 




ERIC 



10 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



COMPLEX SKILLS AND THEIR ACQUISITION IN A COMPUTERIZED SOCIETY 



nition accuracy. There are some differences that are 
already apparent. For example, there is an apparent 
tendency for deep knowledge about our pseudodiseases 
to result in somewhat more likelihood of noticing fea- 
tures that are central to an explanation of the physical 
dynamics of a disease and somewhat less likelihood of 
mentioning features that are, in my opinion, especially 
physically salient but not reflective of an immediate 
effect of the basic physical disease mechanism. This is 
strikingly close to the sort of schema-driven processing 
effect we got in the studies I just told you about. 

The real payoff, I think, is just beginning to appear 
from this sort of research. We can trace the longitudinal 
pattern of sensitivity to specific features in different 
films. For example, Figure 4 shows a matrix of all the 
features mentioned for a specific type of film over all 
its occurrences in the course of 8 days of 1-h/day 
training. The rows represent the instances of the film 
type being presented, from fust to last. The columns 
represent specific features that were mentioned. Fea- 
tures with the letter M in their code were actual features 
of this mitral stenosis film, as was A6. You can see that 

Features Reported for Moderate Mitral Stenosis 
With Normal Exposure by Subject U 



FILM 


Diagnosis 


P1M5P2M2 Ml 


140. 


Mitr Sten 


+ 


141. 


Atr Sept 0 




142. 


Mitr Sten 


+ 


493. 


Mitr Sten 




518. 


Mitr Sten 


* * 


496. 


'Atr Sept D 




510. 


Mitr Sten 


* 


519. 


Mitr Sten 


* 


498 


Mitr Sten 


* + 


489. 


Embolism 


* 


511. 


Mitr Sten 


* 


491. 


Mitr Sten 


* * 



* 
+ 
* 



+ 
+ 



+ 
+ 
+ 



+ 
+ 



Figure 4. Longitudinal trace of features mentioned for normal 
exposure, moderate mitral stenosis over eight training stations. 



85 

features Ml, M4, and A6 were present from the begin, 
ning, but that it took some time for the subject to learn 
to notice P1MS and P2M2, which were also found in 
embolism films. Figure 5, in contrast, shows an example 
of seeing stuff tha* isn't there, A features in an E film, 
during the first days of leamiiig. We are just starting to 
look at this sort of longitudinal data. 

Since we can control the relationship between the 
features we put into our pseudodiseases and what the 
subject is taught about them, we have the basis for quite 
a range of longitudinal studies of the effects of theo- 
retical versus more practically specific forms of instruc- 
tion on recognition and diagnosis. When the possibilities 
of both near transfer, to milder forms of a diseaw,. and 
far transfer, to the same disease in different loci (e.g., 
collapse of different lungs), are considered, it is apparent 
that this paradigm should be very helpful in studying 
the effects of different forms of training. 

As a methodologically driven organization, I think it 
is important to be sensitive to the role the computer has 
played in making such research possible. The mass of 
data from our longitudinal studies requires a database 
system. The stimuli are computer generated, and it 
would be impractical to do them by hand. The modeling 
work that has led to this whole domain of research 
rests on a variety of tools developed by artificial inteffi. 
gence researchers and psychologists who interact with 
them. It is almost a cliche, for a scientist to say that his 
ability to see a bit further is due to his standing on the 
shoulders of giants. It seems that we're now able to find 
both human and machine giants to give us a boost. 

Reading skill. With these new tools, I argue that we 
must start to do studies on the scale that matches the 
kinds of learning that are important in our society. Just 
as the physicist sometimes requires a Fermilab or a 
tokamak to study basic physical forces, so we must be 
prepared to scale up our experiments to study learning 
that takes place over hours, days, even months and 
yean. We have the ability to conduct extensive expert, 
menu with computer-controlled conditions and com- 



F-atnres Reported for Moderate Emphysema With Normal Exposure by Subject K 
HLM m mQm E , w „ E4 K Efi ^ „ AlP5 M1 M3 M4 A2 A3 A5 A6 
106. 

105. Collapse * T * ♦ * * 

107. AtrSeptD + " * - - * 

336. 
331. 
349. 
351. 
354. 
351 
339. 
332. 
338. 



Diagnosis 


El 


E2 


E3 


Mitt Sten 


+ 






Collapse 






+ 


Atr Sept D 


+ 






Emphysema 


+ 




+ 


Emphysema 


+ 


+ 


+ 


Emphysema 


+ 


+ 


+ 


Emphysema 


+ ■ 


+ 


+ 


Emphysema 


+ 


♦ 


+ 


AtrSeptD 








Emphysema 


+ 




+ 


Emphysema 


+ 


♦ 


+ 


Emphysema 


+ 


+ 


+ 



Pifut 5. Losqttsatsjai trace of fsatum omtfostad for 



moderate* 



11 



86 LESGOLD 



puter-sited databases, and we should use this ability. I 
want to reinforce this point by presenting very briefly 
another example of the utility of longitudinal research, 
this time research on how reading is taught and learned. 

For decades, debate has raged over how to teach 
reading. Designers of basal reading series argue that one 
should emphasize reading as language, quickly getting 
children to read whole texts that are meaningful, teach* 
ing words as holistic recognition units. Others argue that 
children should concentrate on learning the basic spell- 
ing patterns of which words are composed, so that they 
can "sound out'* a word that they haven't seen in print 
but may recognize in speech. The issue is even political, 
with conservatives favoring phonics more often than 
liberals do. There are a few data, but not many. A 
couple of decades ago, phonics-rich programs had a 
slight edge in levels of reading test scores they produced. 
However, teachers select curricula, so there are all sorts 
of confoundings of curriculum with teacher qualities, 
especially in the period when the original research was 
done, a period during which use of phonics was some- 
what restricted to tough, no-nonsense teachers. 

Lauren Resnick and I decided a number of years ago 
that the way to settle some of these issues was to watch 
the changes in word processing skills and overall reading 
ability as children advanced through the primary grades. 
We designed a longitudinal study that followed children 
through the primary grades in one school that had a 
phonics program and another that used a standard basal 
program. We've published some of our findings (Lesgold 
& Resnick, 1982), and more will be out soon. Today, I 
can only give you a very brief sense of the use of the 
longitudinal approach. 

We were able to do correlations and various forms 
of path analysis among the many measures we took, 
with each measure made at several points in time, on the 
same subjects. These measures allowed us to conclude, 
for example, that in both basal and ph6nic*4oaded 
programs, facility in word recognition is an important 
precursor of later reading comprehension facility. This 
supports the idea that general skills of word recogni- 
tion, as opposed to recognition for lots of separate 
words only, are important On the* other hand, by 
second grade, and certainly by third grade, the best 
predictor of reading success later on is current reading 
comprehension ability, not word automaticity. There is 
no evidence that those who are behind in reading should 
be relegated to phonics drill instead of reading sensible 
text lie general pattern of our data is that word pro- 
cessing facility provides a boost early in the course of 
training. We suspect that word recognition practice 
could be useful later if it can be provided without 
prejudice to time spent on serious discourse processing. 4 

We also were able to trace many of the effects of 
different forms of instruction. For example, students in 
the basal classrooms initially were faster at oral reading. 



We think this is because they didn't have any time- 
demanding strategies for sounding out words that they 
didn't know. However, by third grade, there were no 
striking differences either in reading speed or in per- 
formance on comprehension tests. Further, both groups 
showed the same general pattern of early word recogni- 
tion facility's predicting later comprehension skill. We 
continue to examine the data for evidence that specific 
children require one kind of training or another! This is 
where differences in curricular success are likely to 
appear. 

What Resnick and I did not do was was to collect 
sufficiently rich qualitative data on the development of 
reading skill; at least we have yet to analyze or report 
any (we do have some preliminary indications that 
qualitative modeling of the pause structures of early 
oral reading may be interesting). What I am suggesting 
today is that we begin to commit ourselves to longer 
term, richer studies of the course of learning. I think 
that we will need broader and more refined knowledge 
of how flexible, extensible skill is acquired if we are to 
make the same progress in improving human opportu- 
nities for intelligent activity as has occurred in research 
on machine intelligence. Even though such research 
requires complex computer tools and teams of re- 
searchers, we must attempt it. 

NEW STYLES OF RESEARCH 

This Society has an important role to play in match- 
ing the scale of research to the problems for which ex- 
perimental psychologists can provide solutions. As 
computer networks, more powerful machines, and 
artificial intelligence tools appear, we will be capable of 
conducting studies whose time scale and complexity 
match that of human learning. By doing so, we can 
match the new theoretical power of cognitive psy- 
chology with the empirical basis that can preserve it as 
a science. My experience is that this requires more 
collaborative efforts, and perhaps more interdisciplinary 
efforts, than were once the case for our field. Nothing 
Tve reported would have been possible had I tried to do 
it myself, even in the rich computer environment avail- 
able to me. Fortunately, I've had colleagues skilled both 
in their disciplines and in the social skills of collabora- 
tion. Someday, perhaps we'll understand how to help 
people acquire both kinds of skill. 



RSFEUNCES 

LaaooLO, A. M. (1983a). Acquiring expertise, in J. ft Anderson 
* S. M. Kostlyn (Bdt.), Tutorials in laming tnU memory: 
Esxyt in honor of Cordon Bower. San Freodsco: Freeman. 

LsaooLD, A. (1963 b). tntrtliftncr The ability to kara, or more? 
A review of Handbook of Human Intetiigence by Robert S. 
Sternberg! Contemporary Education Re*mw.l.\\u\\*. 



COMPLEX SKILLS AND THEIR ACQUISITION IN A COMPUTERIZED SOCIETY 87 



Li mold, A. M., Fsltovich, P. J., Glajce, R, & Wang, Y. 
(1981, September). The acquisition of perceptual diagnostic skill 
in radiology (Tech. Rep. No. PDS-1). University of Pittsburgh, 
Learning Research and Development Center. 

LtsooLO, Am & Rtxr, F. (1983). Compute* In education: Realiz- 
ing the potential Report of a research conference (U.S. Depart- 
ment or Education Publication Not. 1903*381-054-134 and 
1983*381-054-135). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Print- 
ing Office. 

LtaooLO, A. M M & Rksnick, L. B. (1982). How reading dis- 
abilities develop: Perspectives from a longitudinal study. In 
J* P. Das, R. Mulcahy, St A. E. Wall (Eds.), Theory and 



research in learning disabilities. New York: Plenum. 



NOTES 

1. See (Lesgoid, 1983b) for thoughts of mine on some related 
issues. 

2. Known locally as the Department of Cognitive Surgery. 

3. Available from the author (at LRDC, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260) on request. 

4. My colleagues Isabel Beck and Ste'en Roth have recently 
developed game software to provide such practice. 



13 



