AD-A022  584 

WHAT'S  IN  A LINK:  FOUNDATIONS  FOR  SEMANTIC  NETWORKS 

W.  A.  Woods 

Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Incorporated 


Prepared  for: 

Office  of  Naval  Research 


November  1975 


STRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


WHAT’S  IN  A LINK 


Foundat'.ions  for  Semantic  Networks 


W.  A.  Woods 


November  1975 


DISiHIBUTION  STATEMENT  a7  ] 

Approved  for  public  reIoa:c;  j 
Distribution  Unlimited  j 


Sponsored  by 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
ARPA  Order  No.  2904 


This  research  was  supported  by  the  Advancea  Kesearcn  projects 
Agency  of  the  Departirenv.  <~.f  Defense  and  was  monitored  by  ONR 
under  Contract  No.  N00014-7u-C-0533 . 

The  views  and  conclusions  contained  in  this  documeint  are  those 
of  the  author  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily 
rer<resenting  the  official  policies,  either  expressed  or  impliC' 
the  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  or  the  U.S.  Governmen 

REPRODWCED  BY 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 

U.  S,  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 
SPRINGFIELD.  VA.  22161 

ANGEIES 


OXNARD  SAN  FRANCISCO 


HOUSTON 


CHICAGO 


What's  in  a Link: 
Foundations  for  Semantic  Networks 


•i-l. 


W.A.  Woods 


Bolt  Beraaek  and  Newman  Inc. 


To  Appear  in: 


Bobrow  & Collins  (eds.) 
Studies  in  CbgnitiY? 
(1975). 


-u.  il-*. 


Representation  and 
Science . New  York: 


tar 

urn 

o:: 


Wiilti  S' 
Mi  SbCilM 


□ 

MTtfiUTiM 

fx/cJrji&A 

mmwnw/t>y«iuiMTT  costs 


tiitiit  M M v.on 


ynd?rgtap..<3ing; 
Academic  Press 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


pa^e 

I.  Introduction  .....  1 

II.  What  is  Semantics  3 

1.  The  Philosopher  and  the  Linguist  .... 

2.  Procedural  Semantics  6 

3.  Semantic  Specification  of  Natural  Language  8 

4.  Misconceptions  about  Semantics  ....  9 

5.  Semantics  of  Programming  Languages  ...  12 

III.  Semantics  and  Semantic  Netwoi ks  13 

1.  Requirements  for  a Semantic  Representation  15 

2.  The  Canonical  Form  Myth 16 

3.  Semantics  of  Semantic  Network  Notations  . 21 

4.  Intensions  and  Extensions  ......  22 

5.  The  Need  for  Intensional  Representation  . 23 

6.  Attributes  and  "Values" 24 

7.  Links  and  Predication  28 

3.  Relations  of  More  than  Two  Arguments  . . 30 

9.  Case  Representations  in  Semantic  Networks  . 33 

10.  Assertional  and  Structural  Links  ....  35 

IV.  Problems  in  Knowledge  Representation  ....  37 

1.  Relative  Clauses  38 

2.  Representation  of  Complex  Sentences  ...  46 

3.  Definite  and  Indefinite  Entities  ....  46 

4.  Consequences  of  Intensional  Nodes  ...  51 

5.  Functions  and  Predicates  52 

6.  Representing  Quantified  Expressions  ...  55 

V.  Conclusion  68 


References 


BBN  Report  No.  3072  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 
I . Introduction 

This  paper  is  concerned  with  the  theoretical 
underpinnings  for  semantic  network  representations,  of  the 
sort  dealt  with  by  Quillian  [1966,1969],  Rumelhart,  Lindsay, 
4 Norman  [1972],  Carbonell  4 Collins  [1973],  Schank  [1975], 
Simmons  [1973],  etc.  (I  include  Schank's  conceptual 
dependency  representations  in  this  class  although  he  himself 
may  deny  the  kinship).  I am  concerned  specifically  with 
understanding  the  semantics  of  the  semantic  network 
structures  themselves,  i.e.,  with  what  tne  notations  and 
structures  used  in  a semantic  network  can  mean,  and  with 
interpretations  of  what  these  links  mean  that  will  be 
logically  adequate  to  the  job  of  representing  knowledge.  I 
want  to  focus  on  several  issues:  the  meaning  of  "semantics", 
the  need  for  explicit  understanding  of  the  intended  meanings 
for  various  types  of  arcs  and  links,  the  need  for  careful 
thought  in  choosing  conventions  for  representing  facts  as 
assemblages  of  arcs  and  nodes,  and  several  specific 
difficult  problems  in  knowledge  representation  - especially 
problems  of  relative  clauses  and  quantification. 

I think  we  must  begin  with  the  realization  that  there 
is  currently  no  "theory"  of  semantic  networks.  The  notion 
of  semantic  networks  is  for  the  most  part  an  attractive 
notion  which  has  yet  to  be  proven.  Even  the  question  of 
what  networks  have  to  do  with  semantics  is  one  which  takes 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  In 


some  answering.  I am  convinced  that  there  is  real  value  to 
the  work  that  is  being  done  in  semantic  network 
representations  and  that  there  is  much  to  be  learned  from 
it.  However,  I feel  the  major  discoveries  are  yet  to  be 
made  and  what  is  currently  being  done  is  not  really 
understood.  In  this  paper,  I would  like  to  make  a start  at 
such  an  understanding. 

I will  attempt  to  show  that  when  the  semantics  of  the 
notations  are  made  clear,  many  of  the  techniques  used  in 
existing  semantic  networks  are  inadequate  for  representing 
knowledge  in  general.  By  means  of  examples,  I will  argue 
that  if  semantic  networks  are  to  be  used  as  a representation 
for  storing  human  verbal  knowledge,  then  they  must  include 
mechanisms  for  representing  propositions  without  commitment 
to  asserting  their  truth  or  belief.  Also  they  must  be  able 
to  represent  various  types  of  intensional  objects  without 
commitment  to  their  existence  in  the  external  world,  their 
external  distinctness,  or  their  completeness  in  covering  all 
of  the  objects  which  are  presumed  to  exist.  I will  discuss 
the  problems  of  representing  restrictive  relative  clauses 
and  argue  that  a commonly  used  "solution"  is  inadequate.  I 
will  also  demonstrate  the  inadequacy  of  certain  commonly 
used  techniques  which  purport  to  handle  quantificational 
information  in  semantic  networks.  Three  adequate  mechanisms 
will  be  presented,  one  of  v/hich  to  my  knowledge  has  not 
previously  been  used  in  semantic  nets.  I will  discuss 


2 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


several  different  possible  uses  of  links  and  some  of  the 
different  types  of  nodes  and  links  which  are  required  in  a 
semantic  network  if  it  is  to  serve  as  a medium  for 
representing  knowledge. 

The  emphasis  of  the  paper  will  be  on  problems,  possible 
solution  techniques,  and  necessary  characteristics  of 
solutions,  with  particular  emphasis  on  pointing  out 
non-solutions.  No  attempt  will  be  made  to  formulate  a 
complete  specification  of  an  adequate  semantic  network 
notation.  Rather,  the  discussion  will  be  oriented  towards 
requirements  for  an  adequate  notation  and  the  kind  of 
explicit  understanding  of  what  one  intends  his  notations  to 
mean  that  are  requl'i’ed  to  investigate  such  questions. 


II  What  is  Semantics 

First  we  must  come  to  grips  with  the  term  "semantics". 
What  do  semantic  networks  have  to  do  with  semantics?  What  is 
semantics  anyway?  There  is  a great  deal  of  luisunderstanding 
on  this  point  among  computational  linguists  and 
psychologists.  There  are  people  who  maintain  that  there  is 
no  distinction  between  syntax  and  semantics,  and  there  are 
others  who  lump  the  entire  inference  and  "thought"  component 
of  an  AI  system  under  the  label  "semantics".  Moreover,  the 
philosophers,  linguists,  and  programming  language  theorists 


3 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


have  notions  of  semantics  which  are  distinct  from  each  other 
and  from  many  of  the  notions  of  computational  linguists  and 
psychologists. 

What  I will  present  first  is  my  view  of  the  way  that 
the  term  "semantics”  has  come  to  be  associated  with  so  many 
different  kinds  of  things,  and  the  basic  unity  that  I think 
it  is  all  about.  I will  attempt  to  show  that  the  source  of 
many  confusing  claims  such  as  "there  is  no  difference 
between  syntax  and  semantics"  arise  from  a limited  view  of 
the  total  role  of  semantics  in  language. 

1.  The  Philosopher  and  the  Linguist 

In  my  account  of  semantics,  I will  use  some  caricatured 
stereotypes  to  represent  different  points  of  view  which  have 
been  expressed  in  the  literature  or  seem  to  be  implied.  I 
will  not  attempt  to  tie  specific  persons  to  particular 
points  of  view  since  I may  thereby  make  the  error  of 
misinterpreting  some  author.  Instead,  I will  simply  set  up 
the  stereotype  as  a possible  p;’nt  of  view  which  someone 
might  take,  and  proceed  from  there. 

First,  let  me  set  up  two  caricatures  which  I will  call 
the  Linguist  and  the  Philosopher,  without  thereby  asserting 
that  all  linguists  fall  into  the  first  category  or 
philosophers  in  the  second.  However,  both  represent  strong 
traditions  in  their  respective  fields.  The  Linguist  has  the 


4 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


following  view  of  semantics  in  linguistics:  he  is  interested 
in  characterizing  the  fact  that  the  same  sentence  can 
sometimes  mean  different  things,  and  some  sentences  mean 
nothing  at  all.  He  would  like  to  find  some  notation  in 
which  to  express  the  different  things  which  a sentence  can 
mean  and  some  procedure  for  determining  whether  a sentence 
is  "anomalous"  (i.e.,  has  no  meanings).  The  Philosopher  on 
the  other  hand  is  concerned  with  specifying  the  meaning  of  a 
formal  notation  rather  than  a natural  language.  (Again, 
this  is  not  true  of  all  philosophers  — just  our 
caricature.)  His  notation  is  already  unambiguous.  What  he 
is  concerned  with  is  determining  when  an  expression  in  the 
notation  is  a "true"  proposition  (in  some  appropriate  formal 
sense  of  truth)  and  when  it  is  false.  (Related  questions 
are  when  it  can  be  said  to  be  necessarily  true  or 
necessarily  false  or  logically  true  or  logically  false, 
etc.)  Meaning  for  the  Philosopher  is  not  defined  in  terms  of 
some  other  notation  in  which  to  represent  different  possible 
interpretations  of  a sentence,  but  he  is  interested  in  the 
conditions  for  truth  of  an  already  formal  representation. 

Clearly,  these  caricatured  points  of  view  are  both 
parts  of  a larger  view  of  the  semantic  interpretation  of 
natural  language.  The  Linguist  is  concerned  with  the 
translation  of  natural  languages  into  formal  representations 
of  their  meanings,  while  the  Philosopher  is  interested  in 
the  meanings  of  such  representations.  One  cannot  really 


5 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


have  a complete  semantic  specification  of  a natural  language 


unless  both  of 

these 

tasks 

have  been  accomplished. 

However, 

I will  go  further 

and 

point  out 

that  there 

is  a 

consideration 

which 

the 

philosophers 

have  not  yet 

covered 

and  which  must 

be  included 

in  order  to 

provide  a 

complete 

semantic  specification. 

2.  Procedural  Semantics 

While  the  types  of  semantic  theories  that  have  been 
formulated  by  logicians  and  philosophers  do  a reasonable  job 
of  specifying  the  semantics  of  complex  constructions 
involving  quantification  and  combination  of  predicates  with 
operators  of  conjunction  and  negation,  they  fall  down  on  the 
specification  of  the  semantics  of  the  basic  "atomic" 

propositions  consisting  of  a predicate  and  specifications  of 
its  arguments  — for  example,  the  specification  of  the 

meanings  of  elementary  statements  such  as  "snow  is  white"  or 
"Socrates  is  mortal".  In  most  accounts,  these  are  presumed 
to  have  "truth  conditions"  which  determine  those  possible 
worlds  in  which  they  are  true  and  those  in  which  they  are 

false,  but  how  does  one  specify  those  truth  conditions?  In 

order  lor  an  intelligent  entity  to  know  the  meaning  of  such 
sentences  it  must  be  the  case  that  it  has  stored  somehow  an 
effective  set  of  criteria  for  deciding  in  a given  possible 
world  whether  such  a sentence  is  true  or  false.  Thus,  it  is 
not  sufficient  merely  to  say  that  the  meaning  of  a sentence 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


is  a set  of  truth  conditions  - one  must  be  able  to  specify 
the  truth  conditions  for  particular  sentences.  Most 
philosophers  have  not  faced  this  issue  for  atomic  sentences 
such  as  "snow  is  white." 

Elsewhere  I have  argued  [Woods,  1967,  1973a]  that  a 
specification  of  truth  conditions  can  be  made  by  means  of  a 
procedure  or  function  which  assigns  truth  values  to 
propositions  in  particular  possible  worlds.  Such  procedures 
for  determining  truth  or  falsity  are  the  basis  for  what  I 
have  called  "procedural  semantics",  (although  this 
interpretation  of  the  term  may  differ  slightly  from  that 
which  is  intended  by  other  people  who  have  since  used  it). 
This  notion  has  served  as  the  basis  of  several  computer 
question-answering  systems  [Woods,  Kaplan  and  Mash-Webber, 
1972;  Woods,  1973b;  Winograd,  1972]. 

The  case  presented  above  is  a gross  oversimplification 
of  what  is  actually  required  for  an  adequate  procedural 
specification  of  the  semantics  Ci  natural  language.  There 
are  strong  reasons  dictating  that  the  best  one  can  expect  to 
have  is  a partial  function  which  assigns  true  in  some  cases, 
false  in  some  cases,  and  fails  to  assign  either  true  or 
false  in  others.  There  are  also  cases  where  the  procedures 
require  historical  data  that  is  not  normally  available  and 
therefore  cannot  be  directly  executed.  In  these  cases  their 
behavior  must  be  predicted  on  the  basis  of  more  complex 


-7- 


BBK  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


inference  techniques.  Some  of  these  issues  are  discussed 
more  fully  in  Woods  [1973a]. 

3.  Semantic  Specification  of  Natural  Language 

You  now  have  the  basics  of  my  case  for  a broader  view 
of  the  role  of  semantics  in  natural  language.  The  outline 
of  the  picture  goes  like  this: 

There  must  be  a notation  for  representing  the  meanings 
of  sentences  inside,  the  brain  (of  humans  or  other 
intellects)  that  is  not  merely  a direct  encoding  of  the 
English  word  sequence.  This  must  be  so,  since  (among  other 
reasons)  what  we  understand  by  sentences  usually  includes 
the  disambiguation  of  certain  syntactic  and  semantic 
ambiguities  present  in  the  sentence  itself. 

The  linguist  is  largely  concerned  with  the  process  for 
getting  from  the  external  sentence  to  this  internal 
representation  (a  process  referred  to  as  semantic 
interpretation).  The  philosopher  is  concerned  with  the 
rules  of  correspondence  between  expressions  in  such 
notations  and  truth  and  falsity  (or  correctness  of 
assertion)  in  the  real  or  in  hypothetical  worlds.  However, 
philosophers  have  generally  stopped  short  of  trying  to 
a^uualiy  specify  the  truth  conditions  of  the  basic  atonic 
propositions  in  their  systems,  dealing  mainly  with  the 
specification  of  the  meanings  of  complex  expressions  in 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


terms  of  the  meanings  of  elementary  ones.  Researchers  in 
artificial  intelligence  are  faced  with  the  need  to  specify 
the  semantics  of  elementary  propositions  as  vjell  as  complex 
ones  and  are  moreover  required  to  put  to  the  test  the 
assembly  of  the  entire  system  into  a working  total  - 
including  the  interface  to  syntax  and  the  subsequent 
inference  and  "thought"  processes.  Thus,  the  researcher  in 
artificial  intelligence  must  take  a more  global  view  of  the 
semantics  of  language  than  either  the  linguist  or  the 
philosopher  has  taken  in  the  past.  The  same,  I think,  is 
true  of  psychologists. 

4.  Misconceptions  about  Semantics 

There  are  two  misconceptions  of  what  semantics  is  about 
(or  at  least  misuses  of  the  term)  that  are  rather  widely 
circulated  among  computational  linguists  and  which  arise  I 
think  from  a limited  view  of  the  role  of  semantics  in 
language.  They  arise  from  traditions]  uses  of  the  term  but 
through  specialized  application  eventually  lose  sight  of 
what  semantics  is  really  about.  According  to  my  dictionary, 
semantics  is  "the  scientific  study  of  ♦'he  relations  between 
signs  or  symbols  and  what  they  denote  or  mean.”  This  is  the 
traditional  use  of  the  terra  and  represents  the  common  thread 
which  links  the  different  concerns  discussed  previously. 
Notice  that  the  term  does  not  refer  to  the  things  denoted  or 
the  meanings,  but  to  the  relations  between  these  things  and 


9 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


the  linguistic  expressions  which  denote  them. 

One  common  misuse  of  the  term  "semantics”  in  the  fields 
of  computational  linguistics  and  artificial  intelligence  is 
to  extend  the  coverage  of  the  term  not  only  to  this  relation 
between  linguistic  form  and  meaning,  but  to  all  of  the 
retrieval  and  inference  capabilities  of  the  system.  This 
misuse  arises  since  for  many  tasks  in  language  processing, 
the  use  Oi  semantic  information  necessarily  involves  not 
only  the  determination  of  the  object  denoted,  but  also  some 
inference  about  that  object.  In  absence  of  a good  name  for 
this  further  inference  process,  terms  such  as  "semantic 
inferences"  have  come  to  be  used  for  the  entire  process.  It 
is  easy  then  to  start  incorrectly  referring  to  the  entire 
thought  process  as  "semantics.”  One  may  properly  use  the 
term  "semantic  inferences"  to  refer  to  inferences  that  cross 
the  boundary  between  symbol  and  referent,  keeping  in  mind, 
however,  that  this  does  not  imply  that  all  steps  of  the 
process  are  "semantic.” 

At  the  opposite  extreme,  there  are  those  who  deny  any 
difference  in  principle  between  syntax  and  semantics  and 
claim  that  the  distinction  is  arbitrary.  Again,  the 
misconception  arises  from  a limited  view  of  the  role  of 
semantics.  When  semantics  is  used  to  select  among  different 
possible  parsings  of  a sentence  by  using  selectional 
restrictions  on  so-called  semantic  features  of  words,  there 


10 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc- 


is  little  difference  between  the  techniques  usually  used  ana 
those  used  for  checking  syntactic  features.  In  another 
paper  [Woods,  1973a]  I make  the  case  that  such  techniques 
are  merely  approximations  of  the  types  of  inferences  that 
are  "eally  required,  and  that  in  general,  semantic 
selectional  restrictions  need  to  determine  the  referent  of  a 
phrase  and  then  make  inferences  about  that  referent  (i.e., 
they  involve  semantic  inferences  as  I defined  the  term 
above).  However,  the  approximate  technique  usually  used 
requires  no  special  mechanism  beyond  what  already  exists  in 
the  syntax  specification,  and  when  taken  as  the  paradigm  for 
"setuantic  inferences"  can  lead  to  the  false  conclusion  that 
semantics  is  no  different  from  syntax.  Likewise,  if  the 
representation  constructed  by  a parser  purports  to  be  a 
semantic  representation,  wit*"  no  intervening  pureJ" 
syntactic  representation,  ''hen  one  might  argue  that  the 
techniques  used  to  produce  it  are  syntactic  techniques  and 
therefore  there  is  nothing  left  to  be  semantics. 

As  we  have  pointed  out,  however,  a semantic 
specification  requires  more  than  the  transformation  of  the 
input  sentence  into  a "semantic"  representation.  The 
meanings  of  these  representations  must  be  specified  also. 
Recall  that  semantics  refers  to  the  correspondence  between 
linguistic  expressions  and  the  things  that  they  denote  or 
mean.  Thus,  although  it  may  be  difficult  to  isolate  exactly 
what  part  of  a system  is  semantics,  any  system  which 


11 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


understands  sentences  and  carries  out  appropriate  actions  in 
response  to  them  is  somehow  completing  this  connection.  For 
systems  which  do  not  extend  beyond  the  production  of  a 
so-called  semantic  representation,  there  may  or  may  not  be  a 
semantic  component  included,  and  the  justificatioi.  for 
calling  something  semantic  may  be  lost.  Again,  if  one  takes 
the  production  of  such  "semantic”  representations  as  the 
paradigm  case  for  what  semantics  is,  one  is  misunderstanding 
the  meaning  of  the  term. 

5.  Semantics  of  Programming  Languages 

Before  proceeding  it  is  probably  worth  pointing  out 
that  the  use  of  the  term  semantics  by  programming  language 
theorists  has  been  much  closer  to  the  tradition  of  the 
logicians  and  the  philosophers  and  less  confused  than  in 
computational  linguistics.  Programming  language  theoi y is 
frequently  used  as  a paradigm  for  natural  language 
semantics.  However,  programming  languages  do  not  have  many 
of  the  features  that  natural  languages  do  and  the  mechanisms 
developed  there  are  not  sufficient  for  modeling  the 
semantics  of  natural  language  without  considerable 
stretching. 

The!  programming  language  theorists  do  have  one 
advantage  over  the  philosophers  and  linguists  in  that  their 
semantic  specifications  stand  on  firmer  ground  since  they 


12 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


are  defined  in  terras  of  the  procedures  that  the  machine  is 
to  carry  out.  It  is  this  sarae  advantage  which  the  notion  of 
procedural  semantics  and  artificial  intelligence  brings  to 
the  specification  of  the  semantics  of  natural  language. 
Although  in  ordinary  natural  language  not  every  sentence  is 
overtly  dealing  with  procedures  to  be  executed,  it  is 
possible  nevertheless  to  use  the  notion  of  procedures  as  a 
means  of  specifying  the  truth  conditions  of  declarative 
statements  ai  well  as  the  intended  meaning  of  questions  and 
commands.  One  thus  picks  up  the  semantic  chain  from  the 
philosophers  at  the  level  of  truth  conditions  and  completes 
it  to  the  level  of  formal  specifications  of  procecures. 
These  can  in  turn  be  characterized  by  their  operations  on 
real  machines  and  can  be  thei  eby  anchored  to  physics. 
(Notice  that  the  notion  of  procedure  shares  with  the  notion 
of  meaning  that  elusive  quality  of  being  impossible  to 
present  except  by  means  of  alternative  representations.  The 
procedure  itself  is  something  abstract  which  is  instantiated 
whenever  someone  carries  out  the  procedure,  but  otherwise, 
all  one  has  when  it  is  not  being  executed  is  some 
representation  of  it.) 


III. 


aM  Semantic  Networks 


Having  established  a framework  for  understanding  what 
we  mean  by  semantics,  let  us  now  proceed  to  see  how  semantic 


BBN  Report  No,  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


networks  fit  into  the  picture.  Semantic  networks  presumably 


are  candidates 

for 

the  role  of  internal 

semantic 

representation  — 

— i.e., 

the  notation  used  to 

store 

knowledge 

inside  the  head. 

Their 

competitors  for  this 

role  are  formal 

logics  such  as 

the 

predicate  calculus. 

and 

various 

representations 

such 

as  Lakoff-type  deep 

structures,  and 

Fillmore-type 

case 

representations. 

(The 

case 

representations  shade  off  almost  imperceptibly  into  certain 
possible  semantic  network  representations  and  hence  it  is 
probably  not  fruitful  to  draw  any  clear  distinction.)  The 
major  characteristic  of  the  semantic  networks  that 
distinguishes  them  from  other  candidates  is  the 
characteristic  notion  of  a link  or  pointer  which  connects 
individual  facts  into  a total  structure. 

A semantic  network  attempts  to  combine  in  a single 
mechanism  the  ability  not  oiily  to  store  factual  knowledge 
but  also  to  model  the  associative  connections  exhibited  by 
humans  which  make  certain  items  of  information  accessible 
from  certain  others.  It  is  possible  presumably  to  model 
these  two  aspects  with  two  separate  mechanisms  such  as,  for 
example,  a list  of  the  facts  expressed  in  the  predicate 
calculus  or  some  such  representation,  together  with  an  index 
of  associative  connections  which  link  facts  together. 
Semantic  network  representations  attempt  instead  to  produce 
a single  representation  which  by  virtue  of  the  way  in  which 
it  represents  facts  (i.e.,  by  assemblies  of  pointers  to 


14 


I 

I 

D 

D 

D 


I 


D 

D 

Q 

U 

Q 

a 

D 

n 

a 

0 

0 

n 


BBN  Report  No,  3072  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

other  facts)  automatically  provides  the  appropriate 
associative  connections.  One  should  keep  in  mind  that  the 
assumption  that  such  a representation  is  possible  is  merely 
an  item  of  faith,  an  unproven  hypothesis  used  as  the  basis 
of  the  methodology.  It  is  entirely  conceivable  that  no  such 
single  representation  is  possible. 

1.  Requirements  for  a Semantic  Representation 

When  one  tries  to  devise  a notation  or  a language  for 
semantic  representation,  he  is  seeking  a representation 
which  will  precisely,  formally,  and  unambiguously  represent 
any  particular  interpretation  that  a human  listener  may 
place  on  a sentence.  We  will  refer  to  this  as  "logical 
adequacy"  of  a semantic  representation.  There  are  two  other 
requirements  of  a good  semantic  representation  beyond  the 
requirement  of  logical  adequacy.  One  is  that  there  must  be 
an  algorithm  or  procedure  for  translating  the  original 
sentence  into  this  representation  and  the  other  is  that 
there  must  be  algorithms  which  can  make  use  of  this 
representation  for  the  subsequent  inferences  and  deductions 
that  the  human  or  machine  must  perform  on  them.  Thus,  one 
is  seeking  a representation  which  facilitates  translation 
and  subsequent  intelligent  processing,  in  addition  to 
providing  a notation  for  expressing  any  particular 
interpretation  of  a sentence. 


15 


BBN  Report  No.  ?,072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Nevman  Inc. 


2.  The  Canonical  Form  Myth 

Before  continuing,  let  me  mention  one  thing  which 
semantic  networks  should  not  be  expected  to  do.  That  is  to 
provide  a "canonical  form"  in  which  all  paraphrases  of  a 
given  proposition  are  reduced  to  a single  standard  (or 
canonical)  form.  It  is  true  that  humans  seem  to  reduce 
input  sentences  into  some  different  internal  form  that  does 
not  preserve  all  of  the  information  about  the  form  in  which 
the  sentence  was  received  (e.g.,  whether  it  was  in  the 
active  or  the  passive).  A canonical  form,  however,  requires 
a great  deal  more  than  this.  A canonical  form  requires  that 
every  expression  equivalent  to  a given  one  can  be  reduced  to 
a single  form  by  means  of  an  effective  procedure,  so  that 
tests  of  equivalence  between  descriptions  can  be  reduced  to 
the  testing  of  Identity  of  canonical  form.  I will  make  two 
points.  The  first  is  that  it  is  unlikely  that  there  could 
be  a canonical  form  for  English,  and  the  second  is  that  for 
independent  reasons,  in  order  to  duplicate  human  behavior  in 
paraphrasing,  one  would  still  need  all  of  the  inferential 
machinery  that  canonical  forms  attempt  to  avoid. 

Consider  first  the  motivation  for  wanting  a canonical 
form.  Given  a system  of  expressions  in  some  notation  (in 
this  case  English,  or  more  specifically  an  internal  semantic 
representation  of  English)  and  given  a set  of  equivalence 
preserving  transformations  (such  as  paraphrasing  or  logical 


lb 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


equivalence  transformations)  which  map  one  expression  into 
an  equiva-lent  expression,  two  expressions  are  said  to  be 
equivalent  if  one  can  be  transformed  into  the  other  by  some 
sequence  of  these  equivalence  transformations.  If  one 
wanted  to  determine  if  two  expressions  el  and  e2  were 
equivalent,  he  would  expect  to  have  to  search  for  a sequence 
of  transformations  that  would  produce  one  from  the  other  — 
a search  which  could  be  non-deterministic  and  expensive  to 
carry  out.  A canonical  form  for  the  system  is  a computable 
function  c which  transforms  any  expression  e into  a unique 
equivalent  expression  c(e)  such  that  for  any  two  expressions 
el  and  e2,  el  is  equivalent  to  e2  if  and  only  if  c(e1)  is 
equal  to  c(e2).  With  such  a function,  one  can  avoid  the 
combinatoric  search  for  an  equivalence  chain  connecting  the 
two  expressions  and  merely  compute  the  corresponding 
canonical  forms  and  compare  them  for  identity.  Thus  a 
canonical  form  provides  an  improvement  in  efficiency  over 
having  to  search  for  an  equivalence  chain  for  each 
individual  case  (assuming  that  the  function  c is  efficiently 
computable ) . 

A canonical  form  function  is,  however,  a very  special 
function,  and  it  is  not  necessarily  the  case  for  a given 
system  of  expressions  and  equivalence  transformations  that 
there  is  such  a function.  It  can  be  shewn  for  certain 
formal  systems  such  as  the  word  problem  for  semigroups 
[Davis,  1958]  that  there  can  be  no  computable  canonical  form 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


function  with  the  above  properties.  That  is,  in  order  to 
determine  the  equivalence  of  a particular  pair  of 
expressions  el  and  e2  it  may  be  necessary  to  actually  search 
for  a chain  of  equivalence  transformations  that  connects 
these  two  particular  expressions  rather  than  performing 
separate  transformations  c(e1)  and  c(e2)  (both  of  which  know 
exactly  where  to  stop)  and  then  compare  these  resulting 
expressions  for  identity.  If  this  can  be  the  case  for 
formal  systems  as  simple  as  semigroups,  it  would  be 
foolhardy  to  lightly  assume  that  there  is  a canonical  form 
for  something  as  complex  as  English  paraphrasing. 

Now,  for  the  second  point.  Quite  aside  from  the 
possibility  of  having  a canonical  form  function  for  English, 
I will  attempt  to  argue  that  one  still  needs  to  be  able  to 
search  for  individual  chains  of  inference  between  pairs  of 
expressions  el  and  e2  and  thus  the  principal  motivation  for 
wanting  a canonical  form  is  superfluous.  The  point  is  that 
in  most  cases  where  one  is  interested  ir.  some  paraphrase 
behavior,  the  paraphrase  desired  is  not  one  of  full  logical 
equivalence,  but  only  of  implication  in  one  direction.  For 
example,  one  is  interested  in  whether  the  truth  of  some 
expression  el  is  implied  by  some  stored  expression  e2.  If 
one  had  a canonical  form  function,  then  one  could  store  only 
canonical  forms  in  the  data  base  and  ask  simply  whether 
c(el)  is  stored  in  the  data  base  without  having  to  apply  any 
equivalence  transformations  in  the  process.  However,  this 

la 


u 

Q 

D 

D 

□ 

D 


a 


a 


* 


I 

f- 


I 


1^ 


J 

a 

a 


3BN  Report  No.  3072  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 

is  just  a special  case.  It  is  rather  unlikely  that  what  we 
have  in  the  data  base  is  an  expression  exactly  logically 
equivalent  to  el  (i.e.,  some  e?  such  that  e2  implies  el  and 
el  implies  e2).  Rather,  what  we  expect  in  the  typical  case 
is  that  we  will  find  some  e2  that  implies  el  but  not  vice 
versa.  For  this  case,  we  must  be  able  to  find  an  inference 
chain  as  part  of  our  retrieval  process.  Given  that  we  must 
devise  an  appropriate  iiferential  retrieval  process  for 
dealing  with  this  case  (which  is  the  more  common)  the 
special  cases  of  full  equivalence  will  fall  out  as  a 
consequence  and  thus  the  canonical  form  mechanism  for 
handling  the  full  equivalence  case  gives  no  improvement  in 
performance  and  is  unnecessary. 

There  is  still  benefit  from  "partially  canonicalizing" 
the  stored  knowledge  (the  term  is  reminiscent  of  the  concept 
of  being  just  a little  bit  pregnant).  This  is  useful  to 
avoid  storing  multiple  equivalent  repi esentations  of  the 
same  fact.  However,  there  is  little  motivation  for  making 
sure  that  this  form  does  in  fact  reduce  all  equivalent 
expressions  to  the  same  form  (and  as  I said  before,  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  this  may  be  impossible). 


19 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc . 


Another  argument  against  the  expectation  of  a canonical 
form  solution  to  the  equivalence  problem  comes  from  the 
following  situation.  Consider  the  kinship  relations  program 
of  Lindsay  [1963].  The  basic  domain  of  discourse  of  the 
system  is  family  relationships  such  as  mother,  father, 
brother,  sister,  etc.  The  data  structure  chosen  is  a 
logically  minimal  representation  of  a family  unit  consisting 
of  a male  and  female  parent  and  some  number  of  offspring. 
Concepts  such  as  aunt,  uncle,  and  brother-in-law  are  not 
represented  explicitly  in  the  structure  but  are  rather 
implicit  in  the  structure,  and  questions  about  unclehood  are 
answerej  by  checking  brothers  of  the  father  and  brothers  of 
the  mother.  However,  what  does  such  a system  do  when  it 
encounters  the  input  ’’Harry  is  John's  Uncle”?  It  doesn't 
know  whether  to  assign  Harry  as  a sibling  of  John's  father 
or  his  mother.  Lindsay  had  no  good  solution  for  this 
problem  other  than  the  suggestion  to  somehow  make  both 
entries  and  connect  them  together  with  some  kind  of  a 
connection  which  indicates  that  one  of  them  is  wrong.  It 
seems  that  for  handling  "vague”  predicates  such  as  uncle, 
i.e.,  predicates  which  are  not  specific  with  respect  to  some 
of  the  details  of  an  underlying  representation,  we  must  make 
provision  for  storing  such  predicates  direc^^ly  (i.e.,  in 
terms  of  a concept  of  uncle  in  this  case),  even  though  the 
concept  may  be  defined  in  terms  of  more  "basic" 
relationships  (ignoring  here  the  issue  that  there  may  be  no 


20 


A 


BBN  Report  No.  3072  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

objective  criterion  for  selecting  any  particular  set  of 
relationships  as  basic). 

If  we  hope  to  be  able  to  store  information  at  the  level 
of  detail  that  it  may  be  presented  to  us  in  English,  then  we 
are  compelled  to  surrender  the  assumptions  of  logical 
minimality  in  our  internal  representation  and  provide  for 
storing  such  redundant  concepts  as  •'uncle"  directly. 
However,  we  would  not  like  tt  have  to  store  all  such  facts 
redundantly.  That  is,  given  a Lindsay-type  data  base  of 
family  units,  we  would  not  want  to  be  compelled  to 

explicitly  store  all  of  the  instances  of  unclehood  that 
could  be  inferred  from  the  basic  family  units.  If  we  were 
to  carry  such  a program  to  its  logical  conclusion  we  would 
have  to  explicitly  store  all  of  the  possible  inferable 
relations,  a practical  impossibility  since  in  many  cases  the 
number  of  such  inferables  is  effectively  infinite.  Hence 
the  internal  structure  that  we  desire  must  have  some 
instances  of  unclehood  stored  directly  and  others  left  to  be 
deduced  from  more  basic  family  relationships,  thus 

demolishing  any  hope  of  a canonical  form  representation. 

3.  Semantics  of  Semantic  Network  Notations 

When  I c eate  a node  in  a network  or  when  I establish  a 
link  of  some  type  between  two  nodes,  I am  building  up  a 
representation  of  something  in  a notation.  The  question 


21 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


that  I will  be  concerned  with  in  the  remainder  of  this  paper 
is  what  do  I mean  by  this  representation.  For  example,  if  I 
create  a node  and  establish  two  links  from  it,  one  labeled 
SUPERC  and  pointing  to  the  "concept"  TELEPHONE  and  another 
labeled  MOD  and  pointing  to  the  "concept"  BLACK,  what  do  I 
mean  this  node  to  represent?  Do  I intend  it  to  stand  for  the 
"concept"  of  a black  telephone,  or  perhaps  I mean  it  to 
assert  a relationship  between  the  concepts  of  telephone  and 
blackness  — i.e.,  that  telephones  are  black  (all 
telephones?,  some  telephones?).  When  one  devises  a semantic 
network  nocation,  it  is  necessary  not  only  to  specify  the 
types  of  nodes  and  links  that  can  be  used  and  the  rules  for 
their  possible  combinations  (the  syntax  of  the  network 
notation)  but  also  to  specify  the  import  of  the  various 
types  of  links  and  structures  — what  is  meant  by  them  (the 
semantics  of  the  network  notation). 

4.  Intensions  and  Extensions 

To  begin,  I would  like  to  raise  the  distinction  between 
intension  and  extension,  a distinction  that  has  been 
variously  referred  to  as  the  difference  between  sense  ana 
reference,  meaning  and  denotation,  and  various  other  pairs 
of  terms.  Basically  a predicate  such  as  the  English  word 
"red"  has  associated  with  it  two  possible  conceptual  things 
which  could  be  related  to  its  meaning  in  the  intuitive 
sense.  One  of  these  is  the  set  of  all  red  things  — this  is 


22 


D 

Q 

D 

D 

Q 

D 


BBN  Report  No.  3072  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 

called  the  ext enslon  of  the  predicate.  The  other  concept  is 
an  abstract  entity  which  in  some  sense  characterizes  what  it 
means  to  be  red,  it  is  the  notion  of  redness  which  may  or 
may  not  be  true  of  a given  object;  this  is  called  the 
intension  of  the  predicate.  In  many  philosophical  theories 
the  intension  of  a predicate  is  identified  with  an  abstract 
function  which  applies  to  possible  worlds  and  assigns  to  any 
such  world  a set  of  eAtensional  objects  (e.g.,  the  intension 
of  "red"  would  assign  to  each  possible  world  a set  of  red 
things).  In  such  a theory,  when  one  wants  to  refer  to  the 
concept  of  redness,  what  is  denoted  is  this  abstract 
function. 


5.  The  Need  for  Intensional  Representation 

The  following  quote  frorr,  Quine  [1961]  relating  an 
example  of  Frege  should  illustrate  the  kind  of  thing  that  I 
am  trying  to  distinguish  as  an  internal  intensional  entity; 


"The  phrase  'Evening  Star'  names  a certain  large 
physical  object  of  spherical  form,  which  is  hurtling 
through  space  some  scores  of  millions  of  miles  from 
here.  The  phrase  'Morning  Star'  names  the  same  thing, 
as  was  probably  first  established  by  some  ob.jervant 
Babylonian.  But  the  two  phrases  cannot  be  regarded  as 
having  the  same  meaning;  otherwise  that  Babylonian 
could  have  dispensed  with  his  observations  and 
contented  himself  with  reflecting  on  the  meanings  of 
his  words.  The  meanings,  then,  being  different  from 
one  another,  must  be  other  than  the  named  object,  which 
is  one  and  the  same  in  both  cases."  [Quine,  1961,  p 9]. 


23 


\ 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


In  the  appropriate  internal  representation,  there  must 
be  two  mental  entities  (concepts,  nodes,  or  whatever) 
corresponding  to  the  two  different  intensions,  morning  star 
and  evening  star.  There  is  then  an  assertion  about  these 
two  intensionai  entities  that  they  denote  one  and  the  same 
external  object  (extension). 

In  artificial  intelligence  applications  and  psychology, 
it  is  not  sufficient  for  these  intensions  to  be  abstract 
entities  such  as  possibly  infinite  sets,  but  rather  they 
must  have  ^ orae  finite  representation  inside  the  head  as  it 
were,  or  in  our  case  in  the  internal  semantic 
representation. 

6.  Attributes  and  "Values” 

Much  of  the  structure  of  semantic  networks  is  based  on, 
or  at  least  similar  to,  the  notion  of  attribute  and  value 
which  has  become  a standard  concept  in  a variety  of  computer 
science  applications  and  was  the  basis  of  Raphael's  SIR 
program  [Raphael,  1964]  — perhaps  the  earliest  forerunner 
of  today's  semantic  networks.  Facts  about  an  object  can 
frequently  be  stored  on  a "property  list"  of  the  object  by 
specifying  such  attribute-value  pairs  as  HEIGHT  : 6 FEET, 
HAIRCOLOR  : BROWN,  OCCUPATION  : SCIENTIST,  etc.  (Such  lists 
are  provided,  for  example,  for  all  atoms  in  the  LISP 
programming  language.)  One  way  of  thinking  of  these  pairs  is 


24 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


that  the  attribute  name  (i.e.,  the  first  element  of  the 
pair)  is  the  name  of  a ’’link”  or  "pointer”  which  points  to 
the  "value"  of  the  attribute  (i.e.,  the  second  element  of 
the  pair).  Such  a description  of  a person  named  John  might 
be  laid  out  graphically  as: 

JOHN 

HEIGHT  6 FEET 

HAIRCOLOR  BROWN 

OCCUPATION  SCIENTIST 

Now  it  may  seem  the  case  that  the  intuitive  examples 
that  I just  gave  are  all  that  it  takes  to  explain  what  is 
meant  by  the  notion  of  attribute-value  pair  and  that  the  use 
of  such  notations  can  now  be  used  as  part  of  a semantic 

network  notation  without  further  explanation.  I will  try  to 
make  the  case  that  this  is  not  so,  and  thereby  give  a simple 
introduction  to  the  kinds  of  things  I mean  when  I say  that 
the  semantics  of  the  network  notation  need  to  be  specified. 

The  above  examples  seem  to  imply  that  the  thing  which 
occurs  as  the  second  element  of  an  attribute-value  pair  is 
the  name  or  at  least  some  unique  handle  on  the  value  of  that 
attribute.  However,  what  will  I do  with  an  input  sentence 
"John's  height  is  greater  than  6 feet".  Most  people  would 
not  hesitate  to  construct  a representation  such  as: 

JOHN 

HEIGHT  (GREATERTHAN  6 FEET) 


25 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Notice,  however,  that  our  interpretation  of  what  our  network 
notations  mean  has  just  taken  a great  leap.  No  longer  is 
the  second  element  of  the  attribute-value  pair  a name  or  a 
pointer  to  a value,  but  rather  it  is  a predicate  which  is 
asserted  to  be  true  of  the  value.  One  can  think  of  the 
names  such  as  6 FEET  and  BROWN  in  the  previous  examples  as 
special  cases  of  identity  predicates  which  are  abbreviated 
for  the  sake  of  conciseness  and  thereby  consider  the  thing 
at  the  end  of  the  pointer  to  be  always  a predicate  rather 
than  a name.  Thus,  there  are  at  least  two  possible 
interpretations  of  the  meaning  of  the  name  at  the  end  of  the 
link  — either  as  the  name  of  the  value  or  as  a predicate 
which  must  be  true  of  the  value.  The  former  will  not  handle 
the  (GREATERTHAN  6 FEET)  example,  while  the  latter  will. 

Oet  us  consider  now  another  example  — "John's  height 
is  greater  than  Sue's".  We  now  have  a new  set  of  problems. 
We  can  still  think  of  a link  named  HEIGHT  pointing  from  JOHN 
to  a predicate  whose  interpretation  is  "greater  than  Sue's 
height",  but  what  does  the  reference  to  Sue's  height  inside 
this  predicate  have  to  do  with  the  way  that  we  represented 
John's  height?  In  a functional  form  we  would  simply 
represent  this  as  HEIGHT(JOHN)  > HEIGHT(SUE),  or  in  LISP 
type  "Cambridge  Polish"  notation, 

(GREATER  (HEIGHT  JOHN) (HEIGHT  SUE)) 


2b 


BBN  Heport  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


but  that  is  departing  completely  from  the  notion  of 
attribute-value  links.  There  i'3  another  possible 
interpretation  of  the  thing  at  the  end  of  the  HEIGHT  link 
which  would  be  capable  of  dealing  with  this  type  of 
situation.  That  is,  the  HEIGHT  link  can  point  from  JOHN  to 
a node  whlc’^  represents  the  intensional  object  "John 's 
height".  In  a similar  way,  we  can  have  a link  named  HEIGHT 
from  SUE  to  a node  which  represents  "Sue's  height"  and  then 
we  can  establish  a relation  GREATER  between  these  two 
intensional  nodes.  (Notice  that  even  if  the  heights  were 
the  same,  the  two  intensional  objects  would  be  different, 
just  as  in  the  morning  star/evening  star  example.)  This 
requires  a major  reinterpretation  of  the  semantics  of  our 
notation  and  a new  set  of  conventions  for  how  we  set  up 
networks.  We  must  now  introduce  a new  intensional  node  at 
the  end  of  each  attribute  link  and  then  establish  predicates 
as  facts  that  are  true  about  such  intensional  objects.  It 
also  raises  for  us  a need  to  somewhere  indicate  about  this 
new  node  that  it  was  created  to  represent  the  concept  of 
John's  height,  and  that  the  additional  information  that  it 
is  greater  than  Sue's  height  is  not  one  of  its  defining 
properties  but  rather  a separate  assertion  about  the  node. 
Thus,  a distinction  between  defining  and  asserted  properties 
of  the  node  become  important  here.  In  my  conception  of 
semantic  networks  I have  used  ttv'  concept  of  an  EGO  link  to 
indicate  for  the  benefit  of  the  human  researcher  and 


27 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc . 


eventually  for  the  benefit  of  the  system  itself  what  a given 
node  is  created  to  stand  for.  Thus  the  EGO's  of  these  two 
nodes  are  John's  haight  and  Sue's  height  respectively.  The 
EGO  link  represents  the  intensional  identity  of  the  node. 


7.  Links  and  Predication 


II  addition  to  considering  what  is  at  the  end  of  a 
link,  we  must  also  consider  what  the  link  itself  means.  The 
examples  above  suggest  that  an  attribute  link  named  Z from 
node  X to  Y is  equivalent  to  the  English  sentence  "the  Z of 
X is  Y"  or  functionally  Z(X)=Y  or  (in  the  case  where  Y is  a 
predicate)  Y(Z(X)),  (read  Y of  Z of  X),  Many  people, 
however,  have  used  the  same  mechanism  and  notation  (and  even 
called  it  attribute-value  pairs)  to  represent  arbitrary 
English  verbs  by  storing  a sentence  such  as  "John  hit  Mary" 
as  a link  named  HIT  from  the  node  for  John  to  the  node  for 
Mary,  as  in  the  structure: 


JOHN 

HIT  MARY 

and  perhaps  placing  an  inverse  link  under  Mary: 
MARY 

HIT»  JOHN 


If  we  do  this,  then  suddenly  the  semantics  of  our  notation 
has  changed  again.  No  longer  do  the  link  names  stand  for 
attributes  of  the  node,  but  rather  arbitrary  relations 


2U 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


between  the  node  and  other  nodes.  If  we  are  to  mix  the  two 
notations  together  as  in: 

JCHN 

HEIGHT  6 FEET 

HIT  MARY 

then  we  need  either  to  provide  somewhere  an  indication  that 
these  two  links  are  of  different  types  and  therefore  must  be 
treated  differently  by  the  procedures  which  make  inferences 
in  the  net,  or  else  we  need  to  find  a unifying 
interpretation  such  as  considering  that  the  "attribute” 
HEIGHT  is  now  really  an  abbreviation  of  the  relation  "height 
of  equals"  which  holds  between  JOHN  and  (the  node?)  6 FEET. 
It  is  not  sufficient  to  leave  it  to  the  intuition  of  the 
reader,  we  must  know  how  the  machine  will  know  to  treat  the 
two  arcs  correctly. 

* 

If  we  use  Church's  lambda  notation,  which  provides  a 
convenient  notation  for  naming  predicates  and  functions 
constructed  out  of  combinations  or  variations  of  other 
functions  (this  is  used,  for  example,  as  the  basic  function 
specification  notation  in  the  LISP  programming  language),  we 
could  define  the  meaning  of  the  height  link  as  the  relation 
(LAMBDA  (X  Y)  (EQUAL  (HEIGHT  X)  Y)).  By  this  we  mean  the 
predicate  of  two  arguments  X and  Y which  is  true  when  and 
only  when  the  height  of  X is  equal  to  Y.  Thus,  a possible 
unifying  interpretation  of  the  notation  is  that  the  link  is 


29 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


always  the  name  of  a relation  between  the  node  being 
described  and  the  node  pointed  to,  (providing  that  we 
reinterpret  what  we  meant  by  the  original  link  named 
HEIGHT).  Whatever  we  do,  we  clearly  need  some  mechanism  for 
establishing  relations  between  nodes  as  facts  (e.g.,  to 
establish  the  above  GREATER  relation  between  the  nodes  for 
John's  height  and  Sue's  height). 

8.  Relations  of  More  than  Two  Arguments 

In  the  example  just  presented,  we  have  used  a link  to 
assert  a relation  between  two  objects  in  the  network 
corresponding  to  the  proposition  that  John  hit  Mary.  Such  a 
method  of  handling  assertions  has  a number  of  disadvantages, 
perhaps  the  simplest  of  which  is  that  it  is  constrained  to 
handling  binary  relations.  If  we  have  a predicate  such  as 
the  English  preposition  "between”  (i.e.,  (LAMBDA  (X  Y Z)  (Y 
is  between  X and  Z))),  then  we  must  invent  some  new  kind  of 
structure  for  expressing  such  facts.  A typical,  but  not 
very  satisfying,  notation  that  one  might  find  in  a semantic 
network  of  the  type  which  uses  links  for  relotions  is 
something  like: 

Y 

LOCATION  (BETWEEN  X Z) 

usually  without  further  specification  of  the  semantics  of 
the  notation  or  what  kind  of  thing  the  structure  (BETWEEN  X 


30 


BBN  Report  No,  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Z)  is.  For  example,  is  it  the  name  of  a place?  In  some 
implementations  it  would  be  exactly  that,  in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  an  underlying  model  in  which  there  is  only  one 
place  between  any  given  pair  of  places  is  an  inadequate 
model  of  the  world  we  live  in.  Another  possible 
interpretation  is  that  it  denotes  the  range  of  places 
between  the  two  endpoints  (this  interpretation  requires 
another  interpretation  of  what  the  LOCATION  link  means  — 
the  thing  at  ♦’h<^  end  is  no  longer  a name  of  a place  but 
rather  a set  of  places,  and  the  LOCATION  link  must  be 
considered  to  be  implicitly  existentially  quantified  in 
order  to  be  interpreted  as  a.'  '.erting  that  the  location  is 
actually  one  of  those  places  ar  ^ not  all). 

Given  the  notion  which  we  introduced  previously  that 
interprets  the  thing  at  the  end  of  the  link  as  a predicate 
which  must  be  true  of  the  location,  we  have  perhaps  the  best 
interpretation  — we  can  interpret  the  expression  (BETWEEN  X 
Z)  at  the  end  of  the  link  as  being  an  abbreviation  for  the 
predicate  (LAMBDA  (U)  (BETWEEN  X U Z)),  i,e.,  a one  place 
predicate  whose  variable  is  U and  whose  values  of  X and  Z 
are  fixed  to  whatever  X and  Z are. 

Although  this  representation  of  the  three-place 
predicate  "between"  (when  supplied  with  an  appropriate 
interpretation  of  what  it  means)  seems  plausible,  and  I see 
no  major  objections  to  it  on  the  grounds  of  logical 


31 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


inadequacy,  one  is  left  with  the  suspicion  that  there  may  be 
some  predicates  of  more  than  two  places  which  don 't  have 
such  an  intuitively  satisfying  decomposition  into  links 
connecting  only  two  objects  at  a time.  For  example,  I had 
to  introduce  the  concept  of  location  as  the  name  of  the  link 
from  Y to  the  special  object  (BETWEEN  X Z).  In  this  case,  I 
was  able  to  find  a preexisting  English  concept  which  made 
the  creation  of  this  link  plausible,  but  is  this  always  the 
case?  The  account  would  have  been  much  less  satisfying  if 
all  I could  have  produced  was  something  like: 

X 

BETWEEN  1 (BETWEEN2  Y Z) 

with  an  explication  of  its  semantics  that  (BETWEEN2  Y Z)  was 
merely  some  special  kind  of  entity  which  when  linked  to  X by 
a BETWEENl  link  represented  the  proposition  (BETWEEN  X Y Z). 
It  may  be  the  case  that  all  predicates  in  English  v/ith  more 
than  two  arguments  have  a natural  binary  decomposition.  The 
basic  subject-predicate  distinction  which  seems  to  be  made 
by  our  language  gives  some  slight  evidence  for  this.  It 
seems  to  me,  however,  that  finding  a natural  binary 
decomposition  for  sentences  such  as  "John  sold  Mary  a book” 
(or  any  of  Schank's  various  TRANS  operations)  is  unlikely. 


32 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


9.  Case  Representations  in  Semantic  Networks 

Another  type  of  representation  is  becoming  popular  in 
semantic  networks  ?nd  handles  the  problem  of  relations  of 
more  than  one  argument  very  nicely.  This  representation  is 
based  on  the  notion  of  case  introduced  by  Fillmore  [1968]. 
Fillmore  advocates  a unifying  treatment  of  the  inflected 
cases  of  nominals  in  Latin  and  other  highly  inflected 
languages  and  the  prepositions  and  positional  clues  to  role 
that  occur  in  English  and  other  largely  noninflected 
languages.  A case  as  Fillmore  uses  the  term  is  the  name  of 
a particular  role  that  a noun  phrase  or  other  participant 
takes  in  the  state  or  activity  expressed  by  the  verb  of  a 
sentence.  In  the  case  of  the  sentence  "John  sold  Mary  a 
book"  we  can  say  that  John  is  the  agent  of  the  action,  Mary 
is  the  recipient  or  beneficiary  of  the  action,  and  the  book 
is  the  object  or  patient  of  the  action  (where  I have  taken 
arbitrary  but  typical  names  for  the  case  roles  involved  for 
the  sake  of  illustration).  When  such  a notation  is  applied 
to  semantic  network  representations,  a major  restructuring 
pf  the  network  and  what  it  means  to  be  a link  takes  place. 
Instead  of  the  assertion  of  a fact  being  carried  by  a link 
between  two  nodes,  the  asserted  fact  is  itself  a node.  Our 
structure  might  look  something  like: 

SELL 

ACT  JOHN 
RECIP  MARY 
PAT  BOOK 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


(ignoring  for  the  moment  what  has  happened  to  turn  "a  book" 
into  BOOK  or  for  that  matter  what  we  mean  by  JOHN  and  MARY 
— we  will  net  into  that  later).  The  notation  as  I have 
written  it  requires  a lot  of  explanation,  which  is 
unfortunately  not  usually  spelled  out  in  the  presentation  of 
a semantic  network  notation.  In  our  previous  examples,  the 
first  item  (holding  the  position  where  we  have  placed  SELL 
above)  has  been  the  unique  name  or  "handle"  on  a node  and 
the  remaining  link-value  pairs  have  been  predicates  that  are 
true  of  this  node.  In  the  case  above,  which  I have  written 
that  way  because  one  is  likely  to  find  equivalent 
representations  in  the  literature,  we  are  clearly  not 
defining  characteristics  of  the  general  verb  "sell",  but 
rather  setting  up  a description  of  a particular  instance  of 
selling.  Thus,  to  be  consistent  with  our  aarlier  format  for 
representing  a node  we  should  more  properly  represent  it  as 
something  like: 

313^72 

VERB  SELL 
AGT  JOHN 
RECIP  MARY 
PAT  BOOK 

where  313^72  is  some  unique  internal  handle  on  the  node 
representing  this  Instance  of  selling,  and  SELL  is  now  the 
internal  handle  on  the  concept  of  selling,  (I  have  goi\e 
through  this  two-stage  presentation  in  order  to  emphasize 
that  the  relationship  between  the  node  S13472  and  the 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


concept  of  selling  Is  not  essentially  different  at  this 
level  from  the  relationship  it  has  to  the  other  nodes  which 
fill  the  cases. ) 

10.  Assertional  and  Structural  Links 

Clearly  the  case  structure  representation  in  a semantic 
network  places  a new  interpretation  on  the  nodes  and  arcs  in 
the  net.  We  still  seem  to  have  the  same  types  of  nodes  that 
we  had  before  for  JOHN,  MARY,  etc.,  but  we  have  a new  type 
of  node  for  nodes  such  as  313^72  which  represent  assertions 
or  facts.  Moreover,  the  import  of  the  links  from  this  new 
type  of  node  is  different  from  that  of  our  other  links. 
Whereas  the  links  which  we  discussed  before  are  assertional, 
i.e.,  their  mere  presence  in  the  network  represents  an 
assertion  about  the  two  nodes  that  they  connect,  these  new 
link  names  VERB,  ACT,  RECIP,  PAT  are  merely  setting  up  parts 
of  the  proposition  represented  by  node  313^72,  and  no  single 
link  has  any  assertional  import  by  itself;  rather  these 
links  are  definitional  or  structural  in  that  they  constitute 
the  definition  of  what  node  313^72  means. 

Now  you  may  argue  that  these  links  are  really  the  same 
as  the  others;  i.e.,  they  correspond  to  the  assertion  that 
the  agent  of  313^72  is  JOHN  and  that  313^72  is  an  instance 
of  selling,  etc.,  just  like  the  ”hit”  link  between  John  and 
Mary  in  our  previous  example.  In  our  previous  example. 


35 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  In'3 


however,  the  nodes  for  John  and  for  Mary  had  some  a priori 

meanings  independent  of  the  assertion  of  hitting  that  we 

were  trying  to  establish  between  them.  In  this  'lase,  313^72 
has  no  meaning  other  than  that  which  we  establish  by  virtue 
of  the  structural  links  which  it  has  to  other  nodes.  That 
is,  if  we  were  to  ask  for  the  ego  of  the  node  313^72,  we 
would  get  back  something  like  "I  am  an  instance  of  John 
selling  a book  to  Mary"  or  "I  am  an  instance  of  selling 
whose  agent  is  John,  whose  recipient  is  Mary  and  whose 
patient  is  a book."  If  we  were  to  ask  for  the  ego  of  {JOHN, 
we  would  get  something  like  "I  am  the  guy  who  works  in  the 
third  office  down  the  hall,  whose  name  is  John  3raith,  etc." 
The  fact  which  I am  trying  to  assert  with  the  "hit"  link  is 

not  part  of  the  ego  of  JOHN  or  else  I would  not  be  making  a 

new  assertion. 

This  difference  between  assertional  and  structural 
links  is  rather  difficult  for  some  people  to  understanUj  and 
it>  often  confused  in  various  semantic  network 
representations.  It  is  part  of  the  problem  that  we  cited 
earlier  in  trying  to  determine  whether  a structure  such  as: 

N12368 

3UPERC  TELEPHONE 

MOD  BLACK 

is  to  be  interpreted  as  an  intensional  representation  of  a 
black  telephone  or  an  assertion  that  telephones  are  black. 


36 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


If  it  is  to  be  interpreted  as  an  intensional  representation 
of  the  concept  of  a black  telephone,  then  both  of  these 
links  are  structural  or  definitional.  If  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  to  be  interpreted  as  asserting  that  telephones  are 
black  then  the  first  link  is  structural  while  the  second  is 
assertional,  (The  distinction  between  structural  and 
assertional  links  does  not  take  care  of  this  example 
entirely  since  we  still  have  to  worry  about  how  the 
assertional  link  gets  its  '^uantif icational  import  for  this 
interpretation,  but  we  will  discuss  this  problem  later.) 

The  above  discussion  barely  suffices  to  introduce  the 
distinction  between  structural  and  assertional  links,  and 
certainly  doesn't  make  the  distinction  totally  clear. 
Moreover,  before  we  are  through,  we  may  have  cause  to 
repudiate  the  assumption  that  the  links  involved  in  our 
non-case  representation  should  be  considered  to  have 
assertional  import.  Perhaps  the  best  way  to  get  deeper  into 
the  problems  of  differ*^nt  types  of  links  with  different 
imports  and  the  representation  of  intensional  entities  is  to 
consider  further  some  specific  problems  in  knowledge 
representation. 


IV, 


rA:g.Blgni,s 


Representation 


In  previous  sections  I hope  that  I have  made  the  point 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


that  tne  same  semantic  network  notations  could  be  used  by 
different  people  (or  even  by  the  same  person  at  different 
times  for  different  examples)  to  mean  different  things,  and 
therefore  one  must  be  specific  in  presenting  a semantic 
network  notation  to  make  clear  what  he  means  by  the 
notations  which  he  uses  (i.e.,  the  semantics  of  the 
notation).  In  the  remainder  of  this  paper,  I would  like  to 
discuss  two  difficult  problems  of  knowledge  representation 
and  use  the  discussion  to  illustrate  several  additional 
possible  uses  of  links  and  some  of  the  different  types  of 
nodes  and  links  which  are  required  in  a semantic  network  if 
it  is  to  serve  as  a medium  for  representing  human  verbal 
knowledge.  The  specific  problems  which  I will  consider  are 
the  representation  of  restrictive  relative  clauses  and  the 
representation  of  quantified  information. 

1.  Relative  Clauses 

In  attaching  modifiers  to  nodes  in  a network  to  provide 
an  intensional  description  for  a restricted  class,  one  often 
requires  restrictions  which  do  not  happen  to  exist  in  the 
language  as  single-word  modifiers  but  have  to  be  constructed 
out  of  more  primitive  elements.  The  relative  clause 
mechanism  permits  this.  Anything  that  can  be  said  as  a 
proposition  can  be  used  as  a relative  clause  by  leaving  some 
one  of  its  argument  slots  unfilled  and  using  it  as  a 
modifier.  (We  will  be  concerned  here  only  with  restrictive 


38 


viii  iirfrni'iiWlTTjiy^ 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


relative  clauses  and  not  those  which  are  just  parenthetical 
comments  about  an  already  determined  object.)  Let  me  begin 
my  discussion  of  relative  clauses  by  dispensing  with  one 
inadequate  treatment. 

1.1.  The  Shared  Subpart  Fallacy 

A mechanism  which  occasionally  surfaces  as  a claimed 
technique  for  dealing  with  relative  clauses  is  to  simply 
take  the  two  propositions  involved,  the  main  clause  and  the 
relative  clause,  and  represent  the  two  separately  as  if  they 
were  independent  propositions.  In  such  a representation, 
the  sente  ice  "The  dog  that  bit  the  man  had  rabies"  would 
look  something  like  that  in  Fig,  1. 

S112233  3445566 

/ ! \ / I \ 

/ 1 \ / 1 \ 

RECIP  VERB  ACT  ACT  VERB  OBJ 

/ . \ / 1 \ 

man  bi‘e  dog  have  rabies 

Fig.  1.  A shared  subpart  representation 


39 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


The  point  of  interest  here  is  not  the  names  of  the  links 
(for  which  I make  no  claims)  nor  the  type  ox"  representation 
(case  oriented,  deep  conceptual,  or  whatever),  but  simply 
the  fact  that  the  only  relationship  between  the  two 
propositions  is  that  they  share  the  same  node  for  dog. 
There  are  a number  of  problems  with  this  representation: 
First,  since  there  is  no  other  relationship  between  the  two 
sentences  except  sharing  of  a node  (which  is  a symmetric 
relationship)  there  is  no  indication  of  which  is  the  main 
clause  ana  which  is  the  relative  clause.  That  is,  we  would 
get  the  same  internal  representation  for  the  sentence  "The 
dog  that  had  rabies  bit  the  man." 

Another  difficulty  is  that  there  is  nothing  to  indicate 
that  the  two  sentences  go  together  at  all  in  a relative 
clause  relationship.  It  is  possible  that  on  two  different 
occasions  we  were  told  about  this  dog.  On  one  occasion  that 
he  had  rabies  and  on  another  that  he  bit  a man.  Then  the 
presence  of  the  two  propositions  in  our  data  base  both 
sharing  the  same  node  for  dog  would  give  us  a structure 
identical  to  that  for  the  example  sentence.  Now  there  is  a 
subtle  confusion  which  can  happen  at  this  point  which  I 
would  like  to  try  to  clarify.  You  may  say  to  me,  "So  what 
IS  the  problem.  Suppose  I tell  you  about  this  dog  »nd 
suppose  I have  told  you  the  two  facts  at  different  times, 
then  it  is  still  true  that  the  dog  that  bit  the  man  has 
rabies."  How  do  I answer  such  an  argument?  On  the  face  of  it 


40 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc . 


it  seems  true.  Yet  I maintain  that  the  argument  is 
fallacious  and  that  it  results  from  too  shallow  a treatment 
of  the  issues.  The  crux  of  the  matter  I think  rests  in  the 
notion  of  which  dog  we  are  talking  about.  Unfortunately, 
this  issue  is  one-  that  gets  omitted  from  almost  all  such 
discussions  of  semantic  networks.  If  the  two  facts  were 
told  to  me  at  different  times,  how  did  I know  that  they  were 
about  the  same  dog?  (Without  further  explication  of  the 
semantics  of  the  network  notation,  it  is  not  even  clear  that 
we  are  talking  about  a particular  dog  and  not  about  dogs  in 
general.)  It  is  exactly  in  order  to  relate  the  second  fact 
to  the  first  that  we  need  the  relative  clause  mechanism.  In 
the  next  section  we  will  consider  the  problem  in  more 
detail . 


1.2.  The  Transient-Process  "Account” 

Quillian  [personal  communication]  once  made  the 
observation  that  a portion  of  what  was  in  an  .■Jnput  sentence 
was  essentially  stage  directions  used  to  enable  the 
understanding  process  to  identify  an  appropriate  internal 
concept  or  node  and  the  rest  of  the  utterance  was  to  be 
interpreted  as  new  information  to  be  added  somehow  to  the 
network  (and  similar  observations  have  been  made  by  others). 
This  gives  an  attractive  account  of  the  relative  clause 
problem  above.  We  iuterpr  the  relative  clause  not  as 
something  to  be  added  to  ti.  network  at  all,  but  rath^  r as  a 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


description  to  be  used  by  the  understander  to  determine 
which  dog  is  in  question.  After  this,  we  can  forget  about 
the  relative  clause  {it  has  served  its  usefulness)  and 
simply  add  the  new  information  to  the  network.  We  might 
call  this  the  "transient-process  account."  Under  this 
account,  if  I was  told  about  a dog  that  bit  a man  and  later 
told  that  the  dog  that  bit  the  man  had  rabies,  then  I would 
simply  use  the  relative  clause  to  find  the  internal  concept 
for  the  dog  that  bit  the  man,  and  then  add  the  new 
information  that  the  dog  had  rabies.  What's  wrong  with  that 
account?  Doesn't  that  explain  everything? 

Well,  no.  First,  it  simply  evades  the  issue  of 
representing  the  meaning  of  the  sentence,  focusing  instead 
on  the  resulting  change  in  memory  contents.  It  says 
essentially  that  the  role  of  the  relative  clause  is  a 
temporary  and  transient  one  that  exists  only  during  the 
processing  of  the  utterance  and  then  goes  away.  But  you 
say,  "well,  isn't  that  a plausible  account,  doesn't  that 
take  care  of  the  problem  nicely,  who  says  you  have  to  have  a 
representation  of  the  original  sentence  anyway?" 

Let's  start  from  the  first  question  — yes,  it  is  a 
ple.usible  account  of  the  interpretation  of  many  sentences, 
^.ncluding  this  one  in  the  context  I just  set  up.  And  it  may 
also  be  a correct  description  of  what  happens  when  humans 
process  such  sentences.  But  it  dossn't  take  care  of  all 


42 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newiran  Inc 


occurrences  of  relative  clauses.  What  about  a situation 
when  I read  this  sentence  out  of  context  and  I haven't  heard 
about  the  dog  before?  Then  my  processing  must  be  different. 
I must  infer  that  there  must  be  a dog  that  I don 't  know 
about,  perhaps  create  a new  node  for  it,  and  then  assert 
about  this  new  node  that  it  has  rabies.  Clearly  also  I must 
associate  with  this  new  node  that  it  is  a dog  and  that  it 
bit  a man.  But  how  do  I keep  these  two  different  types  of 
information  separate  — the  information  which  designates 
what  I set  the  node  up  to  stand  for  and  that  which  the 
sentence  asserted  about  it.  We're  back  to  the  same  problem. 
We  need  to  distinguish  the  information  that  is  in  the 
relative  clause  from  that  in  the  main  clause. 

One  possible  way  would  be  the  use  of  an  EGO  link  which 
points  to  a specification  of  what  the  node  represents. 
Using  such  a link,  when  one  creates  the  new  node  for  the  dog 
which  bit  the  man,  one  would  give  the  new  node  an  EGO  link 
which  in  essence  says  "I  am  the  node  which  represents  the 
dog  that  bit  the  man,”  When  one  then  adds  information  to 
this  node  asserting  additional  facts  about  it,  the  original 
motivation  for  creating  the  node  in  the  first  place  is  not 
forgotten  and  the  difference  between  the  sentences  "The  dog 
that  bit  the  man  had  rabies"  and  "the  dog  that  had  rabies 
bit  the  man"  would  lie  in  whether  the  facts  about  biting  or 
about  rabies  were  at  the  end  of  the  EGO  link.  (There  are  a 
number  of  other  questions  which  would  require  answers  in 


43 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


order  to  complete  the  specification  of  the  use  of  EGO  links 
for  this  purpose  — such  as  whether  the  propositions  at  the 
end  of  the  EGO  link  are  thereby  made  indirectly  available  as 
properties  of  this  node  or  whether  they  are  redundantly  also 
included  in  the  same  status  as  the  additional  asserted 
properties  which  come  later.  We  will  not,  however,  go  into 
these  issues  here.) 


The  above  argument  should  have  convinced  you  that  the 
simple  explanation  of  using  relative  clauses  always  only  to 
identify  preexisting  nodes  does  not  cover  all  of  the  cases. 
For  certain  sentences  such  as  the  above  example,  the  object 
determined  by  the  relative  clause  does  not  previously  exist 
and  something  must  be  created  in  the  semantic  network  which 
will  continue  to  exist  after  the  process  is  finished.  This 
thing  must  have  an  internal  representation  which  preserves 
the  information  that  it  is  an  object  determined  by  a 
relative  clause. 


A second  argument  against  the  transient  process  account 
is  that  even  for  sentences  v'here  nothing  needs  to  remain  in 
memory  after  the  process  has  completed  (because  the  relative 
clause  has  been  used  to  locate  a preexisting  node), 
something  needs  to  be  extracted  from  the  input  sentence 
which  describes  the  node  to  be  searched  for.  In  our 
previous  example  something  like  the  proposition  "the  dog  bit 
the  man”  needs  to  be  constructed  in  order  to  search  for  its 


44 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc . 


instances,  and  the  process  must  know  when  it  finds  such  an 
instance  that  it  is  the  dog  that  is  of  interest  and  not  the 
man.  This  specification  of  the  node  to  be  searched  for  is 
exactly  the  kind  of  thing  which  a semantic  interpretation 
for  the  noun  phrase  "the  dog  that  bit  the  man"  should  be. 
Thus,  even  when  no  permanent  representation  of  the  relative 
clause  needs  to  remain  after  the  understanding  process  has 
completed,  something  equivalent  to  it  still  needs  to  be 
constructed  as  part  of  the  input  to  the  search  process.  Vhe 
transient  process  account  does  not  eliminate  the  need  for 
such  a representation,  and  the  issue  of  whether  a complete 
representation  of  the  entire  sentence  (includi.ig  the 
relative  clause)  gets  constructed  and  sent  off  to  the 
understanding  process  as  a unit  or  whether  small  pieces  get 
created  and  sent  off  independently  without  ever  being 
assembled  into  a complete  representation  is  at  this  point  a 
red  herring.  The  necessary  operations  which  are  required 
for  the  search  specification  are  sufficient  to  construct 
such  a representation,  and  whether  it  is  actually 
constructed  or  whether  parts  of  it  are  merely  executed  for 
effect  and  then  cast  away  is  a totally  separate  question. 

A third  argument  against  the  transient  process  account, 
which  should  have  becou;®  apparent  in  the  above  discussion  is 
that  it  is  not  an  account  at  all,  but  merely  a way  of 
avoiding  the  problem.  By  claiming  that  the  relative  clause 
is  handled  during  the  transient  process  we  have  merely 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


pushed  the  problem  of  accounting  for  relative  clauses  off 
onto  the  person  who  attempts  to  characterize  the 

understanding  process.  We  have  not  accounted  for  it  or 

solved  it. 

2.  Representation  of  Complex  Sentences 

Let  us  return  to  the  question  of  whether  one  needs  a 
representation  of  the  entire  sentence  as  a whole  or  not. 
More  specifically,  does  one  need  a representation  of  a 

proposition  expressed  about  a node  which  itself  has  a 

propositional  restriction,  or  can  one  effectively  break  this 
process  up  in  such  a way  that  propositions  are  always 

expressed  about  definite  nodes.  This  is  going  to  be  a 

difficult  question  to  answer  because  there  is  a sense  in 
which  even  if  the  answer  is  the  former,  one  can  model  it 
with  a process  which  first  constructs  the  relative  clause 
restricted  node  and  then  calls  it  definite  and  represents 
the  higher  proposition  with  a pointer  to  this  new  node.  The 
real  question,  then,  is  in  what  sense  is  this  new  node 
definite.  Does  it  always  refer  to  a single  specific  node 
like  the  dog  in  our  above  example,  or  is  it  more  complicated 
than  that?  I will  argue  the  latter. 

3.  Definite  and  Indefinite  Entities 

Consider  the  case  which  we  hypothesized  in  which  we  had 


46 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


to  infer  the  existence  of  a heretofore  unknown  dog  because 
we  found  no  referent  for  "the  dog  that  bit  the  man".  This 
new  node  still  has  a certain  definiteness  to  it.  We  can 
later  refer  to  it  again  and  add  additional  information, 
eventually  fleshing  it  out  to  include  its  name,  who  owns  it, 
etc.  As  such  it  is  no  different  from  any  other  node  in  the 
data  base  standing  for  a person,  place,  thing,  etc.  It  got 
created  when  we  first  encountered  the  object  denoted  (or  at 
least  when  we  first  recognized  it  and  added  it  to  our 
memory)  and  has  subsequently  gained  additional  information 
and  may  in  the  future  gain  additional  information  still.  We 
know  that  it  is  a particular  dog  and  not  a class  of  dogs  and 
many  other  things  about  it. 

Consider,  however,  the  question  "Was  the  man  bitten  by 
a dog  that  had  rabies?"  Now,  we  have  a description  of  an 
indefinite  dog  and  moreover  we  have  not  asserted  that  it 
exists  but  merely  questioned  its  existence.  Now  you  may 
first  try  to  weasel  out  of  the  problem  by  saying  something 
like,  "Well,  what  happens  is  that  we  look  in  our  data  base 
for  dogs  that  have  rabies  in  the  same  way  that  we  would  in 
the  earlier  examples,  and  finding  no  such  dog,  we  answer  the 
question  in  the  negative."  This  is  another  example  of 
pushing  the  problem  off  onto  the  understanding  process,  it 
doesn't  solve  it  or  account  for  it,  it  just  avoids  it  (not 
to  mention  the  assumption  that  the  absence  of  information 
from  the  network  implies  its  falsity). 

47 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


Let  us  consider  the  process  more  closely.  Unless  our 
process  were  appropriately  constructed  (how?)  it  would  not 
know  the  difference  (at  the  time  it  was  searching  for  the 
referent  of  the  phrase)  between  this  case  and  the  case  of  an 
assertion  about  an  unknown  dog.  Hence  the  process  we 
described  above  would  create  a new  node  for  a dog  that  has 
rabies  unless  we  block  it  somehow.  Merely  asking  whether 
the  main  clause  is  a question  would  not  do  it,  since  the 
sentence  "Did  the  dog  that  bit  the  man  have  rabies"  still 
must  have  the  effect  of  creating  a new  definite  node.  (This 
is  due  to  the  effect  of  the  presupposition  of  the  definite 
singular  determiner  "the"  that  the  object  described  must 
exist.)  Nor  is  it  really  quite  the  effect  of  the  indefinite 
article  "a",  since  the  sentence  "a  dog  that  had  rabies  bit 
the  man”  should  still  create  a definite  node  for  the  dog. 
We  could  try  conditions  on  questioned  indefinites.  Maybe 
that  would  work,  but  let  me  suggest  that  perhaps  you  don't 
want  to  block  the  creation  of  the  new  node  at  all  but  rather 
simply  allow  it  to  be  a different  type  of  entity,  one  whose 
existence  in  the  real  world  is  not  presupposed  by  an 
intensional  existence  in  the  internal  semantic  network. 

If  we  are  to  take  this  account  of  the  hypothetical  dog 
in  our  question,  then  we  have  made  a major  extension  in  our 
notion  of  structures  in  a semantic  network  and  what  they 
mean.  Whereas  previously  we  construed  our  nodes  to 
correspond  to  real  existing  objects,  now  we  have  introduced 

48 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc . 


a new  type  of  node  which  does  not  have  this  assumption. 
Either  we  now  have  two  very  different  types  of  nodes  (in 
which  case  we  must  have  some  explicit  indicator  or  other 
mechanism  in  the  notation  to  indicate  the  type  of  every 
node)  or  else  we  must  impose  a unifying  interpretation.  If 
we  have  two  different  types  of  nodes,  then  we  still  have  the 
problem  of  telling  the  process  which  constructs  the  nodes 
which  type  of  node  to  construct  in  our  two  examples. 

One  possible  unifying  interpretation  is  to  interpret 
every  node  as  an  intensional  description  and  assert  an 
explicit  predicate  of  existence  for  those  nodes  which  are 
intended  to  correspond  to  real  objects.  In  this  case,  we 
could  either  rely  on  an  implicit  assumption  that  intensional 
objects  used  as  subjects  of  definite  asserted  sentences 
(such  as  "the  dog  that  bit  the  min  had  rabies”)  must 
actually  exist,  or  we  could  postulate  an  inferential  process 
which  draws  such  inferences  and  explicitly  asserts  existence 
for  such  entities. 

Since  the  above  account  of  the  indefinite  relative 
clause  in  our  example  requires  such  a major  reinterpretation 
of  the  fundamental  semantics  of  our  network  notations,  one 
might  be  inclined  to  look  for  some  other  account  that  was 
less  drastic.  However,  I will  argue  that  such  internal 
intensional  entities  are  required  in  any  case  to  deal  with 
other  problems  in  semantic  representation.  For  example. 


49 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beransk  and  Newman  Inc 


whenever  a new  definite  node  gets  created,  it  may  in  fact 
stand  for  the  same  object  as  some  other  node  that  already 
exists,  but  the  necessary  information  to  establish  the 
identity  may  only  come  later  or  not  at  all.  This  is  a 
fundamental  characteristic  of  the.  information  that  we  must 
store  in  our  nets.  Consider  again  Frege's  morning 
star  / evening  star  example.  Even  such  definite 
descriptions,  then,  are  essentially  intensxonal  objects. 
(Notice  as  a consequence  that  one  cannot  make  negative 
identity  assertions  simply  on  the  basis  of  distinctness  of 
internal  semantic  representations.) 

Perhaps  the  strongest  case  for  intensional  nodes  in 
semantic  networks  comes  from  referentially  "opaque"  verbs 
such  as  "need"  and  "want".  When  one  asserts  a sentence  such 
as  "I  need  a wrench",  one  does  not  thereby  assert  the 
e/istence  of  the  object  desired.  However,  one  must  include 
in  the  representation  of  this  sentence  some  representation 
of  the  thing  needed.  For  this  interpretation,  the  object  of 
the  verb  "need"  should  be  an  intensional  description  of  the 
needed  item.  (It  is  also  possible  for  the  slot  filler  to  be 
a node  designating  a particular  entity  rather  than  just  a 
description,  thus  giving  rise  to  an  ambiguity  of 
interpretation  of  the  sentence.  That  is,  is  it  a particular 
wrench  that  is  needed,  or  will  any  wrench  do?) 


50 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Jlewman  Inc . 


4.  Consequences  of  Intensional  Nodes 

We  conclude  that  there  must  be  some  nodes  in  the 
semantic  network  which  correspond  to  descriptions  of 
entities  rather  than  entities  themselves.  Does  that  tix  up 
the  problem?  Well,  we  have  to  do  more  than  just  make  the 
assumption.  We  have  to  decide  how  to  tell  the  two  kinds  of 
nodes  apart,  how  we  decide  for  particular  sentences  which 
type  to  create,  and  how  to  perform  inferences  on  these 
nodes.  If  we  have  nodes  whicn  are  intensional  descriptions 
of  entities,  what  does  it  mean  to  associate  properties  with 
the  nodes  or  to  assert  facts  about  the  nodes.  We  can't  just 
rely  on  the  arguments  that  we  made  when  we  were  assuming 
that  all  of  the  nodes  corresponded  to  definite  external 
entities.  We  must  see  whether  earlier  interpretations  of 
the  meanings  of  links  between  nodes  still  hold  true  for  this 
new  expanded  notion  of  node  or  whether  they  need 
modification  or  reinterpretation.  In  short  we  must  start 
all  over  again  from  the  beginning  but  this  time  with 
attention  to  the  ability  to  deal  with  intensional 
descriptions. 

Let  me  clarify  further  some  of  the  kinds  of  things 
which  we  must  be  able  to  represent.  Consider  the  sentence 
"Every  boy  loves  his  dog".  Here  we  have  an  indefinite  node 
for  the  dog  involved  which  will  not  hold  still. 
Linguistically  it  is  marked  definite  (i.e.,  the  dog  that 


51 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


belongs  to  the  boy),  but  It  is  a variable  definite  object 
whose  reference  changes  with  the  boy.  There  are  also 
variable  entities  which  are  indefinite  as  in  "Every  boy 
needs  a dog."  Here  we  plunge  into  the  really  difficult  and 
crucial  problems  in  representing  quantification.  It  is  easy 
to  create  simple  network  structures  that  model  the  logical 
syllogisms  by  creating  links  from  subsets  to  supersets,  but 
the  critical  cases  are  those  like  the  above.  We  need  the 
notion  of  an  intensional  description  for  a variable  entity. 

To  ^^mmarize,  then,  in  designing  a network  to  handle 
intensional  entities,  we  need  to  provide  for  definite 
entities  that  are  intended  to  correspond  to  particular 
entities  in  the  real  world,  indefinite  entities  which  do  not 
necessarily  have  corresponding  entities  in  the  real  world, 
and  definite  and  indefinite  variable  entities  which  stand  in 
some  relation  to  other  entities  and  whose  instantiations 
will  depend  on  the  instantiations  of  those  other  entities. 

5.  Functions  and  Predicates 

Another  question  about  the  interpretation  of  links  and 
vfhat  we  mean  by  them  comes  in  the  representation  of 
information  about  functions  and  predicates.  Functions  and 
predicates  have  a characteristic  that  clearly  sets  them 
apart  from  the  other  types  of  entities  which  we  have 
mentioned  (with  the  possible  exception  of  the  variable 


52 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


entity  which  depends  on  others)  — namely,  they  take 
arguments.  Somewhere  in  the  internal  representation  of  an 
entity  which  is  a function  or  a predicate  there  must  be 
inform -^tion  about  the  arguments  which  the  function  or 
predicate  takes,  what  kinds  of  entities  can  fill  those 
arguments,  and  how  the  value  of  the  function  or  the  truth  of 
the  predicate  is  determined  or  constrained  by  the  values  of 
the  arguments.  There  is  a difference  between  representing 
the  possible  entities  that  can  serve  as  arguments  for  a 
predicate  and  expressing  the  assertion  of  the  predicate  for 
particular  values  or  classes  of  values  of  those  arguments. 
Unfortunately  this  distinction  is  often  confused  in  talking 
about  semantic  networks.  That  is,  it  is  all  too  easy  to  use 
the  notation: 

LOVE 

AGT  HUMAN 

RECIP  HUMAN 

to  express  constraints  on  the  possible  fillers  for  the 
arguments  of  the  predicate  and  to  use  the  same  link  names  in 
a notation  such  as: 

376543 

VERB  LOVE 
AGT  JOHN 

RECIP  SALLY 

to  represent  the  assertion  that  John  loves  Sally.  Here  we 
have  a situation  of  the  same  link  names  meaning  different 
things  depending  on  the  nodes  which  they  are  connected  to. 

53 


■"V  . r T ’ll 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


Without  some  explicit  indication  in  the  network 
notation  that  the  two  nodes  are  of  different  types,  no 
mechanical  procedure  operating  on  such  a network  would  be 
able  to  handle  these  links  correctly  in  both  cases.  With  an 
explicit  indication  of  node  type  and  an  explicit  definition 
that  the  meaning  of  an  arc  depends  on  the  type  of  the  node 
to  which  it  is  connected  (and  how),  such  a procedure  could 
be  defined,  but  a network  notation  of  this  sort  would 
probably  be  confusing  as  an  explanatory  device  for  human 
consumption.  This  is  functionally  equivalent,  however,  to 
an  alternative  mechanism  using  a dual  set  of  links  with 
different  names  (such  as  R-AGT  and  AGT,  for  example)  which 
would  make  the  difference  explicit  to  a human  reader  and 
would  save  the  mechanical  procedure  from  having  to  consult 
the  type  of  the  node  to  determine  the  import  of  the  link. 
Notice  that  in  either  case  we  are  required  to  make  another 
extension  of  the  semantics  of  our  network  notation  since  we 
have  two  different  kinds  of  links  with  different  kinds  of 
import.  The  ones  which  make  statements  about  possible  slot 
fillers  have  assertional  import  (asserting  facts  about  the 
predicate  LOVE  in  this  case)  while  the  ones  that  make  up  the 
arguments  of  3765^3  have  structural  import  (building  up  the 
parts  of  the  proposition,  which  incidentally  may  itself  not 
be  asserted  but  only  part  of  some  intensioral 
representation). 

54 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc . 


We  conclude  that  the  difference  between  the 
specification  of  possible  slot  fillers  for  a predicate  as 
part  of  the  information  about  the  predicate  and  the 
specification  of  particular  slot  fillers  for  particular 
instances  of  the  predicate  requires  some  basic  distinction 
in  our  semantic  network  notation.  One  is  left  with  several 
questions  as  to  just  how  this  distinction  is  best  realized 
(for  example  does  one  want  a dual  set  of  link  names  — or 
is  there  a preferable  notation?)  For  the  moment,  however, 
let  us  leave  those  questions  unexplored  along  with  many 
issues  that  we  have  not  begun  to  face  and  proceed  with 
another  problem  of  knowledge  representation  that  imposes  new 
demands  on  the  interpretations  of  links  and  the  conventions 
for  representing  facts  in  semantic  networks. 

6.  Representing  Quantified  Expressions 

The  problem  of  representing  quantified  information  in 
semantic  networks  is  one  that  few  people  have  faced  and  even 
fewer  handled  adequately.  Let  me  begin  by  laying  to  rest  a 
logically  inadequate  way  of  representing  quantified 
expressions  which  unfortunately  is  the  one  most  used  in 
implemented  semantic  networks.  It  consists  of  simply 
tagging  the  quantifier  onto  the  noun  phrase  it  modifies  just 
as  if  it  were  an  adjective.  In  such  a notation,  the 
representation  for  "every  integer  is  greater  than  some 
integer"  would  look  something  like: 


55 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  B«;ranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


S11113 

VERB  GREATER 

ARG1  D123^*5 

ARG2  D67890 

D123^*5 

NOUN  INTEGER 

MOD  EVERY 

D67890 

NOUN  INTEGER 

MOD  SOME 

Now  there  are  two  possible  interpretations  of  this 
sentence  depending  on  whether  or  not  the  second,  existential 
quantifier  is  considered  to  be  in  the  scope  of  the  universal 
i-uantifier.  In  the  normal  interpretation,  the  second 
integer  depends  on  the  first  and  the  sentence  is  true,  while 
a patt.ological  inte»'pretation  of  the  sentence  is  that  there 
is  some  integer  which  every  integer  is  greater  than.  (Lest 
you  divert  the  issue  with  some  claim  that  there  is  only  one 
possible  interpretation  taking  the  quantifiers  in  the  order 
in  which  they  occur  in  the  sentence  consider  a sentence  such 
as  "Everybody  jumped  in  some  old  car  that  had  the  keys  in 
it",  in  which  the  normal  interpretation  is  the  opposite.) 
Since  our  semantic  network  notation  must  provide  a 
representation  for  whichever  interpretation  we  decide  was 
meant,  there  must  be  some  way  to  distinguish  ihe  difference. 
If  anythiiig,  the  representation  we  have  given  seems  to 
suggest  the  interpretation  in  which  there  is  some  integer 

56 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


that  every  integer  is  greater  than.  If  we  take  this  as  the 
interpretation  of  the  above  notation,  then  we  need  another 
representation  for  the  other  (and  in  this  case  correct) 
interpretation  — the  one  in  which  the  second  integer  is  a 
variable  entity  dependent  on  the  first, 

To  complicate  matters  even  further,  consider  the  case 
of  numerical  quantifiers  and  a sentence  such  as  ’’three 
lookouts  saw  two  boats”.  There  are  three  possible 
interpretations  of  the  quantifiers  in  this  case.  In  the  one 
that  seems  to  correspond  to  treating  the  quantifier  as  a 
modifier  of  the  noun  phrase,  we  would  have  one  group  of 
three  lookouts  that  jointly  participated  in  an  activity  of 
seeing  one  group  of  two  boats.  However,  there  is  another 
interpretation  in  which  each  of  three  lookouts  saw  two  boats 
(for  an  unknown  total  number  of  boats  between  2 and  6 since 
we  aren't  told  whether  any  of  them  saw  the  same  boats  as  the 
others)  and  still  another  interpretation  in  which  each  of 
two  boats  was  seen  by  three  men.  We  must  have  a way  in  our 
network  notation  to  unambiguously  represent  all  three  of 
these  possible  interpretations.  Quillian's  [1968] 
suggestion  of  using  ’’criterialities”  on  the  arcs  to  indicate 
quantification  will  fail  for  the  same  reasons  unless  some 
mechanism  for  indicating  which  arguments  depend  on  which 
others  is  inserted. 


Before  proceeding  to  discuss  logically  adequate  ways  of 


57 


. I •’itoiirt'mviiinffri  iirinn  TiI  ' i ~ i 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


dealing  with  quantification,  let  me  also  lay  to  rest  a 
borderline  case.  One  might  decide  to  represent  the 
interpretation  of  the  sentence  in  which  each  of  three  men 
saw  two  boats,  for  example,  by  creating  three  separate  nodes 
for  the  men  and  asserting  about  each  of  them  that  he  saw  two 
boats.  This  could  become  logically  adequate  if  the 
appropriate  information  were  indicated  that  the  three  men 
were  all  different  (it  is  not  adequate  to  assume  that 
internal  nodes  are  different  just  because  they  are  different 
nodes  — recall  the  morning  star/evening  star  example)  and 
if  the  three  separate  facts  are  tied  together  into  a single 
fact  somewhere  (e.g.,  by  a conjunction)  since  otherwise  this 
wouldn't  be  an  expression  of  a single  fact  (which  could  be 
denied,  for  example).  This  is,  however,  clearly  not  a 
reasonable  representation  for  a sentence  such  as  ”250 
million  people  live  in  the  United  States",  and  would  be  a 
logical  Impossibility  for  representing  universally 
quantified  expressions  over  sets  whose  cardinality  was  not 
known. 

A variant  of  this  is  related  to  the  transient  process 
account > One  might  argue  that  it  is  not  necessary  to 
represent  a sentence  such  as  "Every  boy  has  a dog"  as  a unit 
but  one  can  simply  add  an  assertion  to  each  internal  nods 
representing  a boy.  To  be  correct,  however,  such  an  account 
would  require  a network  to  have  perfect  knowledge  (i.e.,  an 
Internal  node  for  every  boy  that  exists  in  the  world),  a 

58 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


practical  impossibility.  We  cannot  assume  that  the  entities 
in  our  network  exhaust  those  that  exist  in  the  world.  Hence 
we  must  represent  this  assertion  in  a way  that  will  apply  to 
future  boys  that  we  may  learn  about  and  not  just  to  those  we 
know  about  at  this  moment.  To  do  this  we  must  be  able  to 
store  an  intensional  representation  of  the  universally 
quantified  proposition. 

6.1.  Quantifiers  as  Higher  Operators 

The  traditional  representation  of  quantifiers  in  the 
predicate  calculus  is  that  they  are  attached  to  the 
proposition  which  they  govern  in  a string  whose  order 
determines  the  dependency  of  the  individual  variables  on 
other  variables.  Thus  the  two  interpre>,ations  of  our  first 
sentence  are: 


(VX/integer ) 

(3Y/integer) 

(GREATER 

X Y) 

and 

(3Y/integer) 

(VX/integer ) 

(GREATER 

X Y) 

where  I have  chosen  to  explicitly  indicate  in  the  quantifier 
prefix  the  range  of  quantification  of  the  variable  (see 
Woods  [1967]  for  a discussion  of  the  advantages  of  doing 
this  — namely  the  uniform  behavior  for  both  universal  and 
existential  quantifiers).  In  the  question-answering  systems 
that  I have  constructed,  including  the  LUNAR  system,  I have 
used  a slightly  expanded  form  of  such  quantifiers  which 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


uniformly  handles  numerical  quantifiers  and  definite 
determiners  as  well  as  the  classical  universal  and 

existential  quantifiers  by  treating  the  quantifiers  as 
higher  predicates  which  take  as  arguments  a variable  name,  a 
specification  of  the  range  of  quantification,  a possible 
restriction  on  the  range,  and  the  proposition  to  be 

quantified  (which  includes  a free  occurrence  of  the  variable 
of  quantification  and  which  may  be  already  quantified  by 
other  quantifiers).  In  this  notation,  the  above  two 

interpretations  would  be  represented  as: 

(FOR  EVERY  X / INTEGER  : T ; 

(FOR  SOME  Y / INTEGER  : T ; (GREATER  X Y))) 
and 

(FOR  SOME  Y / INTEGER  : T ; 

(FOR  EVERY  X / INTEGER  : T ;*  (GREATER  X Y))) 

where  the  component  of  the  notation  following  the  in 

these  expressions  is  a proposition  which  restricts  the  range 
of  quantification  (in  this  case  the  vacuously  true 
proposition  T)  and  the  component  following  the  is  the 
proposition  being  quantified.  This  type  of  higher  operator 
representation  of  quantification  can  be  represented  in  a 
network  structure  by  creating  a special  type  of  node  for  the 
quantifier  and  some  special  links  for  its  components.  Thus, 
we  could  have  something  like: 


60 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


m 


S39732 


TYPE 

QUANT-TYPE 

VARIABLE 

CLASS 

RESTRICTION 

PROP 


QUANT 

EVERY 

X 

INTEGER 

T 

S39733 


S39733 


a 


a 

□ 

a 

a 


TYPE 

QUANT-TYPE 

VARIABLE 

RESTRICTION 

PROP 


S39734 


TYPE 

VERB 

ARG1 

ARG2 


QUANT 

SOME 

Y 

T 

S3973‘> 


PROPOSITION 

GREATER 

X 

Y 


This  is  essentially  the  technique  used  by  Shapiro  [1971b], 
who  is  one  of  the  two  people  I know  of  to  suggest  a 
logically  adequate  treatment  of  quantifiers  in  his  nets, 
(The  other  one  is  Martin  Kay,  whose  proposal  we  will  discuss 
shortly.)  This  technique  has  an  unpleasant  effect,  however, 
in  that  it  breaks  up  the  chains  of  connections  froni  node  to 
node  that  one  finds  attractive  in  the  more  customary 
semantic  network  notations.  That  is,  if  we  consider  our 
sentence  about  lookouts  and  boats,  we  have  gone  successively 
from  a simple-minded  representation  in  which  we  might  have  a 
link  labeled  "see"  which  points  from  a node  for  "lookout"  to 
one  for  "boats",  to  a case  representation  notation  in  which 

61 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


the  chain  becomes  an  agent  link  from  ’’lookout”  to  a special 
node  which  has  a verb  link  to  ”see”  and  a patient  link  to 
”boats”,  and  finally  to  a quantified  representation  in  which 
the  chain  stretches  from  "lookout”  via  an  inverse  CLASS  link 
to  a quantifier  node  which  has  a PROP  link  to  another 
quantifier  node  which  has  a CLASS  link  to  "boats”  and  a PROP 
link  to  a proposition  which  has  a VERB  link  to  "see”.  Thus 
our  successive  changes  in  the  network  conventions  designed 
to  provide  them  with  a logically  adequate  interpretation  are 
carrying  with  them  a cost  in  the  directness  of  the 
associative  paths.  This  may  be  an  inevitable  consequence  of 
making  the  networks  adequate  for  storing  knowledge  in 
genet’s!,  and  it  may  be  that  it  is  not  too  disruptive  of  the 
associative  processing  that  one  would  like  to  apply  to  the 
memory  representation.  On  the  other  hand  it  may  lead  to  the 
conclusion  that  one  cannot  accomplish  an  appropriate 
associative  linking  of  information  as  a direct  consequence 
of  the  notation  in  which  it  is  stored  and  that  some  separate 
indexing  mechanism  is  required. 

6,2.  Other  Possible  Representations 

There  are  two  other  possible  candidates  for- 
representing  quantified  information,  one  of  which  to  my 
knowledge  has  not  been  tried  before  in  semantic  networks.  I 
will  Cc.ll  them  the  "Skolem  function  method”  and  the  "iamdda 
abstraction  method,”  after  well-known  techniques  in  formal 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc . 


logic . 


a)  Skolem  Functions 

The  use  of  Skolem  functions  to  represent  quantified 
expressions  is  little  known  outside  the  field  of  mechanical 
theorem  proving  and  certain  branches  of  formal  logic,  but  it 
is  a pivotal  technique  in  resolution  theorem  proving  and  is 
rather  drastically  different  from  the  customary  way  of 
dealing  with  quantifiers  in  logic.  The  essence  of  the 
technique  is  to  take  a quantified  expression  containing  no 
negative  operators  in  the  quantifier  prefix  (any  such  can  be 
removed  by  means  oi  the  transformations  exchanging  "not 
every"  for  "some  not"  and  "not  some"  for  "every  not")  and 
replacing  all  instances  of  existentially  quantified 
variables  with  a functional  designator  whose  function  is  a 
unique  function  name  chosen  for  that  existential  variable 
and  whose  arguments  are  the  universally  quantified  variables 
in  whose  scopes  the  existential  quantifier  for  that  variable 
lies.  After  this  the  existential  quantifiers  are  deleted 
and,  since  the  only  remaining  variables  are  universally 
quantified,  the  universal  quantifiers  can  be  deleted  and 
free  variables  treated  as  implicitly  universally  quantified. 
For  example,  the  expression  (Vx) (3y) (Vz) (3w)  P(x,y,z,w) 
becomes  P(x, f (x ) , z , g(x, z ) ) , where  f and  g are  new  function 
names  created  to  replace  the  variables  y and  w. 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


Notice  that  the  arguments  of  the  functions  f and  g in 
the  result  preserve  the  information  about  the  universally 
quantified  variables  on  which  they  depend.  This  is  all  the 
information  necessary  to  reconstruct  the  original  expression 
and  is  intuitively  exactly  that  infcrmation  which  we  are 
interested  in  to  characterize  the  difference  between 
alternative  interpretations  of  a sentence  corresponding  to 
different  quantifier  orderings  — i.e.,  does  the  choice  of  a 
given  object  depend  on  the  choice  of  a universally 
quantified  object  or  not.  Thus  the  Skolem  function  serves 
as  a device  for  recording  the  dependencies  of  an 
existentially  quantified  variable.  An  additional  motivating 
factor  for  using  Skolem  functions  to  represent  natural 
language  quantification  is  that  the  quantification  operation 
implicitly  determines  a real  function  of  exactly  this  sort, 
and  there  are  places  in  natural  language  dialogs  where  this 
implicit  function  appears  to  be  referenced  by  anaphoric 
pronouns  outside  the  scope  of  the  original  quantifier  (e.g., 
in  "Is  there  someone  here  from  Virginia?  If  so,  I have  a 
prize  for  him",  the  "him"  seems  to  refer  to  the  value  of 
such  a function.)  We  can  obtain  a cemantic  network  notation 
based  on  this  Skolem  function  analogy  by  simply  including 
with  every  existentially  quantified  object  a link  which 
points  to  all  of  the  universally  quantified  objects  on  which 
this  one  depends.  This  is  essentially  the  technique 
proposed  by  Kay  [1973]* 


U 

li 

L 

L 

[ 

r 

L 

L 

c 

s 

L 

r 


L 


64 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


It  must  be  pointed  out  that  one  difficulty  with  the 
Skolem  function  notation  which  accounts  for  its  little  use 
as  a logical  representation  outside  the  theorem  proving 
circles  is  that  it  is  not  possible  to  obtaiu  the  negation  of 
a Skolem  form  expression  by  simply  attaching  a negation 
operator  to  the  ”top"o  Rather,  negation  involves  a complex 
operation  which  changes  all  of  the  universal  variables  to 
existential  ones  and  vice  versa,  and  can  hardly  be 
accomplished  short  of  converting  the  expression  back  to 
quantifier  prefix  form,  rippling  the  negation  through  the 
quantifier  prefix  to  the  embedded  predicate  and  then 
reconverting  to  Skolem  form.  This  makes  it  difficult,  for 
example,  to  store  the  denial  of  an  existing  proposition.)  It 
seems  likely  that  the  same  technique  of  explicitly  linking 
the  quantified  object  to  those  other  objects  on  w .tch  it 
depends  might  also  handle  the  case  of  numerically  quantified 
expressions  although  I am  not  quite  sure  how  it  would  all 
work  out  — especially  with  negations. 

b)  Lambda  Abstraction 

We  have  already  introduced  Church's  lambda  notation  as 
a convenient  device  for  expressing  a predicate  defined  by  a 
combination  or  a modification  of  other  predicates.  In 
general,  for  any  completely  instantiated  complex  assemblage 
of  predicates  and  propositions,  one  can  make  a predicate  of 
it  by  replacing  some  of  its  specific  arguments  with  variable 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


names  and  embedding  it  in  a lambda  expression  with  those 
variables  indicated  as  arguments.  For  example,  from  a 
sentence  "John  told  Mary  to  get  something  and  hit  Sam"  we 
can  construct  a predicate  (LAMBDA  (X)  John  told  Mary  to  get 
something  and  hit  X)  which  is  true  of  Sam  if  the  original 
sentence  is  true  and  may  be  true  of  other  individuals  as 
well.  This  process  is  called  lambda  abstraction. 

Now,  one  way  to  view  a universally  quantified  sentence 
such  as  "all  men  are  mortal"  is  simply  as  a statement  of  a 
relation  between  a set  (all  men)  and  a predicate  (mortal)  — 
namely  that  the  predicate  is  true  of  each  member  of  the  set 
(call  this  relation  FORALL).  By  means  of  lambda  abstraction 
we  can  create  a predicate  of  exactly  the  type  we  need  to 
view  every  instance  of  universal  quantification  as  exactly 
this  kind  of  assertion  about  a set  and  a predicate.  For 
example,  we  can  represent  our  assertion  that  every  integer 
is  greater  than  some  integer  as  an  assertion  of  the  FORALL 
relation  between  the  set  of  integers  and  the  predicate 
(LAMBDA  (X)  (X  is  greater  than  some  integer)) 
and  in  a similar  way  we  can  define  a relation  FORSOME  which 
holds  between  a set  and  a predicate  if  the  predicate  is  true 
for  some  member  of  the  set,  thus  giving  us  a representation: 

(FORALL  INTEGER  (LAMBDA  (X) 

■ (FORSOME  INTEGER  (LAMBDA  (Y)  (GREATER  X Y))))) 


66 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


D 

D 


a 

n 

a 

D 

D 


□ 

ii 

[] 


1 

U 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


which  can  be  seen  as  almost  a notational  variant  of  the 
higher  operator  quantifier  representation.  Notice  that  the 
expression  (LAMBDA  (Y)  (GREATER  X Y))  is  a predicate  whose 
argument  is  Y and  which  has  a free  variable  X.  This  means 
that  the  predicate  itself  is  a variable  entity  which  depends 
on  X — i.e.,  for  each  value  of  X we  get  a different 
predicate  to  be  applied  to  the  Y's. 


The  use  of  this  technique  in  a semantic  network 
notation  would  require  a special  type  of  node  for  a 
predicate  defined  by  the  lambda  operator,  but  such  a type  of 
node  is  probably  required  anyway  for  independent  reasons 
(since  the  operation  of  lambda  abstraction  is  an 
intellectual  operation  which  one  can  perform  and  since  our 
semantic  network  should  be  able  to  store  the  results  of  such 
mental  gymnastics).  The  structure  of  the  above  expression 
might  look  like: 


S12233 


TYPE 

VERB 

CLASS 

PRED 


PROPOSITION 

FORALL 

INTEGER 

P1223^ 


PI2234 

TYPE 

ARGUMENTS 

BODY 


PREDICATE 

(X) 

SI2235 


SI2235 

TYPE  PROPOSITION 

VERB  FORSOME 


67 


f 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


CLASS  INTEGER 

PRED  PI2236 


PI2236 

TYPE  PREDICATE 

ARGUMENTS  (Y) 

BODY  SI2237 


SI2237 


TYPE  PROPOSITION 


VERB  GREATER 

ARG1  X 

ARG2  Y 


V.  Conclusion 

In  the  preceding  sections,  I hope  that  I have 
illustrated  by  example  the  kinds  of  explicit  understanding 
of  what  one  intends  various  network  notations  to  mean  that 
must  be  made  in  order  to  even  begin  to  ask  the  questions 
whether  a notation  is  an  adequate  one  for  representing 
knowledge  in  general  (although  for  reasons  of  space  I have 
been  more  brief  in  such  explanations  in  this  paper  than  I 
feel  one  should  be  in  presenting  a proposed  complete 
semantic  network  notation).  Moreover,  I hope  that  I have 
made  the  point  that  when  one  does  extract  a clear 
understanding  of  the  semantics  of  the  notation,  most  of  the 
existiii:^'  semantic  network  notations  are  found  wanting  in 
some  major  respects  — notably  the  representation  of 
propositions  without  committment  to  asserting  their  truth 


68 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 

and  in  representing  various  types  of  intensional 
descriptions  of  objects  without  commitment  to  their  external 
existence,  their  external  distinctness,  or  their 
completeness  in  covering  ail  of  the  objects  which  are 
presumed  to  exist  in  the  world.  I have  also  pointed  out  the 
logical  inadequacies  of  almost  all  current  network  notations 
for  representing  quantified  information  and  some  of  the 
disadvantages  of  some  logically  adequate  techniques. 

I .lavt  not  begun  to  address  all  of  the  problems  that 
need  to  be  addressed,  and  I have  only  begun  to  discuss  the 
problems  of  relative  clauses  and  quant ificational 
information.  I have  not  even  mentioned  other  problems  such 
as  the  representation  of  mass  terms,  adverbial  modification, 
probabilistic  information,  degrees  of  certainty,  time  and 
tense,  and  a host  of  other  difficult  problems,  All  of  these 
issues  need  to  be  addressed  and  solutions  integrated  into  a 
consistent  whole  in  order  to  produce  a logically  adequate 
semantic  network  formalism.  No  existing  semantic  network 
comes  close  to  this  goal. 

I hcpe  that  by  focusing  on  the  Jogical  inadequacies  of 
many  of  the  current  (naive)  assumptions  about  what  semantic 
networks  do  and  can  do,  I will  have  stimulated  the  search 
for  better  solutions  and  flagged  some  of  the  false 
assumptions  about  adequacies  of  techniques  that  might 
otherwise  have  gone  unchallenged.  As  I said  earlier,  I 


69 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 


believe  that  work  in  the  area  of  knowledge  representation  in 
general,  and  semantic  networks  in  particular,  is  important 
to  the  further  development  of  our  understanding  of  human  and 
artificial  intelligence  and  that  many  essentially  correct 
facts  about  human  performance  and  useful  techniques  for 
artificial  systems  are  emerging  from  this  study.  My  hope 
for  this  paper  is  that  it  will  stimulate  this  area  of  study 
to  develop  in  a productive  direction. 


70 


iifh'fiihihirf’ftTiriii 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc 


REFERENCES 


Carbonell,  J.R.,  4 Collins,  A.M.  (1974) 

"Natural  semantics  in  artificial  intelligence,"  Proceedings 
Third  International  Joint  QQnfsr.encs  <211  Artifi<?ial 
Intelligence.  1973,  pp.  344-351.  Reprinted  in  the  American 
Journal  of  Computational  Linguistics.  1974,  Vol.  1,  Mfc.  3. 

Davis,  M.  (1958) 

Computability  anil  Unsolvabilitv.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 
Fillmore,  C.  (1968) 

"The  case  for  case,"  in  Bach  and  Harms  (eds.),  Universals  in 
Linguistic  Theory.  Chicago:  Holt,  Rinehart  and  Winston. 

Kay,  M.  (1973) 

"The  MIND  System,"  in  R.  Rustin  (ed.)  Natural  Language 
Processing.  New  York:  Algorithmics  Press. 

Lindsay,  R.K.  (1963) 

"Inferential  memory  as  the  basis  of  machines  which 

understand  natural  language,"  in  E.A.  Feigenbaum  4 J. 
Feldman  (eds.-),  Computers  and  thought.  New  York: 

McGraw-Hill . 

Quillian,  M.R.  (1968) 

"Semantic  memory,"  in  M.  Minsky  (ed.).  Semantic  information 
processing.  Cambridge:  ‘.IT  Press. 

Quillian,  M.R.  (1969) 

"The  Teachable  Language  Coraprehender : A simulation  program 
and  theory  of  language,"  CACM.  Vol.  12,  No.  8,  pp.  459-476. 

Quine,  W.V.  (1961) 

From  a Logical  Point  of  View.  Second  Edition,  revised.  New 
York:  Harper  and  Row. 

Raphael,  B.  (1964) 

"A  Computer  Program  which  'Understands',"  AFIPS  Conference 
Proceedings . Vol.  26,  1964  Fall  Joint  Computer  Conference, 

pp.  577-589. 

Rumelhart,  D.E.,  Lindsay,  P.H.,  4 Norman,  D.A.  (1972) 

"A  process  model  for  long-term  memory,"  in  E.  Tulving  4 W. 
Donaldson  (eds.).  Organization  of  memory.  New  York:  Academic 
Press . 

Schank,  R.C.  (1975) 

Conceptual  Information  Processing.  Amsterdam:  North-Holland. 


7/ 


BBN  Report  No.  3072 


Bolt  Beranek  and  Nevnnan  Inc. 


Shapiro,  S.C.  (1971b) 

"A  net  structure  for  semantic  information  storage, 
deduction,  and  retrieval,”  Proceedings  of  the  Second 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence . 
pp.  512-523. 

Simmons,  W.  (1973) 

"Semantic  networks:  Their  computation  and  use  for 

understanding  English  sentences,"  in  R.C.  Schank  & K.M. 
Colby  (eds.).  Computer  models  of  thought  and  language . San 
B’rancisco:  Freeman. 

Winograd,  T.  (1972) 

Understanding  natural  language . New  York:  Academic  Press. 
Woods,  W.A.  (1967) 

"Semantics  for  a Question-Answering  System,"  Ph.D.  Thesis, 
Division  of  Engineering  and  Applied  Physics,  Harvard 
University.  (Also  in  Report  NSF-19,  Harvard  Computation 
Laboratory,  September,  1967.)  (Available  from  NTIS  as 
PB-176-548. ) 

Woods,  W.A.  (1973a) 

"Meaning  and  Machines,"  in  A.  Zampolli  (ed.).  Computational 
MkA  Mathematical  Linguistics.  Proceedings  ^ 
Int,eraatiQaa.I  C-C>.Ple.£.e.Qg.s  qd.  (lQj3r.utat,ig.n,aI  Linsui3,t.ics>  Pisa, 
Italy,  August  1973»  Leo  S.  Olschki,  Florence,  Italy. 

Woods,  W.A.  (1973b) 

"Progress  in  Natural  Language  Understanding:  An  application 
to  Lunar  Geology,"  AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings . Vol.  42, 
1973  National  Computer  Conference  and  Exposition, 

pp.  441-450. 

Woods,  W.A.  (1975) 

"Syntax,  Semantics,  and  Speech,"  in  R.D.  Reddy  (ed.)  Speech 
Recognition ; invited  papers  presented  at  the  1974  IEEE 
Symposium.  New  York:  Academic  Press  (in  press). 

Woods,  W.A.,  R.M.  Kaplan,  and  B.  Nash-Webber  (1972) 

"The  Lunar  Sciences  Natural  Language  Information  System: 
Final  Report,"  BBN  Report  No.  2378,  June  1972.  (Available 
from  NTIS  as  N72-28984.) 


7»- 


