AD-A019  702 


AN  OVERVIEW  OF  PRODUCTION  SYSTEMS 
Randall  Davis,  et  al 
Stanford  University 


Prepared  for: 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 


October  1975 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


A&A019702 


0281  40 


Stanford  Artificial  InteKgence  Laboratory  October  1975 

Memo  AIM-271 

Computer  Science  Department 
Report  No.  STAN-CS-75-524 


An  Overview  of  Production  Systems 

fay 

Randall  Davis  and  Jonathan  King 


Research  sponsored  by 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
ARPA  Order  No,  2494 
and 

National  Institutes  of  Heath 

. v. 


COMPUTER  SCIENCE  DEPARTMENT 
Stanford  University 


^•produced  by 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAOE  (Whwm  Data  Erik 


1 REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

—Mil 

1.  RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  MUMSEft 

4.  TITLE  fend  Jutelrle) 

An  Overview  of  Production  Systems 

S-  TYNE  OF  NENONT  * NEMOO  COVEREO 

Technical 

7.  AUTMORfaf 

R.  Davis  and  J.  King 

S.  CONTRACT  ON  GRANT  NUMRKfsJ 

DAHC15-73-C-0435 

t.  PERFORMING  ONOANIZATION  NAME  ANO  AOONESS 

Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
Stanford  University 
Stanford,  California  9U305 

10.  FNOORAM  ELEMENT.  NROJECT.  TASK 
AREA  * WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

AREA  Order  2h9h 

11.  CONTNOLLINO  OFFICE  NAME  ANO  AOONESS 

Col .Dave  Russell,  Dep.  Dir.,  AEPA,  TPT, 
AREA  Headquarters , U+00  Wilson  Blvd. 
Arlington,  Virginia  22209 

12.  REPORT  DATE 

October  I975 

1*.  NUMBER  OF  PAOES 

40 

14  MONlTORlNO  AGENCY  name  a AOORESSfff  AflmM  flea  Cents edited  Otttcm) 

Philip  Surra,  CHE  Representative 
Durand  Aeronautics  Building  Room  165 
Stanford  University 
Stanford,  California  9A305 

IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  fel  Me  ramarl) 

15 

si  rm-T  r-rv^^jr-^TFrTf-^T'rTr.T’r.xriM 

14  OISTNiewTION  STFt,TMENT  <1  Ms  Sepero 

Rcieasable  without  limitations  on  disseminat  lop*£-;  i-.-jf.,  37;  3r/!r^:*iENT  h 

Approved  ior  public  ieleassfl 
Distribution  zlimitod  i 

17.  OIL.TNI8UTION  STATEMENT  (at  tha  ehetrecl  missed  te  Blaa*  M,  If  differ  ml  ham  Ktjart) 

— ■ 1-  ..  ~M—  - 

is.  supplementary  notes 


If.  KEY  WO  AOS  fCiaftaM  an  itfWH  elde  If  nttmafy  md  lAnlliy  by  Ma^A  mmthar) 


*0.  ABSTRACT  (t 


l«M  A _ Slob  — — 


ttaea  protection  qnlwa  wn  flrat  proposed  Jn  19W  me  a general  ec^uta.iooal 
aaolaa,  the  MttodDUur  hoc  iota  a grant  teal'  of  development  and  hai  baas  applied 
to  a divan*  coUactloa  of  prjfelaaa . Dssplte  the  vids  icor  of  goals  aad  perepectlvee 
dmnnatratad  by  tha  various  systsm,  there  *ppear  to  be  situiy  recurrent  theses.  This 
paper  Is  an  attcapt  to  provlte  an  analytic  *nd  overview  of  those  theses,  as  well  as  a 
conceptual  frsaework  by  which  aary  of  the  teeslngly  disparate  efforts  can  be  viewed, 
both  in  relation  to  each  other,  and  to  other  setbodologlea .. 

Accordingly,  we  use  the  ten  ’production  lyites*  in  a broad  teoae,  and  attegit 
to  stew  how  noet  system  which  have  used  the  ten  caa  he  fit  into  the  frmn  mb.,  n, 
cc^ayiaon  to  other  ■ethntelngtee  ie  talented  to  provide  a view  of  IB  charae*-rietics 
“ * . llr  00*®**t*  trimrf  reference  to  prneeteraUyhaeed  technlow  but 

with  reference  aloe  to  eon  of  the  onneat  tevelopsante  la  programme  sdt 
oramlaatlm  of  data  Md  r ‘ 


nn  ro"“ 

•w  1 JAN  7* 


1473 


COITION  OF  1 NOV  SB  It  O' 
S/N  010  5*014*  ggOl  1 


■TK 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAOE  ftem  Data  SRIered) 


Stanford  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
Memo  AIM-271 


October  1975 


Computer  Science  Department 
Report  No.  STAN-CS-75-524 


An  Overview  of  Production  Systems 

by 

Randall  Dav.s  and  Jonathan  King 


ABSTRACT 


Since  production  systems  were  first  proposed  in  1943  as  a general  computational  mechanism, 
the  methodology  has  seen  a great  deal  of  development  and  has  been  applied  to  a diverse 
collection  of  problems.  Despite  the  wide  scope  of  goals  and  perspectives  demonstrated  by  the 
various  systems,  ther  appear  to  be  many  recurrent  themes.  This  paper  is  an  attempt  to 
provide  at.  analysis  and  overview  of  those  themes,  as  well  as  a conceptual  framework  by 
which  many  of  the  seemingly  disparate  efforts  can  be  viewed,  both  in  relation  to  each  other, 
and  to  other  methodologies. 

Accordingly,  we  use  the  term  'production  system’  in  a broad  sense,  and  attempt  to  show  hov> 
most  systems  which  have  used  the  term  can  be  fit  into  the  framework.  The  comparison  ti 
other  methodologies  is  intended  to  provide  a view  of  PS  characteristics  in  a broader 
context,  with  primary  reference  to  procedurally-based  techniques,  but  with  reference  also  to 
some  of  the  current  developments  in  programming  and  the  organization  of  data  and 
knowledge  bases.  This  is  a slightly  revised  version  of  a paper  to  appear  in  Machine 
Representations  of  Knowledge,  Dordrecht,  D.  Reidel  Publishing  Company  (1976). 


The  work  reported  here  was  funded  in  part  by  grants  from  the  National  Institutes  of  Health, 
NIH  Grant  HS01544,  and  the  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  ARP  A Contract  DAHC15-72- 
C-0425 

The  views  and  conclusions  contained  in  this  document  are  those  of  the  author(s)  and  should  not  be 
interpreted  as  necessarily  representing  the  official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of  Stanford 
University,  ARP  A,  NIH,  or  the  U.  S.  Government. 

Reproduced  in  the  U S. A.  Available  from  the  National  Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield, 
Virginia  22151. 


Contntt 

{1}  Introduction  and  Background 

{2}  "Pure"  Production  systems 

{3}  Two  views  of  Production  Systems 

{4}  Appropriate  and  Inappropriate  Domains 

{5}  Characteristics 

{6}  Taxonomy 

{7}  Conclusions 


i 


imOOUCTlM 


{1}  INTRODUCTION  AND  BACKGROUND 

Since  production  systems  (PS)  were  first  proposed  by  Post  [194$)  u a general  computations? 
mechanism,  the  methodology  has  seen  a great  deal  of  development  and  has  been  applied  to  a 
diverse  collection  of  problems  Despite  the  wide  scope  of  goals  and  perspectives  demonstrated  by  the 
various  systems,  there  appear  to  be  many  recurrent  themes.  This  paper  is  an  attempt  to  provide  an 
analysis  and  overview  of  those  themes,  as  well  as  a conceptual  framework  by  which  many  of  the 
seemingly  disparate  efforts  can  be  viewed,  both  in  relation  to  each  other,  and  to  other  methodologies 
[11 

Accordingly,  we  use  the  term  ‘production  system*  in  a broad  sense,  and  attempt  to  show  how 
most  systems  which  have  used  the  term  can  be  fit  into  the  framework.  The  comparison  to  other 
methodologies  is  intended  to  provide  a view  of  PS  characteristics  in  a broader  context,  with  primary 
reference  to  procedurally-based  techniques,  but  with  reference  alto  to  some  of  the  current 
developments  in  programming  and  the  organization  of  data  and  knowledge  bases. 

We  begin  by  offering  a review  of  the  essential  structure  and  function  of  a PS,  presenting  i 
picture  of  a “pure"  Pb  to  provide  a basis  for  subsequent  elaborations.  We  then  suggest  that  current 
views  of  PSs  fall  into  two  distinct  classes,  and  demonstrate  that  this  dichotomy  may  explain  much  of 
the  existing  variation  in  goals  and  methods.  This  is  followed  by  some  speculations  on  the  nature  of 
appropriate  and  inappropriate  problem  domains  for  PSs  - i.e.  what  is  it  about  a problem  that 
makes  the  PS  methodology  appropriate,  and  how  do  these  factors  arise  out  of  the  system's  basic 
structure  and  function?  Next  we  review  a dozen  different  characteristics  which  we  found  common  to 
all  systems,  explaining  how  they  contribute  to  the  basic  character,  and  noting  their  Interrelationships. 
Finally,  we  present  a taxonomy  for  PSs,  selecting  four  dimensions  of  characterization,  and  indicating 
the  range  of  possibilities  as  suggested  by  recent  efforts. 

Two  points  of  methodology  should  be  noted  - first,  we  make  frequent  reference  to  what  is 
“typically"  found,  and  what  is  “in  the  spirit  of  things."  Since  there  is  really  no  one  formal  design  for 
current  PSs,  and  recent  implementations  have  exptored  variations  on  virtually  every  aspect,  their  use 
becomes  more  an  issue  of  a programming  styl«  than  anything  else.  It  is  difficult,  then,  to  exclude 
designs  or  methods  on  formal  grounds,  and  we  refer  instead  to  an  informal,  but,  we  feel,  well 
established  style  of  approach. 

A second,  related  point  will  be  important  to  keep  in  mind  as  we  compare  the  capabilities  of 
PSs  with  those  of  other  approaches.  Since  it  is  possible  to  imagine  coding  any  given  Turing 
machine  in  either  procedural  or  PS  terms  (see  [Anderson  1976]  for  a formal  proof  of  the  latter),  in 
the  formal  sense  their  computational  power  is  equivalent.  This  suggests  that,  given  sufficient  effort, 
they  are  ultimately  capable  of  solving  the  same  problems.  The  issues  we  wish  to  examine  are  not, 
however,  questions  of  absolute  computational  power,  but  the  impact  of  a particular  methodology  on 
program  structure,  as  well  as  the  relative  ease  or  difficulty  with  which  certain  capabilities  can  be 
achieved,  and  the  extent  to  which  they  can  be  achieved  "in  the  spirit  of  things." 


1 


MK  nONCTMN  IWtlB 


{2}  "PURE"  PRODUCTION  SYSTEMS 

A production  system  may  be  viewed  as  consisting  of  three  bask  components:  a set  of  rules,  a 
data  base,  and  an  interpreter  for  the  rules.  In  the  simplest  design,  a rule  is  an  ordered  pair  of 
symbol  strings,  with  a left  and  right  hand  side  (LHS  and  RH$>,  the  rule  set  has  a predetermined, 
tout  ordering:  and  the  data  base  is  simply  a collection  of  symbols.  The  interpreter  in  this  simple 
design  operates  by  scanning  the  LHS  of  each  rule  until  one  is  found  whkh  can  be  successfully 
matched  against  the  data  base.  At  that  point  the  symbols  matched  in  the  data  base  are  replaced  with 
those  found  in  the  RHS  of  the  rule,  and  Manning  either  continues  with  the  next  rule  or  begins 
again  with  the  first  A rule  can  also  be  viewed  as  simple  conditional  statement,  and  the  invocation  of 
rules  as  a chained  sequence  of  nodus  ponens  actions. 

{2.1}  RULES 

More  generally,  one  side  of  a rule  is  evahiattd  with  reference  to  the  data  base,  and  if  this 
succeeds  (i.e.  evaluates  to  TRUE  in  some  sense),  the  action  specified  by  the  other  side  is  performed. 
Note  that  evaluate  is  typically  taken  to  mean  a passive  operation  of  "perception",  or,  "an  operation 
involving  only  matching  and  detection"  [21  while  the  action  is  generally  one  or  more  conceptually 
primitive  operations  (although  more  complex  constructs  are  also  being  examined:  see  {5.9}).  As 
noted,  the  simplest  evaluation  is  a matching  of  literals,  and  the  simplest  action  a replacement 

Note  that  we  do  not  specify  which  side  is  to  be  matched,  since  either  is  possible.  For  example, 
given  a grammar  written  in  production  rule  form  [Si, 

$ -»  A B A 

B -»  B 0 A-»  A 1 

B -*  0 A -*  1 

matching  the  LHS  on  a data  base  which  consists  of  the  start  symbol  S,  gives  a generator  for  strings 
in  the  language.  Matching  on  the  RHS  of  the  same  set  of  rules  gives  a recognizer  for  the  language. 
We  can  also  vary  the  methodology  slightly  to  obtain  a top  down  recognizer,  by  interpreting  e'ements 
of  the  LHS  as  goals  to  be  obtained  by  the  successful  matching  of  elements  from  the  RHS.  In  this 
case  the  rules  "unwind."  Thus  we  can  use  the  same  set  of  rules  in  several  ways.  Note,  however,  that 
in  doing  so  ve  obtain  quite  different  systems,  with  characteristically  different  control  structures  and 
behavior. 

The  organization  and  accessing  of  the  rule  set  is  also  an  important  issue.  The  simplest  scheme 
is  the  fixed,  total  ordering  mentioned,  but  elaborations  quickly  grow  more  complex.  The  term 
conflict  resolution  has  been  used  to  describe  the  process  of  selecting  a rule.  These  issues  of  rule 
evaluation  and  organization  are  explored  in  more  detail  below. 


2 - 


PURE  MOOIICTtM  SYSTEM 


{2.2}  DATA  BASE 

In  the  simplest  production  system,  the  data  base  is  simply  a collection  of  symbols  intended 
to  reflect  the  state  of  the  world,  but  the  interpretation  of  those  symbols  depends  in  large  part  on 
the  nature  of  the  application.  For  those  systems  intended  to  explore  symbol  processing  aspects  of 
human  cognition,  the  data  base  is  interpreted  as  modelling  the  contents  of  some  memory 
mechanism  (typically  short  term  memory,  STM),  with  each  symbol  representing  some  “chunk"  of 
knowledge,  and  hence  its  total  length  (typically  ^oond  seven  elements),  and  organisation  (linear, 
hierarchical,  etc.),  are  important  theoretical  issues.  Typical  contents  of  STM  for  psychological 
models  are  those  of  PSG  [Newell  1 9731  where  STM  might  contain  pureiy  content-free  symbols  like; 

QQ 

(EE  FT) 

TT 

or  VIS  [Moran  1973al  where  the  STM  contains  symbols  representing  directions  on  a visualized  map: 

(NEW  C-l  CORNER  WEST  L-i  NORTH  L-2) 

(L-2  LINE  EAST  P-2  P-1) 

(HEAR  NORTH  EAST  X END) 

For  systems  intended  to  be  knowledge-based  experts,  the  data  base  contains  facts  ?nd  assertions 
about  the  world,  is  typically  of  arbitrary  size,  and  has  no  a priori  constraints  on  the  complexity  of 
organization.  For  example,  the  MYCIN  system  [Davis  1975]  uses  a collection  of  4-tuples,  consisting  of 
an  associative  triple  and  a "certainty  factor’  (CF,  see  [Shortliffel975b]),  which  indicates  (on  a scale 
from  -I  to  I)  how  strongly  the  fact  has  been  confirmed  (CF  > 0)  or  disconfirmed  (CF  < 0): 

(IDENTITY  ORGANISM- 1 E.C0LI  .8) 

(SITE  CULTURE-2  BLOOD  1.0) 

(SENSITIVE  ORGANISM- 1 PENICILLIN  -1.0) 

As  another  example,  in  the  DENDRAL  system  [Feigenbauml97l,  Smith  1972)  the  data  base  contain! 
complex  graph  structures  which  represent  molecules  and  molecular  fragments.  The  structures  are 
built  by  assigning  unique  numbers  to  each  atom  of  a molecule  and  by  describing  chemical  bonds  by 
a pair  of  numbers  indicating  the  atoms  they  join. 

A third  style  of  organization  for  the  data  base  is  the  “token  stream"  approach  used,  for 
example,  in  LISP70  (Teslerl973l  Here  the  data  base  is  a linear  stream  of  tokens,  accessible  only  in 
sequence.  Each  production  in  turn  is  matched  against  the  beginning  of  the  stream  (i.e.  if  the  first 
character  of  a production  and  the  first  character  of  the  stream  differ,  the  whole  match  fails),  and  if 
the  rule  is  invoked,  it  may  act  to  add,  delete,  of  modify  characters  in  the  matched  segment.  The 
anchoring  of  the  match  at  the  first  token  offers  the  possibility  of  great  efficiency  in  rule  selection, 
since  the  productions  can  be  “compiled*  into  a decision  tree  which  keys  off  sequential  tokens  from 


HK  MOOUCTIM  SYJTtW 


the  stream  (a  very  simple  example  is  shown  below). 


production  set 
ABC  -*  X Y 
A CF  - WZ 
B B A - XZ 
ACD  -♦  W Y 


decision  tree 


Whatever  the  organization  of  the  data  base,  one  important  characteristic  should  be  noted: 
it  is  the  sole  storage  medium  for  all  state  variables  of  the  system.  In  particular,  unlike 
procedurally-oriented  languages  there  is  no  provision  for  separate  storage  of  control  state 
information  - no  separate  program  counter,  pushdown  stack,  etc  There  is  nothing  but  the  single 
data  base,  and  all  information  to  be  recorded  must  go  there.  We  refer  to  this  as  the  unity  of  data 
and  control  store,  and  examine  some  of  its  implications  below.  This  store  is,  moreover,  universally 
accessible  to  every  rule  in  the  system,  so  that  anything  put  there  is  potentially  detectable  by  any 
rule.  We  will  see  that  both  of  these  have  significant  consequences  for  the  use  of  the  data  base  as 
a communication  channel 


rm  mnoucum  svsTcns 


{2-3}  INTERPRETER 

The  interpreter  is  the  source  of  much  of  the  variation  found  among  different  systems,  but 
it  may  be  seen  in  the  simplest  terms  as  a sdtct-txtctUi  loop,  in  which  one  rule  applicable  to  the 
current  state  of  the  data  base  is  chosen,  and  then  executed.  Its  action  results  in  a modified  data  base, 
and  the  select  phase  begins  again.  Given  that  the  selection  is  often  a process  of  choosing  the  first 
rule  which  matches  the  current  data  base.  It  is  clear  why  this  cycle  is  often  referred  to  as  a 
'recognize-act',  or  ‘situation-action'  loop.  The  range  of  variations  on  this  theme  is  explored  in  the 
section  on  control  cycle  architecture. 

This  ahem  at  ion  of  selection  and  execution  is  an  essential  element  of  PS  architecture  that  is 
responsible  for  one  of  their  most  fundamental  characteristics.  By  choosing  each  new  rule  for 
execution  on  the  basis  of  the  total  contents  of  the  data  base,  we  are  effectively  performing  a 
complete  reevaluation  of  the  control  state  of  the  system  at  every  cycle  (recall  the  unity  of  data  and 
control  store).  This  is  distinctly  different  from  procedurally-oriented  approaches,  in  which  control 
flow  is  typically  the  decision  of  the  process  currently  executing,  and  is  commonly  dependent  on  only 
a small  fraction  of  the  total  number  of  state  variables.  PSs  are  thus  sensitive  to  any  change  in  the 
entire  environment,  and  potentially  reactive  to  such  changes  within  the  scope  of  a single  execution 
cycle.  The  price  of  such  reactivity  is.  of  course,  the  computation  time  required  for  the  reevaluation. 

An  example  of  one  execution  of  the  recognize-act  loop  for  a much  simplified  version  of 
Newell's  PSG  system  will  illustrate  some  of  the  foregoing  notions.  The  production  system,  called 
PS.ONE,  is  assumed  for  this  example  to  contain  two  productions,  PDl  and  PD2.  We  indicate  this  as 
follows: 

PS-ONEKPOl  PD2) 

PDl;  (DO  AND  (EE)  ~>  BB) 

PD2:  (XX  ~>  CC  DO) 

PDl  says  that  if  the  symbol  DD  and  some  expression  beginning  with  EE  (that  is,  (EE  ...))  is  found 
in  STM,  then  insert  the  symbol  BB  at  the  front  of  STM.  PD2  says  that  if  the  symbol  XX  is  found 
in  STM,  then  first  insert  the  symbol  CC,  then  the  symbol  DD,  at  the  front  of  the  STM.  The  initial 
contents  of  STM  are. 


STM:  <QQ  (EE  FF)  RR  XX  SS) 

This  STM  is  assumed  to  have  a fixed  maximum  capacity  of  five  elements.  As  new  elements  are 
inserted  at  the  beginning  (left)  of  the  STM,  therefore,  other  elements  will  be  lost  (forgotten)  off  the 
right  end.  Second,  as  illustrated  below,  for  this  system  elements  accessed  in  matching  the  condition  of 
a rule  are  'refreshed'  (pulled  to  the  front  of  STM),  rather  than  replaced. 

The  production  system  then  scans  the  productions  in  order:  PDl,  then  PD2.  Only  PD2 
matches,  so  it  is  evoked.  The  con  ten  a of  STM  after  this  step  are: 


5 


me  pmhctiw  mm 


STM:  <00  CC  XX  QQ  (EE  FTn) 
PD1  will  match  during  the  upcoming  cycle  to  yield, 
STM:  <08  00  (EE  FF>  CC  XX) 
completing  two  cydei  of  the  syttem. 


6 


TWO  VKH9  OF  MtOWCTlON  5 WETS 


{3}  TWO  ViEWS  OF  PRODUCTION  SYSTEMS 

Throughout  much  of  the  work  reported,  there  appear  to  be  two  major  views  of  PSs,  as 
characterized  on  one  hand  by  the  psychological  modelling  efforts  (PSC,  PAS  II,  VIS,  etc),  and  on 
the  other  by  the  performance  oriented,  knowledge-based  expert  systems  (?.g.  MYCIN,  DENDRAL). 
These  appear  to  be  two  distinct  efforts  which  have  arrived  at  similar  methodologies  while  pursuing 
differing  goals. 

The  efforts  tc  simulate  human  performance  on  simple  tasks  are  aimed  at  creation  of  a 
program  which  embodies  a theory  of  that  oehavior.  From  the  performance  record  of  experimental 
subjects  the  modeller  attempts  to  formulate  the  minimally  competent  set  of  production  rules,  the 
smallest  set  still  able  to  reproduce  the  behavior.  Note  that  'behavior'  here  is  meant  to  include  all 
aspects  of  human  performance  (including  mistakes,  the  effects  of  forgetting,  etc.),  all  shortcomings  or 
successes  which  may  arise  out  of  (and  hence  may  be  dues  to)  the  ‘architecture’  of  human  cognitive 
systems  [43- 

An  example  of  this  approach  is  the  PSC  system,  from  which  we  constructed  the  example 
above.  This  system  has  been  used  to  test  a number  of  theo’ies  to  explain  the  results  of  the  Sternberg 
memory  scanning  tasks  (Newell  19731,  with  each  set  of  productions  representing  a different  theory  of 
how  the  human  subject  retains  and  recalls  the  information  given  to  him  during  the  psychological 
task.  Here  the  subject  first  memorizes  a small  subset  of  a class  of  familiar  symbols  (e.g.  digits),  and 
then  attempts  to  respond  to  a symbol  flashed  on  a screen  by  indicating  whether  or  not  it  was  in  the 
initial  set.  His  response  rimes  are  noted. 

The  task  was  first  simulated  with  a simple  production  system  that  performed  correctly,  but  did 
not  account  for  timing  variations  (which  were  due  to  list  length  and  other  factors).  Refinements  were 
then  developed  to  incorporate  new  hypotheses  aJout  how  the  symbols  were  brought  Into  memory, 
and  eventually  a good  simulation  was  built  arouno  a small  number  of  productions. 

Newell  has  reported  [1973]  that  use  of  a production  system  methodology  led  in  this  case  to  a 
novel  hypothesis  that  certain  timing  effects  are  caused  by  a decoding  process  rather  than  a search 
process,  and  that  it  also  clearly  illustrated  the  possible  tradeoffs  in  speed  and  accuracy  between 
differing  processing  strategies.  As  such  it  was  an  effective  vehicle  for  the  expression  and  evaluation 
of  theories  of  be  I-  svior. 

The  performance-oriented  expert  systems,  on  the  other  hand,  start  with  productions  as  a 
representation  of  knowledge  about  a task  or  domain,  and  attempt  to  build  a program  which  displays 
competent  behavior  in  that  domain.  These  efforts  are  not  concerned  with  similarities  between  the 
resulting  systetns  and  human  performance  (except  insofar  as  the  latter  may  provide  a possible  hint 
about  ways  to  structure  the  domain  or  to  approach  the  problem,  or  as  a yardstick  for  success,  since 
few  A I programs  approach  human  levels  of  competence).  They  are  intended  simply  to  perform  the 
task  without  errors  of  any  sort,  human-like  or  otherwise. 

The  approach  is  characterized  by  the  DENDP.AL  system,  in  which  much  of  the  development 
has  involved  embedding  a chemist's  knowledge  about  mass  spectrometry  into  rules  usable  by  the 


7 


TUO  VIEW  OF  PftOMCTIOM  SYSTEM 


program,  without  attempting  to  model  the  chemist's  thinking.  The  program's  knowledge  is  extended 
by  adding  rules  that  apply  to  new  classes  of  chemical  compounds.  Similarly,  much  of  the  work  on 
the  MYCIN  system  has  involved  crystallizing  informal  knowledge  of  clinical  medicine  in  a set  of 
production  rules. 

Despite  the  difference  in  emphasis,  both  approaches  have  been  drawn  to  PSs  as  a 
methodology.  For  the  psychological  modellers,  production  rules  offer  a clear,  formal,  and  powerful 
way  of  expressing  basic  symbol  processing  acts,  which  form  the  primitives  of  ii. formation  processing 
psychology  [5].  For  the  c*  signer  of  knowledge  based  systems,  production  rules  offer  a representation 
of  knowledge  that  is  relatively  easily  accessed  and  modified,  making  it  quite  useful  for  systems 
designed  for  incremental  approaches  to  competence.  For  example,  much  of  the  MYCIN  system’s 
capability  for  explaining  its  actions  is  based  on  the  representation  of  knowled"e  as  individual 
production  rules  [Short!iffel9?5al  This  makes  the  knowledge  far  more  accessable  tc  the  program 
i.self  than  it  might  otherwise  be  if  it  were  embodied  in  the  form  of  ALGOL-like  procedures.  As  in 
DENDRA  L.  the  modification  and  upgrading  of  the  system  are  by  incremental  modification  of.  or 
addition  to  the  rule  set. 

Note  that  we  are  suggesting  here,  and  through  much  of  the  rest  of  the  paper,  that  it  is 
possible  to  view  a g eat  deal  of  the  work  on  PSs  in  terms  of  a unifying  formalism.  The  intent  is  to 
offer  a conceptual  structure  which  can  help  organize  what  may  appear  to  be  a disparate  collection  of 
efforts.  The  presence  of  such  a formalism  should  not,  however,  obscure  the  significant  differences 
which  arise  c of  the  various  perspectives.  As  one  example,  the  decision  to  use  RHS-driven  rules  in 
a goal-directed  fash.on  implies  a control  structure  which  is  simple  and  direct,  but  relatively 
inflexible.  This  offers  a very  different  programming  tool  than  the  LHS-driven  systems.  The  latur 
are  capable  of  much  more  complex  control  structures,  giving  them  capabilities  much  closer  to  those 
of  a complete  programming  language.  Recent  efforts,  especially,  have  begun  to  explore  the  issues  of 
more  complex,  higher  level  control  within  the  PS  methodology  (see  {5.9}). 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  production  systems  are  seen  by  some  [Newell  1972]  not  as  simply  a 
convenient  paradigm  for  approaching  psychological  modelling,  but  rather  as  a methodology  whose 
power  arises  out  of  its  close  similarity  to  fundamental  mechanisms  of  human  cognition.  In  this  view, 
human  problem  solving  behavior  can  be  modelled  easily  and  successfully  by  a production  system 
t -cause  it  in  fact  is  being  generated  by  one: 

We  confess  to  a strong  premonition  that  the  actual  organization  of  human 
programs  closely  resembles  the  production  system  organization ...  We  cannot  yet 
prove  the  correctness  of  this  judgment,  and  we  suspect  that  the  ultimate 
verification  may  depend  on  this  organization’s  proving  relatively  satisfactory  in 
many  different  small  ways,  no  one  of  them  decisive. 

In  summary,  we  do  not  think  a conclusive  case  can  be  made  yet  for  production 
systems  as  tht  appropriate  form  of  [human]  program  organization.  Many  of  the 
arguments  ...  raise  difficulties.  Nevertheless,  our  judgment  stands  that  we  should 
choose  production  systems  as  the  preferred  language  for  expressing  programs  arid 
program  organization. 

[Newell  1 972,  p 803-4,  806] 

- 8 - 


two  VIEW  «r  MOMCTIM  SfSTtRS 


Thii  hu  ltd  to  speculation  [6]  that  th«  interest  in  production  systems  on  the  part  of  those 
building  high  performance  knowledge-based  systems  is  more  than  a coincidence.  It  ts  suggested 
that  this  is  a result  of  current  research  (rediscovering  what  has  been  learned  by  naturally 
intelligent  systems  through  evolutioi  - that  structuring  knowledge  in  a production  system  format 
is  an  effective  approach  to  the  organisation,  retrieval,  and  use  of  very  large  amounts  of 
knowledge. 

The  success  of  some  production  rule  based  AI  systems  does  give  weight  to  this  argument, 
and  the  PS  methodology  is  clearly  powerful  But  whether  this  is  a result  of  its  equivalence  to 
human  cognitive  processes,  and  whether  this  implies  artificially  intelligent  systems  ought  to  be 
similarly  structured,  are,  we  feel,  still  open  questions. 


9 - 


WMOMlfcTE  MO  IMMMMtOTC  OOMIHt 


{4}  APPROPRIATE  AND  INAPPROPRIATE  DOMAINS 

Program  designers  have  found  that  PSs  easily  model  problems  in  some  domains,  but  are 
awkward  for  others.  Let  us  briefly  investigate  why  this  may  be  so,  and  relate  it  to  the  bask  structure 
and  function  of  a PS. 

We  can  imagine  two  very  different  domains  - the  first  is  best  viewed  and  understood  as 
consisting  of  many  independent  states,  while  the  second  seems  best  understood  via  a concise,  unified 
theory,  perhaps  embodied  in  a single  law.  Examples  of  the  former  include  some  views  of  perceptual 
psychology  or  clinical  medicine,  in  whkh  there  are  a large  number  of  states  relative  to  the  number 
of  actions  (this  may  be  due  either  to  our  lack  of  a cohesive  theory,  or  to  the  basic  complexity  of  the 
system  being  modelled).  Examples  of  the  latter  include  well-established  areas  of  physics  and 
mathematics,  in  which  a few  basic  tenets  serve  to  embody  much  of  the  required  knowledge,  and  in 
which  the  discovery  of  unifying  principles  has  emphasized  the  similarlities  in  seemingly  different 
states.  This  first  distinction  appears  to  be  one  important  factor  in  distinguishing  appropriate  from 
inappropriate  domains. 

A second  distinction  concerns  the  complexity  of  control  flow.  As  two  extremes,  we  can  imagine 
two  processes,  one  of  which  is  a set  of  independent  actions,  and  the  other  a complex  collection  of 
multiple,  parallel  process  involving  several  dependent  sub-processes. 

A third  distinction  concerns  the  extent  to  which  the  knowledge  to  be  embedded  in  a system 
can  be  separated  from  the  manner  in  which  it  is  to  be  used  (also  known  as  the  controversy  between 
declarative  and  procedural  representations;  see  [Winogradl975]  for  a extensive  discussion).  As  one 
example,  we  can  imagine  simply  stating  facts,  perhaps  in  a language  like  predicate  calculus.  This 
makes  no  assumptions  about  the  way  those  facts  will  be  employed.  Alternatively,  we  could  write 
procedural  descriptions  of  how  to  accomplish  a stated  goal.  Here  the  use  of  the  knowledge  is  for  the 
most  part  predetermined  during  the  process  of  embodying  it  in  this  representation. 

In  all  three  of  these  distinctions,  a PS  is  well  suited  to  the  first  description  and  ill  suited  to  the 
latter.  The  existence  of  multiple,  non-trivially  different,  independent  states  is  an  indication  of  the 
feasibility  of  writing  multiple,  nontrivial,  modular  rules.  A process  composed  of  a set  of  independent 
actions  requires  only  limited  communication  between  the  actions,  and,  as  we  shall  see,  this  is  an 
important  characteristic  of  PSs.  The  ability  to  state  what  knowledge  ought  to  be  in  the  system 
without  also  describing  its  use  makes  an  important  difference  in  the  ease  with  which  a PS  can  be 
written  (see  {5.9}) 

For  the  latter  description  (unified  theory,  complex  control  flow,  predetermined  use  for  the 
knowledge),  the  economy  of  the  basic  theory  makes  for  either  trivial  rules,  or  multiple,  almost 
redundant  rules.  In  addition,  a complex  looping  and  branching  process  requires  explicit 
communication  between  actions,  in  which  one  explicitly  invokes  the  next,  while  interacting  subgoals 
require  a similary  advanced  communication  process  to  avoid  conflict.  Such  communication  is  not 
easily  supplied  in  a PS-based  system.  The  same  difficulty  also  makes  it  hard  to  specify  in  advance 
exactly  how  a given  fact  should  be  used. 


10  - 


WmmflTE  MO  INMMOMKTE  OOflflINS 


It  seems  alio  to  be  the  nature  of  production  systems  to  focus  upon  the  variations  within  a 
domain  rather  than  upon  the  common  threads  that  link  different  facts  or  operations.  Thus  for 
example,  (as  we  shall  describe  in  more  detail  below)  the  process  of  addition  is  naturally  expressed 
via  productions  as  n^  rewrite  operations  involving  two  symbols  (the  digits  being  added).  The  fact 
that  addition  is  commutative,  or  rath-r,  that  there  is  a property  of  "commutativity”  shared  by  all 
operations  that  we  consider  to  be  addition,  is  a rather  awkward  one  to  express  in  production  system 
terms. 

This  same  characteristic  may,  conversely,  be  viewed  as  a capability  for  focussing  on  and 
handling  significant  amounts  of  detail  Thus,  where  the  emphasis  of  a task  is  on  recognition  of  large 
numbers  of  distinct  states,  PSs  provide  a significant  advantage.  In  a procedurally-oriented  approach, 
it  is  both  difficult  to  organize  and  troublesome  to  update  the  repeated  checking  of  large  numbers  of 
state  variables  and  the  corresponding  transfers  of  control.  The  task  is  tar  easier  in  PS  terms,  where 
each  rule  can  be  viewed  as  a demon  awaiting  the  occurrence  of  a specific  state.  [In  the  case  of  one 
current  PS  (DENDRAL),  the  initial,  procedural  approach  proved  sufficiently  inflexible  that  the 
entire  sy**em  was  rewritten  in  production  rule  terms.] 

In  addition,  we  noted  above  the  potential  sensitivity  and  reactivity  of  PSs  which  arises 
from  their  continue!  reevaluation  of  the  control  state.  This  has  also  been  referred  to  as  the 
'openness*  of  production  rule  based  systems.  It  is  characterized  by  the  principle  that  ‘any  rule  can 
tire  at  any  time’,  which  emphasizes  the  fact  that  at  any  point  in  the  computation,  any  rule  could 
possibly  be  the  next  to  be  selected,  depending  only  on  the  state  of  the  data  base  at  the  end  of  the 
current  cycle  Compare  this  to  the  normal  situation  in  a procedurally-oriented  language,  where 
such  a principle  is  manifestly  untrue:  it  is  simply  not  typically  the  case  that,  depending  the 
contents  of  that  data  base,  any  procedure  in  the  entire  program  could  potentially  be  the  nex  oe 
invoked. 

PSs  therefore  appear  to  be  useful  where  it  is  important  to  detect  and  deal  with  a large 
number  of  independent  states,  in  a system  which  requires  a broad  scope  of  attention,  and  the 
capability  of  reacting  quickly  to  small  changes.  In  addition,  where  knowledge  of  the  problem 
domain  falls  naturally  into  a sequence  of  independent  ‘recognize-act’  pairs,  PSs  offer  a convenient 
formalism  for  structuring  and  expressing  that  knowledge. 

Finally,  note  that  the  implication  is  not  that  both  approaches  couldn’t  perform  in  both 
domains,  but  that  there  are  tasks  for  which  one  of  them  would  prove  awkward,  and  the  resulting 
system  unenlightening.  Such  tasks  are  far  more  elegantly  accomplished  in  only  one  of  the  two 
methodologies.  The  main  point  is  that  we  can,  to  some  extent,  formalize  our  intuitive  notion  of 
which  approach  seems  more  appropriate  by  considering  two  essential  characteristics  of  any  PS  - its 
set  of  multiple,  independent  rules,  and  its  limited,  indirect  channel  of  interaction  via  the  data  base. 


11 


PRODUCTION  SYSTEM  CWMACTCRISTICS 


{5}  PRODUCTION  SYSTEM  CHARACTERISTICS 

Despite  the  range  of  variations  in  methodologies,  there  appear  to  be  many  characteristics 
common  to  almost  all  PSs.  It  is  the  presence  of  these,  and  their  interactions,  that  crem  ate  to  the 
‘nature’  of  a PS,  its  capabilities,  deficiencies,  and  characteristic  behavior.  This  section  is  an  attempt 
to  isolate  and  analyse  etch  of  these  factors,  discovering  the  primitive  elements  which  compose  them, 
and  providing  an  overview  of  their  interactions. 

The  network  of  Figure  . ~ a summary  of  features  and  relationships.  Each  box  represents 
some  feature,  capability,  or  pa'imetr  of  interest,  with  arrows  labelled  with  Vs  and  -’s  suggesting  the 
interactions  between  them.  This  roegh  scale  of  facilitation  and  inhibition  is  naturally  very  crude, 
but  does  indicate  the  interactions  as  we  saw  them. 

Figure  1 contains  at  least  three  conceptually  different  sorts  of  factors:  (a)  those  fundamental 
characteristics  of  the  basic  PS  scheme  (eg.  indirect/limited  channel,  constrained  format);  (b) 
secondary  effects  of  these  (eg.  automated  modification  of  behavior);  and  (c)  performance  parameters 
of  implementation  which  are  helpful  in  characterising  PS  strengths  and  weaknesses  (eg.  visibility  of 
behavior  flow,  extensibility).  This  division  ol  factors  is  suggested  by  the  three  levels  \ -tfed  in  the 
figure. 

Below  we  briefly  describe  each  feature  and  suggest  the  nature  of  its  interac  with  the 
others. 

{5.1}  INDIRECT/LIMITED  CHANNEL  OF  INTERACTION 

Perhaps  the  most  fundamental  and  significant  characteristic  a*  PSs  their  re  iction  on  the 
interactions  between  rules.  In  the  simplest  model,  a pure  PS,  we  have  a completely  ordered  set  of 
rules,  with  no  interaction  channel  ocher  than  the  data  base.  The  total  effect  of  any  rule  is 
determined  by  its  modifications  to  the  data  base,  and  hence  subsequent  rules  must  ‘read’  there  any 
traces  it  may  leave  behind.  Winograd  [1975]  characterises  this  in  discussing  global  modularity  in 
programming: 

We  can  view  production  systems  as  a programming  language  in  which  all  interaction 
is  forced  through  a very  narrow  cbanneUThe  temporal  interactions  [of  individual 
productions]  is  completely  determined  by  the  data  in  this  STM,  and  a uniform 
ordering  regime  for  deciding  which  productions  will  be  activated  in  cases  where 
more  than  one  might  apply....  Of  course  it  is  possible  to  use  the  STM  to  pass 
arbitrarily  complex  message  which  embody  any  degree  of  interaction  we  want  But 
the  spirit  of  the  venture  is  very  much  opposed  to  this,  and  the  formalism  is 
interesting  to  the  degree  that  complex  processes  can  be  described  without  resort  to 
such  kludgery,  maintaining  the  clear  modularity  between  the  pieces  of  knowledge  and 
the  global  process  which  uses  them. 

While  this  characterisation  is  clearly  true  for  a pure  PS,  with  its  limitations  on  the  rise  of 
STM,  we  can  generalize  on  it  slightly  to  deal  with  a broader  class  of  systems.  First,  in  ihe  more 


12  - 


MONCTION  SYlTCfl  CMMCTtltlSTICS 

general  case,  the  channel  Is  not  to  much  narrow  as  indirect  and  unique.  Second,  the  kludgery  arises 
not  from  arbitrarily  complex  messages,  but  from  specially  crafted  messages  which  force  highly 
specific,  carefully  chosen  interactions. 

With  reference  to  the  first  point,  one  of  the  most  fundamental  characteristics  of  the  pure  PS 
organization  is  that  rules  must  interact  indirectly  through  a tingle  channel.  Indirection  implies  that 
all  interaction  must  occur  by  the  effect  of  modifications  written  in  the  data  base,  uniqueness  of  the 
channel  implies  that  these  modifications  are  accessible  to  every  one  of  the  rules.  Thus,  to  produce  a 
system  with  a specified  behavior,  one  must  think  not  in  the  usual  terms  of  having  one  section  of 
code  call  another  explicitly,  but  rather  use  an  indirect  approach  in  which  each  piece  of  code  (i.e. 
each  rule)  leaves  behind  the  proper  traces  to  trigger  the  next  relevant  piece.  The  uniform  access  to 
the  channel,  along  with  the  openness  of  PSs,  implies  that  those  traces  must  be  constructed  in  the 
light  of  a potential  response  from  any  rule  in  the  system.  It  is  in  some  sense  like  a difficult  case  of 
programming  purely  by  side  effects. 

With  reference  to  the  second  point,  in  many  systems  the  action  of  a single  rule  may,  quite 
legitimately,  result  in  the  addition  of  very  complex  structures  to  the  data  base  (e.g.  DENDRAL,  see 
Taxonomy,  {6.1}).  Yet  another  rule  in  the  same  system  may  deposit  just  one  carefully  selected  symbol, 
chosen  solely  because  it  will  serve  as  an  unmistakable  'ymbol  to  precisely  one  other  (carefully 
preselected)  rule.  Choosing  the  symbol  carefully  provides  a way  of  sending  what  becomes  a private 
message  through  a public  channel;  the  continual  reevaluation  of  the  control  state  assures  that  the 
message  can  take  immediate  effect.  The  result  is  that  one  rule  has  effectively  called  another, 
procedure  style,  and  this  is  the  variety  of  kludgery  which  is  contrary  to  the  style  of  knowledge 
organization  typically  associated  with  a PS.  We  argue  below  (see  {5.5})  that  it  is.  in  particuar,  the 
premeditated  nature  of  such  message  passing  (typically  in  an  attempt  to  'produce  a system  with 
specified  behavior’)  which  is  the  primary  violation  of  the  spirit  of  PS  methodology. 

The  primary  effect  of  this  indirect,  limited  interaction  is  to  produce  a system  which  is  strongly 
modular,  since  no  rule  is  ever  called  directly.  It  is  also,  however,  perhaps  the  most  significant  factor 
in  making  the  behavior  flow  of  a PS  more  difficult  to  analyze.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that,  even  for 
very  simple  tasks,  overall  behavior  of  a PS  may  not  be  at  all  evident  from  a simple  review  of  its 
rules. 

To  illustrate  many  of  these  issues,  consider  the  algorithm  for  addition  of  positive,  single  digit 
integers  used  by  Waterman  [1974]  with  his  PAS  II  production  system  interpreter.  First,  the 
procedural  version  of  the  algorithm,  in  which  transfe.  of  control  is  direct  and  simple; 

add(m,n) 

count  «-  0;  nn  +-  nj 
LI:  if  count  - m then  roturn(nn); 
count  «-  succesaor(count); 
nn  <-  successor  nn); 
go(Ll)i 


A] 

B] 

C] 

D] 

E] 


- 14  - 


M0WCT1M  ItS TUI  CMMMCTiKIITICt 


Compare  this  with  the  set  of  productions  for  the  same  task,  in  Figure  2 (the  notation  may  be 
somewhat  unfamiliar,  we  have  provided  a brief  explanation).  The  two  are  not  precisely  analogous, 
since  the  procedural  version  does  simple  addition,  while  the  production  set  boths  adds  and  "learns" 
(see  note  [7]  and  the  comments  in  Figure  2).  The  example  is  still  quite  illustrative,  however,  and 
Waterman  points  out  some  direct  correspondences  between  productions  and  statements  in  the 
procedure.  For  example,  productions  I and  2 accomplish  the  initialization  of  Itne  A,  rule  9 
corresponds  to  line  B,  and  rule  4 to  lines  C and  D.  There  is  no  production  equivalent  to  the  goto  of 
line  £ because  the  production  system  execution  cycle  takes  care  of  that  Implicitly.  On  the  other  hand, 
note  that  in  the  procedure,  there  is  no  question  whatsoever  that  the  initialization  step  nn  ♦*  n is  the 
second  statement  of  "add",  and  that  it  is  to  be  executed  just  once,  at  the  beginning  of  the  procedure. 
In  the  productions,  the  same  action  is  predicated  on  an  unintuitive  condition  of  the  STM  (essentially 
it  says  if  the  value  of  n is  known,  but  nn  has  never  been  referenced  or  incremented,  then  initialize 
nn  to  the  value  that  n has  at  that  time).  This  degree  of  explicitness  is  necessary  because  the 
production  system  has  no  notion  that  the  initialization  step  has  already  been  performed  in  the  given 
ordering  of  statements,  so  the  system  must  check  the  conditions  each  time  it  goes  through  a new 
cycle. 

Thus,  procedural  languages  are  oriented  toward  the  explicit  handling  of  control  flow  and 
stress  the  importance  of  its  influence  on  the  fundamental  organization  of  the  program  (as,  for 
example,  in  recent  developments  in  structured  programming).  PSs,  cn  the  other  hand,  emphasize  the 
statement  of  independent  chunks  of  knowledge  from  a domain,  and  make  control  flow  a secondary 
issue.  Given,  moreover,  the  limited  form  of  communication  available,  it  is  more  difficult  to  express 
concepts  which  require  structures  larger  than  a single  rule.  Thus,  where  the  emphasis  is  on  global 
behavior  of  a system  rather  than  the  expression  of  small  chunks  of  knowledge,  PSs  are,  in  general, 
going  to  be  less  transparent  than  formulations  of  equivalent  routines  in  procedural  terms. 


15 


MCWCT1M  iriTtfl  CMMCTtMSTICS 


CONDITIONS 

1]  (READY)  (ORDER  XI) 

2]  (N  Xi)  - (NN)  - (SNN) 

3]  (COUNT  XI)  (M  XI)  (NN  X2)  (N  X3) 


Mim. 

->  (REF  (READY)  (CO1  “T  Xl)> 

(ATTEND) 

->  (DEP  (NN  XI)) 

->  (SAY  X2  IS  THE  ANSWER) 

(COND  (M  XI)  (N  X3)) 

(ACTION  (STOP)) 

(ACTION  (SAY  X2  IS  THE  ANSWER)) 

(PROO 

(STOP) 


i 

i 

t 

t 

i 

i 


4] 

(COUNT)  (NN) 

->  (REP  (COUNT)  (S  COUNT)) 

(REP  (NN)  (S  NN)) 

5] 

(OROER  XI  X2) 

->  (REP  (XI  X2)  (X2)) 

(COND  (S  X3  XI)) 

(ACTION  (REP  (S  X3  XI)  (X3  X2))) 
(PROD) 

initial  STM:  (READY)  (OROER  012345678  9) 

i 

i 

i 


notation: 

The  Xi’s  in  the  CONDITION  are  variables  in  the  pattern  match,  all  other  symbols  are  literals.  An 
Xi  appearing  only  in  the  ACTION  is  also  taken  as  a literal.  Thus  if  rule  $ is  matched  with  XI  • 4 
and  X2  - 5,  as  its  second  action  it  would  deposit  (COND  (S  X3  4))  in  STM. 

All  elements  of  the  LHS  must  be  matched  for  a match  to  succeed,  except  indicates  the 
ANDNOT  operation. 

An  expression  enclosed  in  parentheses  and  starting  with  a literal  [e.g.  (COUNT)  in  production  4] 
will  match  any  expression  in  STM  which  starts  with  the  same  literal  [eg.  (COUNT  2)1 


Figure  2a 

(after  [Waterman  19741  simplified  slightly) 


16 


M0OUCTIM  SYSTtH  CNMMCTCRISTIC* 


notation  (continued) 


REP  REPIace,  to  that,  eg.  the  RHS  of  production  1 will  replace  the  expression 

(READY)  in  the  data  base  with  the  expression  (COUNT  XI)  [where  the  variable 
X I stands  for  the  element  matched  by  the  X I in  (ORDER  X I)] 

DEP  DEPosit  symbols  at  front  of  STM 

ATTEND  wait  for  input  from  tty.  For  this  example,  typing  (M  4)(N  2)  will  have  the  system 
add  4 and  2 


SAY  output  to  tty 

(COND  ...)  shorthand  for  (DEP  (COND  ...» 

(ACTION  ..)  shorthand  for  (DEP  (ACTION  ...» 


PROD  gather  all  items  in  the  STM  of  the  form  (COND  ...)  and  put  them  together  into  a 

LHS;  gather  all  items  of  the  form  (ACTION  ...)  and  put  them  together  into  a RHS; 
removing  all  these  expressions  from  the  STM.  Form  a production  from  the  resulting 
LHS  and  RHS,  and  add  it  to  the  front  of  the  set  of  productions  (i.e.  before  rule  1). 
[see  note  [1 1]  for  a comment  on  the  importance  of  rule  order] 


comments  on  system  behavior 

The  “S"  (rules  2,  3 and  5)  is  intended  to  indicate  the  successor  function. 

After  initialization  (rules  1 and  2),  the  system  loops  around  rules  4 and  5,  incrementing  N by  1 
for  M interations.  In  this  loop,  intermediate  calculations  (the  results  of  successor  function 
computations)  are  saved  via  the  (PROD)  In  rule  5,  and  the  final  answer  is  saved  by  the  (PROD)  in 
rule  3.  Thus,  after  computing  4*2,  the  rule  set  will  contain  the  additional  rules: 

(S  X3  0)  ->  (REP  (S  X3  0)  (X3  1)) 

(S  X3  1)  ->  (REP  (S  X3  1)  (X3  2)) 

(M  4)  (N  2)  ->  (SAY  6 IS  THE  ANSWER)  (STOP) 

The  system  is  thus  recording  it*  intermediate  and  final  results  by  writing  new  productions,  and  in 
the  future  will  have  these  answers  available  a single  step.  Note  that  the  set  of  productions  therefore 
is  memory  (and  in  fact  long  term  memory,  LTM,  since  productions  are  never  lost  from  the  set). 


Figure  2b 


17  - 


M0OUCTION  SVtTCn  CMMCTttlSTlCS 


{5.2}  CONSTRAINED  FORMAT 

While  there  are  wide  variations  in  the  format  permitted  by  various  PSs,  in  any  given 
systerr>  the  syntax  is  traditionally  quite  restrictive,  and  generally  follows  the  conventions  accepted 
for  PSs  [8].  Mott  commonly  this  means,  first,  that  the  side  of  the  rule  to  be  matched  should  be  a 
simple  predicate  built  out  of  a Boolean  combination  of  computationally  primitive  operations, 
which  involve  (as  noted  above)  only  matching  and  detection.  Second,  it  means  the  side  of  the  rule 
to  be  executed  should  perform  conceptually  simple  operations  on  the  data  base.  In  many  of  the 
systems  oriented  toward  psychological  modelling,  the  side  to  be  matched  consists  of  a set  of  literals 
o.  simple  patterns,  with  the  understanding  that  the  set  is  to  be  taken  as  a conjunction,  so  that  the 
predicate  is  an  implicit  one  regarding  the  success  or  failure  of  matching  all  of  the  elements. 
Similarly,  the  side  to  be  executed  performs  a simple  symbol  replacement  or  rearrangement 

Whatever  the  format  though,  the  conventions  noted  lead  to  clear  restrictions  for  a pure 
production  system.*  First,  as  a predicate,  the  matching  side  of  a rule  should  reb.m  only  some 
indication  of  the  success  or  failure  of  the  match  (white  binding  individual  variables  or  segments 
in  the  process  of  pattern  matching  is  quite  often  used,  it  would  be  considered  inappropriate  to 
have  the  matching  process  produce  a complex  dat*  structure  intended  for  processing  by  another 
part  of  the  system).  Second,  as  a simple  expression,  the  matching  operation  is  precluded  from 
using  more  complex  control  structures  like  iteration  or  recursion  within  the  expression  itself  (such 
operations  can  be  constructed  from  multiple  rules,  however).  Finally,  as  a matching  and  detection 
operation,  it  must  only  'observe'  the  state  of  the  data  base,  and  not  change  it  in  the  operation  of 
testing  it. 

We  can  characterize  a continuum  of  possibilities  for  the  side  of  the  rule  to  be  executed. 
There  might  be  a single  primitive  action,  a simple  collection  of  independent  actions,  a carefully 
ordered  sequence  of  actions,  or  yet  more  complex  control  structures.  We  suggest  that  there  is*  two 
related  forms  of  simplicity  which  are  important  here.  First,  each  action  to  be  performed  should  be 
one  which  is  a conceptual  primtive  for  the  domain.  In  the  DENDRAL  system,  for  example,  it  is 
appropriate  to  use  chemical  bond  breaking  as  the  primitive,  rather  than  describing  the  process  at 
some  lower  level.  Second,  the  complexity  of  control  flow  for  the  execution  of  these  primitives 
should  be  limited  - in  a 'pure'  production  system,  for  example,  we  might  be  wary  of  a complex 
set  of  actions  that  is,  in  effect,  a small  program  of  its  own.  Again,  it  shouk;  be  noted  that  the 
system  designer  may  of  course  follow  or  disregard  these  restrictions.  The  result,  however,  will 
conform  to  the  traditional  PS  architecture  to  the  extent  that  they  are  met. 

These  constraints  on  form  make  the  dissection  and  'understanding'  of  productions  by  other 
parts  of  the  program  a more  straightforward  task,  strongly  enhancing  the  possibility  of  having  the 
program  itself  read,  and/or  modify  (rewrite)  its  own  productions  [91  Expressability  suffers, 
however,  since  the  limited  syntax  may  not  be  sufficiently  powerful  to  make  expressing  each  piece 
of  knowledge  an  easy  task.  This  in  turn  both  restricts  extensibility  (adding  something  is  difficult  if 
it's  hard  to  express  it),  and  makes  modification  of  the  system’s  behavior  more  difficult  (e.g.  it 
might  not  be  particularly  attractive  to  implement  a desired  iteration  if  it  requires  several  rules 
rather  than  a line  or  two  of  code). 


18  - 


MOOUCTION  SVSTCH  CHMWCTERISTICS 


{5.3}  RULES  AS  PRIMITIVE  ACTIONS 

In  a 'pure*  PS,  the  smallest  unit  of  behavior  is  a rule  invocation,  which,  at  its  simplest, 
involves  the  matching  of  literals  on  the  LHS,  followed  by  replacement  of  those  symbols  in  the 
data  base  with  the  ones  found  on  the  RHS.  While  the  variation',  can  be  more  complex,  it  is  in 
some  sense  a violation  of  the  spirit  of  things  to  have  eg.  a sequence  of  actions  in  the  RHS. 

Moran  [1973b],  for  example,  acknowledges  a deviation  from  the  spirit  of  production 
systems  in  his  VIS,  when  he  groups  rules  in  "procedures'  within  which  the  rules  are  totally 
ordered  for  the  purpose  of  conflict  resolution.  He  sees  several  advantages  in  this  departure:  it  is 
"natural"  for  the  user  (a  builder  of  psychological  models)  to  write  rules  as  a group  working  toward 
a single  goal.  This  grouping  restricts  the  context  of  the  rules.  It  also  helps  minimize  the  problem 
of  implicit  context:  when  rules  are  ordered,  a rule  which  occurs  later  in  the  list  may  really  be 
applicable  only  if  some  of  the  conditions  checked  by  earlier  rules  are  untrue.  This  dependency, 
referred  to  as  implicit  context,  is  often  not  made  explicit  in  the  rule,  but  may  be  critical  to  system 
performance.  The  price  paid  for  these  advantages  is  twofold:  first,  extra  rules,  leu  directly 
attributable  to  psychological  processes,  are  needed  to  switch  among  procedures;  second,  it  violates 
the  basic  production  system  tenet  that  any  rule  should  (in  principle)  be  able  to  fire  at  any  time  - 
here  only  those  in  the  currently  active  procedure  can  fire. 

To  the  extent  that  the  pure  production  system  restrictions  are  met,  we  can  consider  rules  as 
the  quanta  of  intelligent  behavior  in  the  system.  Otherwise,  as  in  the  VIS,  svstem,  we  must  look  at 
larger  aggregations  of  rules  to  trace  behavior.  In  doing  so  we  lose  some  of  the  ability  to  quantify 
and  measure  behavior,  as  is  done,  for  example,  with  the  PSG  system  simulation  of  the  Sternberg 
task,  where  response  times  are  attributed  to  individual  production  rules,  and  then  compared 
against  actual  psychological  data. 

A different  sort  of  deviation  is  found  in  the  DENDRAL  system,  and  in  a few  MYCIN 
rules.  In  both,  the  RHS  is  effectively  a small  program,  carrying  out  complex  sequences  of  actions. 
In  this  case,  the  quanta  of  behavior  are  the  individual  actions  of  these  programs,  and 
understanding  the  system  thus  requires  familiarity  with  them. 

By  embodying  these  bits  of  behavior  in  a stylized  format,  it  becomes  possible  for  the 
system  to  'read*  them  to  its  users  (as  is  done  in  MYCIN,  see  [Shortliffel975a]  and  note  [9]),  and 
hence  provide  some  explanation  of  its  behavior,  at  least  at  this  level.  This  prohibition  against 
complex  behaviors  within  a rule,  however,  may  force  us  to  implement  what  are  (conceptually) 
simple  control  structures  by  using  the  combined  effects  of  several  rules.  This  of  course  may  make 
overall  behavior  of  the  system  much  more  opaque  [see  Visibility,  {5.5}  below]. 


i 


i 


j 

I 

i 

\ 


- 19  - 


A 


FMOUCTIM  SVSTEn  CNMMCTIItltriCS 


{5.4}  MODULARITY 

W«  can  regard  the  modularity  of  a program  as  the  degree  of  separation  of  its  functional 
units  into  isotatabte  pieces.  A program  is  highly  modular  if  any  functional  unit  cm  be  changed 
(added,  ^ or  replaced)  with  no  unanticipated  change  to  other  functional  units.  Thus  program 
modularity  is  inversely  related  to  the  strength  of  coupling  between  its  functional  units. 

The  modularity  of  programs  written  as  pure  production  systems  arises  from  the  important  fact 
that  the  next  rule  to  be  invoked  is  determined  solely  by  the  contents  of  the  data  base,  and  no  rule  is 
ever  called  directly.  Thus  the  addition  (or  deletion)  of  a rule  does  not  require  the  modification  of 
any  other  rule  to  provide  for  (delete)  a cal)  to  it  We  might  demonstrate  this  by  repeatedly  removing 
rules  from  a PS:  many  systems  will  continue  to  display  some  sort  of  "reasonable”  behavior,  up  to  a 
point  [1 01  By  contrast,  adding  a procedure  to  an  ALGOL-like  program  requires  modification  of 
other  parts  of  the  code  to  insure  that  it  is  invoked,  while  removing  an  arbitrary  procedure  from 
such  a program  will  generally  cripple  it 

Note  that  the  issue  here  is  more  than  simply  the  'undefined  function'  error  message  which 
would  result  from  a missing  procedure.  The  problem  persists  even  if  the  compiler  or  interpreter  were 
altered  to  treat  undefined  functions  as  no-ops.  The  issue  is  a much  more  fundamental  one 
concerning  organization  of  knowledge:  programs  written  in  procedure-oriented  languages  stress  the 
kind  of  explicit  passing  of  control  from  one  section  of  code  to  another  that  is  characterized  by  the 
calling  of  procedures.  This  is  typically  done  at  a selected  time  and  in  a particular  context,  both 
carefully  chosen  by  the  programmer.  If  a no-op  is  substituted  for  a missing  procedure,  the  context 
upon  returning  will  not  be  what  the  programmer  expected,  and  subsequent  procedure  calls  will  be 
executed  in  increasingly  incorrect  environments.  Similarly,  procedures  which  have  been  added  must 
be  called  from  somwhrrt  in  the  program,  but  the  location  of  the  call  must  be  chosen  carefully  if  the 
effect  is  to  be  meaningful. 

Production  systems,  on  the  other  hand,  especially  in  their  pure  form,  emphasize  the 
decoupling  of  control  flow  from  the  writing  of  rules.  Each  rule  is  designed  to  be.  ideally,  an 
independent  chunk  of  knowledge  with  its  own  statement  of  relevance  (either  the  conditions  of  the 
LHS,  as  in  a data-driven  system,  ur  the  action  of  the  RHS,  as  in  a goal-directed  system).  Thus  where 
the  ALGOL  programmer  carefully  chooses  the  order  of  procedure  calls  to  create  a selected  sequence 
of  environments,  in  a production  system  it  is  the  environment  which  chooses  the  next  rule  for 
execution.  And  since  a rule  can  only  be  chosen  if  its  criteria  of  relevance  have  been  met,  the  choice 
will  continue  to  be  a plausible  one,  and  system  behavior  remain  "reasonable",  even  as  rules  are 
successively  deleted. 

This  inherent  modularity  of  pure  production  systems  eases  the  task  of  programming  in  them. 
Given  some  primitive  action  that  the  system  fails  to  perform,  it  becomes  a matter  of  writing  a rule 
whose  LHS  matches  the  relevant  indicators  In  the  data  base,  and  whose  RHS  performs  the  action. 
Where  the  task  is  then  complete  for  a pure  PS,  systems  which  vary  from  this  design  have  the 
additional  task  of  assuring  proper  invocation  of  the  rule  (not  unlike  assuring  the  proper  call  of  a 
new  procedure).  The  difficulty  of  this  varies  from  trivial  in  the  case  of  systems  with  goal  oriented 
behavior  (like  MYC1N),  t;  substantial  in  systems  that  use  more  complex  LHS  scans  and  conflict 


20  - 


PRODUCTION  OYSTER  CNMMCTCRISTICI 


resolution  strategies. 

For  systems  using  the  goal-oriented  approach,  rule  order  is  usually  unimportant.  Insertion  of  a 
new  rule  is  thus  simple,  and  can  often  be  totally  automated.  This  is  of  course  a distinct  advantage 
where  the  rule  set  is  large,  and  the  problems  of  system  complexity  are  significant. 

For  others  (like  PSG  and  PASII)  rule  order  can  be  critical  to  performance  and  hence 
requires  careful  attention.  This  can,  however,  be  viewed  as  an  advantage,  and  indeed,  Newell 
[1973]  tests  different  theories  of  behavior  by  the  simple  expedient  of  changing  the  order  of  rules. 
The  family  of  Sternberg  task  simulators  there  includes  a number  of  production  systems  which 
differ  only  by  the  interchange  of  two  rules,  yet  display  very  different  behavior.  Waterman’s  system 
[1974]  accomplishes  ’adaptation’  by  the  simple  heuristic  of  placing  a new  rule  immediately  before 
a rule  that  causes  an  an  error  [111 

{5.5}  VISIBILITY  OF  BEHAVIOR  FLOW 

Visibility  of  behavior  flow  is  the  ease  with  which  the  overall  behavior  of  a PS  can  be 
understood,  either  by  observing  the  system,  or  by  reviewing  its  rule  base.  Even  for  conceptually 
simple  tasks,  the  stepwise  behavior  of  a PS  is  often  rather  opaque.  The  poor  visibility  of  PS 
behavior  compared  to  that  of  the  procedutal  formalism  is  illustrated  by  the  Waterman  arithmetic 
example.  The  procedural  version  of  the  iterative  loop  there  is  reasonably  clear  (lines  B,C  and  E), 
and  an  ALGOL-type  FOR  I:»!  UNTIL  N DO...  would  be  completely  obvious.  Yet  the  PS 
formalism  for  the  same  thing  requires  non-intuitive  productions  (like  1 and  2),  and  symbols  like 
NN  whose  only  purpose  is  to  “mask"  the  condition  portion  of  a rule  so  it  will  not  be  invoked  later 
(such  symbols  are  termed  control  tlmtnts  [Anderson  1 97$ J). 

The  requirement  for  control  elements  and  much  of  the  opacity  of  PS  behavior  is  a direct 
result  of  two  f actors  noted  above:  the  unity  of  control  and  data  store,  and  the  reevaluation  of  the 
data  base  at  every  cycle.  Any  attempt  to  ’read’  a PS  requires  keeping  in  mind  the  entire  contents  of 
the  data  base,  and  scanning  the  entire  rule  set  at  every  cycle.  Control  is  much  more  explicit  and 
localized  in  procedural  languages,  so  that  reading  ALGOL  code  is  a far  easier  task  (Indeed,  one  of 
the  motivations  for  the  the  current  interest  in  structured  programming  is  the  attempt  to  emphasize 
still  further  the  degree  of  explicitness  and  localization  of  control). 

The  perspective  on  knowledge  representation  suggested  by  PSs  also  contributes  ’o  this  opacity. 
As  suggested  above,  PSs  are  appropriate  when  it  is  possible  to  specify  the  content  of  required 
knowledge,  without  also  specifying  the  way  in  which  it  is  to  be  used.  Thus,  reading  a PS  does  not 
generally  make  clear  how  it  works,  so  much  as  what  it  may  know,  and  the  behavior  is  consequently 
obscured.  The  situation  is  often  reversed  in  procedural  languages  - program  behavior  may  <.e 
reasonably  clear,  but  the  domain  knowledge  used  is  often  opaquely  embedded  in  the  procedures. 
The  two  methodologies  thus  emphasize  different  aspects  of  knowledge  and  program  organization. 


PRODUCTION  IVSTCN  CMRRCTCRUTICS 


{5.6}  MACHINE  READABLE 

Several  interesting  capabilities  arise  from  making  it  possible  for  the  system  to  examine  its 
own  rules.  As  one  example,  it  becomes  possible  to  implement  automatic  consistency  checking.  This 
can  proceed  at  several  levels:  in  the  simplest  approach  we  can  search  for  straightforward  'syntactic' 
problems  such  as  contradictions  (e.g.  2 rule*  of  the  form  A a B -»  C and  A a B -*  -»0,  or 
subsumption  (e.g.  D a E a F -*  G,  D a F -*  G).  A more  sophisticated  approach,  which  would 
require  entensive  domain-specific  knowledge,  might  be  able  to  detect  'semantic'  problems,  as  for 
example  a rule  of  the  form  AaB-*C,  when  it  is  known  from  the  meaning  of  A and  B that  A •+ 
A.  Many  other  (domain  specific)  tests  may  also  be  possible.  The  point  is  that  by  automating  the 
process,  extensive  (perhaps  exhaustive)  checks  of  newly  added  productions  are  possible  (and  could 
perhaps  be  run  in  background  mode  when  the  system  is  otherwise  idle). 

A second  sort  of  capability  is  described  in  detail  in  note  [9],  and  deals  with  the  MYCIN 
system’s  approach  to  examining  its  rules.  This  is  used  in  several  ways  [Davis  1976],  and  produces 
both  a more  efficient  control  structure,  and  precise  explanations  of  system  behavior. 

{5.7}  EXPLANATION  OF  PRIMITIVE  ACTIONS 

Production  system  rules  are  intended  to  be  modular  chunks  of  knowledge  and  to  represent 
primitive  actions.  Thus,  explaining  primitive  acts  should  be  as  simple  as  stating  the  corresponding 
rule  - all  necessary  contextual  information  should  be  included  in  the  rule  itself.  Achieving  such 
clear  explanations,  however,  evidently  strongly  depends  upon  the  extent  to  which  the  assumptions  of 
modularity  and  explicit  context  are  met.  In  the  case  where  stating  a rule  does  provide  a clear 
explanation,  the  task  of  modification  of  program  behavior  becomes  easier. 

As  an  example,  the  MYCIN  system  often  successfully  uses  rules  to  explain  its  behavior  (see 
[Davisl975]  and  [Shortliffe  1975a]  for  examples).  This  form  of  explanation  fails,  however,  when 
considerations  of  system  pe:  fcrmance  or  human  engineering  lead  to  rules  whose  context  is  obscure. 
One  rule,  for  example,  says  in  effect,  "If  A seems  to  be  true,  and  B seems  to  be  true,  then  that’s 
(more)  evidence  in  favor  of  A".  It  is  phrased  this  way  rather  than  simply  "if  B seems  true,  ,hat's 
evidence  in  favor  of  A",  because  B is  a very  rare  condition,  and  it  appears  counterintuitive  to  ask 
about  it  unless  you  suspect  A to  begin  with.  The  first  clause  of  the  rule  is  thus  acting  as  a strategic 
filter,  to  insure  that  the  rule  is  not  even  tried  unless  it  has  a reasonable  chance  of  succeeding.  System 
performance  has  been  improved  (especially  as  regards  human  engineering  considerations),  at  the  cost 
of  a somewhat  more  opaque  rule. 

{5.8}  MODIFIABILITY,  CONSISTENCY,  RULE  SELECTION  MECHANISM 

As  noted  above,  the  tightly  constrained  formal  of  rules  makes  it  possible  for  the  system  to 
examine  its  own  rule  base,  with  the  possibility  of  modifying  it  in  response  to  requests  from  the  user, 
or  to  insure  consistency  with  respect  to  newly  added  rules.  While  all  these  are  conceivable  in  a 
system  using  a standard  procedural  approach,  it  is  the  heavily  stylized  format  of  rules  and  the 
typically  simple  control  structure  of  the  interpreters  that  makes  them  all  realizable  prospects  in  a PS. 
Finally,  the  relative  complexity  of  the  rule  selection  mechanism  will  have  varying  effects  on 


22  - 


MMUCTION  mm  CNMMCTCtllTICt 


th«  ability  to  automate  consistency  checks,  or  behavior  modification  and  extension.  A RHS  scan 
with  backward  chaining  seems  to  be  the  easiest  to  follow  since  it  mimics  part  of  human  reasoning 
behavior,  while  a LHS  scan  with  a complex  conflict  resolution  strategy  makes  the  system  generally 
more  difficult  to  understand.  As  a result,  predicting  and  controlling  the  effects  of  changes  in,  or 
additions  to,  the  rule  base  are  directly  influenced  in  either  direction  by  the  choice  of  rule  selection 
method. 


{5.9}  PROGRAMMABILITY 

It  is  hard  to  Imagine  any  factor  in  this  section  which  does  not  interact  with 
programmability  (and  it  has  therefore  been  omitted  from  Figure  1).  In  our  experience,  the  answer 
to  "how  easy  is  it  to  program  in  this  formalism?"  is  "it’s  reasonably  difficult."  This  experience  is 
apparently  not  unique 

Any  structure  which  is  added  to  the  system  diminishes  the  explicitness  of  rule 
conditions....Thus  rules  acquire  implicit  conditions.  This  makes  them  (superficially) 
more  concise,  but  at  the  price  of  clarity  and  precision... Another  questionable  device 
in  most  present  production  systems  (including  mine)  is  the  use  of  tags,  markers,  and 
other  cute  conventions  for  communicating  between  rules.  Again,  this  makes  for 
conciseness,  but  it  obscures  the  meaning  of  what  is  intended.  The  consequence  of 
this  in  my  program  is  that  it  is  very  delicate:  one  little  slip  with  a tag  and  it  goes 
off  the  track.  Also,  it  is  very  difficult  to  alter  the  program;  it  takes  a lot  of  time  to 
readjust  the  signals. 

[Moran  1973a] 

One  source  of  the  difficulties  in  programming  production  systems  is  the  necessity  referred  to 
above,  of  programming  "by  side  effect."  Another  is  the  difficulty  of  using  the  PS  methodology  on 
a problem  that  cannot  be  broken  down  into  the  solution  of  independent  subproblems,  or  into  the 
synthesis  of  a behavior  which  is  neatly  decomposable. 

Several  techniques  have  been  investigated  to  deal  with  this  difficulty.  One  of  them  is  the 
use  of  ‘tags  and  markers’  (control  elements)  referred  to  above.  These  can  be  used  in  various  ways, 
and  we  have  come  to  believe  that  the  manner  in  which  they  are  used,  particularly  in  the 
psychological  modelling  systems,  can  be  an  indication  of  how  successfully  the  problem  has  been 
put  into  PS  terms. 

To  demonstrate  this,  consider  two  very  different  (and  somewhat  idealized)  approaches  to 
writing  a PS.  In  the  first,  the  programmer  writes  each  rule  independently  of  all  the  others,  simply 
attempting  to  capture  in  each  some  chunk  of  required  knowler  ge.  The  creation  of  each  rule  is 
thus  a separate  task.  Only  when  all  of  them  have  been  written  are  they  assembled,  the  data  base 
is  initialized,  and  the  behavior  produced  by  the  entire  set  of  rules  is  noted. 

As  a second  approach,  the  programmer  starts  out  with  a specific  behavior  which  he  wants 
to  recreate.  The  entire  rule  set  is  written  as  a group  with  this  in  mind,  and,  where  necessary,  one 
rule  might  deposit  a symbol  like  A00124  in  STM  solely  to  trigger  a second  specific  rule  on  the  next 
cycle. 


23  - 


^3j BKBBBBraa 


MOOUCTIOM  SYITEH  CHMRCTtZISTlCS 

In  the  first  case,  the  control  elements  would  correspond  to  recognizable  states  of  the  system.  As 
such,  they  function  as  indicators  of  those  states  and  serve  to  trigger  what  is  generally  a large  class  of 
potentially  applicable  rules  [121-  In  the  second  case  there  is  no  such  correspondence,  and  often  only  a 
single  rule  recognizes  a given  control  element.  The  idea  here  is  to  insure  the  execution  of  a specific 
sequence  of  rules,  often  because  a desired  effect  could  not  be  accomplished  in  a single  rule 
invocation. 

Such  idiosyncratic  use  of  control  elements  is  formally  equivalent  to  allowing  one  rule  to  call 
a second,  specific  rule,  and  hence  is  very  much  out  of  character  for  a PS.  To  the  extent  that  it  is 
used,  it  appears  to  us  to  be  suggestive  of  a failure  of  the  methodology  - perhaps  because  a PS 
was  ill-suited  to  the  task  to  begin  with,  or  because  the  particular  decomposition  used  for  the  task 
was  not  well  chosen.  [The  possibility  remains,  of  course,  that  a 'natural*  interpretation  of  a control 
element  will  be  forthcoming  as  the  model  develops,  and  additional  rules  which  refer  to  it  will  be 
added.  In  that  case  the  ease  of  adding  the  new  rules  arises  out  of  the  fact  that  the  technique  of 
allowing  one  rule  to  call  another  was  not  used.]  Since  one  fundamental  assumption  of  the  PS 
methodology  as  a psychological  modelling  tool  is  that  states  of  the  system  correspond  to  what  are 
at  least  plausible  (if  not  immediately  recognizable)  individual  "states  of  mind",  the  relative 
abundance  of  the  two  uses  of  control  elements  mentioned  above  can  conceivably  be  taken  as  an 
indication  of  how  successfully  the  methodology  has  been  applied. 

A second  approach  to  dealing  with  the  difficulty  of  programming  in  PSs  is  the  use  of 
increasingly  complex  forms  within  a single  rule.  Where  a 'pure'  PS  might  have  a single  action  in 
its  RHS,  many  of  the  current  psychological  modelling  systems  (PAS  II,  VIS)  have  explored  the 
•ise  of  more  complex  sequences  of  actions,  including  the  use  of  conditional  exits  from  the 
sequence. 

Finally,  one  recent  effort  [Rychenerl975]  has  investigated  the  use  of  PSs  which  are 
unconstrained  by  prior  restrio  'is  on  rule  format,  use  of  tags,  etc.  The  aim  here  is  to  employ  the 
methodology  as  a formalism  fot  explicating  knowledge  sources,  understanding  control  structures, 
and  examining  che  effectiveness  of  PSs  for  attack  ug  the  large  problems  typical  of  artificial 
intelligence.  The  productions  in  this  system  often  turn  out  to  have  a relatively  simple  format,  but 
complex  control  structures  are  built  via  carefully  orchestrated  interaction  of  rules.  This  is  done 
with  several  techniques,  including  explicit  reliance  on  both  control  elements  and  certain 
characteristics  of  the  data  base  architecture.  For  example,  iterative  loops  are  manufactured  via 
explicit  use  of  control  elements,  and  data  is  (redundantly)  re-asserted  in  order  to  make  use  of  the 
'recency'  ordering  on  rules  [the  rule  which  mentions  the  most  recently  asserted  data  item  is  chosen 
first;  see  {6.3}].  These  techniques  have  supported  the  reincarnation  into  PSs  of  a number  of 
sizable  A I programs  (e.g.  Bob  row’s  STUDENT  [Bob  row  1968]),  but,  as  the  author  notes,  "control 
tends  to  be  rather  inflexible,  failing  to  take  advantage  of  the  openness  that  seems  to  be  inherent 
in  PSs." 

This  reflects  something  of  a new  perspective  on  the  use  of  PSs.  Previous  efforts  have  used 
them  as  tools  for  analyzing  both  the  core  of  knowledge  essential  to  a given  task,  and  the  manner 
in  which  such  knowledge  is  used.  Such  efforts  relied  in  part  on  the  austerity  of  the  available 


24  - 


PttMCTION  SYSTW  OWMCTCRISTICS 


control  structure  to  keep  alt  the  knowledge  explicit  (recall  Moran's  comment  above).  The 
expectation  is  that  each  production  will  embody  a single  chunk  of  knowledge.  Even  in  the  work 
of  [Newell  19731  which  used  PSi  as  a medium  for  expressing  different  titeories  [-  different  control 
structures]  in  the  Sternberg  task,  an  important  emphasis  is  placed  on  productions  as  a model  of 
the  detailed  control  structure  of  humans.  In  fact,  'every  aspect  of  the  system”  is  assumed  to  have  a 
psychological  correlate  [Newell  1973,  pg  4721 

The  work  reported  in  [Rychener  19751  however,  after  explicitly  detailing  the  chunks  of 
knowledge  required  in  the  word  problem  domain  of  STUDENT,  notes  a many-to-many  mapping 
between  its  knowledge  chunks  and  productions.  It  alto  focusses  on  complex  control  regimes  which 
can  be  built  using  PSs.  While  still  concerned  with  knowledge  extraction  and  explication,  it  views 
PSs  more  as  an  abstract  programming  language  and  uses  them  as  a vehicle  for  exploring  control 
structures.  While  this  approach  does  offer  an  interesting  perspective  on  such  issues,  it  should  also 
be  noted  that  as  productions  and  their  interactions  grow  more  complex,  many  of  the  advantages 
associated  with  ‘traditional*  PS  architecture  may  be  lost  (as  for  example,  the  loss  of  openness  noted 
above).  The  benefits  to  be  gained  are  roughly  analogous  to  those  of  using  a higher  level 
programming  language,  while  the  finer  grain  of  the  process  being  examined  may  become  leu 
obvious,  the  power  of  the  language  permits  far  larger  scale  tasks  to  be  undertaken,  and  makes  it 
easier  to  examine  larger  scale  phenomena  tike  the  interaction  of  entire  categories  of  knowledge. 

The  use  of  PS  has  thus  grown  to  encompass  many  different  forms,  many  of  which  are  far 
more  complex  than  the  ‘pure’  PS  model  described  initially. 


- 25  - 


tkhmwmv  cnik  MMUCT2M  SYSTEM 


{6}  TAXONOMY  FOR  PRODUCTION  SYSTEMS 

In  this  section  we  suggest  four  dimensions  thing  which  to  characterize  PSs,  examine  related 
issues  for  etch,  and  indicate  the  range  of  each  dimension  as  evidenced  by  systems  currently  (or 
recently)  in  operation. 

{6.1}  Form  - how  primitive  or  complex  should  the  syntax  of  each  side  be? 

There  is  a wide  variation  in  syntax  used  by  various  systems,  and  corresponding  differences  in 
both  the  matching  Sc  detection  process,  and  the  subsequent  action  caused  by  rule  invocation.  For 
matching,  in  the  simplest  case  only  literals  are  allowed,  and  it  is  a conceptually  trivial  process 
(although  the  rule  and  data  base  may  be  so  large  that  efficiency  becomes  a consideration). 
Successively  more  complex  approaches  allow  free  variables  (Waterman's  poker  player 
[Waterman  1970]),  syntactic  classes  (as  in  some  parsing  systems),  and  increasingly  sophisticated 
capabilities  of  variable  and  segment  binding,  and  pattern  specification  (PAS  II,  VIS,  LISP70-,  for  an 
especially  thorough  discussion  of  pattern  matching  methods  in  production  systems  as  used  in  VIS, 
see  [Moran  1973a]  pp.  42-5). 

The  content  of  the  data  base  also  influences  the  question  of  form.  One  interesting  example  is 
Anderson’s  ACT  system  [Anderson  19781  whose  rules  have  node  networks  in  their  LHS.  The 
appearance  of  an  additional  piece  of  network  as  input  results  in  a "spread  of  activation"  occurring 
in  parallel  through  the  LHS  of  each  production.  The  rule  that  is  chosen  is  the  one  whose  LHS  most 
closely  matches  the  input  and  which  has  the  largest  subpiece  of  network  already  in  its  working 
memory. 

As  another  example,  the  DENDRAL  system  uses  a literal  pattern  match,  but  its  patterns  are 
graphs  representing  chemical  classes,  and  can  be  quite  complex.  Each  class  is  defined  by  a basic 
chemical  structure,  referred  to  as  a iktltton.  As  in  the  data  base,  atoms  composing  the  skeleton  are 
given  unique  numbers,  and  chemical  bonds  are  described  by  the  numbers  of  the  atoms  they  join 
[e.g.  (5  6)].  The  LHS  of  a rule  is  the  name  of  one  of  these  skeletons,  and  a side  effect  of  a successful 
match  is  the  recording  of  the  correspondence  between  atoms  in  the  skeleton  and  those  in  the 
molecule. 

The  action  parts  of  these  rules  describe  a sequence  of  actions  to  perform:  break  one  or  more 
bonds,  saving  a molecular  fragment,  and  transfer  one  or  more  hydrogen  atoms  from  one  fragment  to 
another.  An  example  of  a simple  rule  is: 


ESTROGEN  -->  (BREAK  (14  15)03  17) ) 
(HTRANS  +1  *2) 


The  LHS  here  is  the  name  of  the  graph  structure  which  describes  the  estrogen  class  of  molecules, 
white  the  RHS  indicates  the  likely  locations  for  bond  breakages  and  hydrogen  transfers  when  such 
molecules  are  subjected  to  mass  spectral  bombardment.  Note  that  while  both  sides  of  the  rule  are 

. 26  - 


TAXONOMY  FOR  PMOUCTION  SYSTEM 


relatively  complex,  they  are  written  in  term*  which  are  conceptual  primitives  in  the  domain. 

A related  issue  is  illustrated  by  the  rules  used  by  MYCIN,  where  the  LHS  consists  of  a 
Boo*ean  combination  of  standardised  predicate  functions.  Here  the  testing  of  a rule  for  relevance 
consists  of  having  the  standard  LISP  evaluator  evaluate  the  LHS,  and  all  matching  and  detection  is 
controlled  by  the  functions  themselves.  While  there  is  power  available  in  us'rtg  functions  that  is 
missing  from  a simple  pattern  match,  there  is  also  the  temptation  of  writing  one  function  to  do  what 
should  have  been  expressed  by  several  rules. 

For  example,  one  smell  task  in  MYCIN  is  to  deduce  that  certain  organisms  are  present,  even 
though  they  have  not  been  recovered  from  any  culture.  This  is  a conceptually  complex,  multi-step 
operation,  which  is  currently  handled  by  invocation  of  a single  function.  (Work  is  underway  in 
MYCIN  to  provide  a much  cleaner,  rule  based  solution,  which  will  allow  easier  access  and 
modification  of  the  knowledge  required  for  the  task). 

If  one  succumbs  often  to  the  temptation  to  write  one  function  rather  than  several  rules,  the 
result  can  be  a system  that  may  perform  the  initial  task,  but  which  loses  a great  many  of  the  other 
advantages  of  the  PS  approach.  The  problem  is  that  the  knowledge  embodied  in  these  functions  is 
unavailable  to  anything  else  in  the  system.  Where  mles  can  be  accessed  and  their  knowledge 
examined  (because  of  their  constrained  format),  chunks  of  ALGOL-like  code  are  not  nearly  as 
informative.  The  availability  of  a standardised,  well  structured  set  of  operational  primitives  can 
help  to  avoid  the  temptation  to  create  new  functions  unnecessarily. 


- 27  - 


TRXORORY  FOR  production  svsicns 


{6.2}  Content  - How  * far ’ conceptually  it  it  from  the  LHS  to  the  RHS? 

Which  conceptual  levels  of  knowledge  belong  in  rules? 

The  question  here  is  how  large  a reasoning  step  is  to  be  embodied  in  a single  rule,  and  there 
seem  to  be  two  distinct  approaches.  Systems  designed  for  psychological  modelling  (PAS  II,  PSC,  etc.), 
try  to  measure  and  compare  tasks  and  determine  required  knowledge  and  skills.  As  a result,  they  try 
to  dissect  cognition  into  its  most  primitive  terms.  While  there  is,  of  course,  a range  of  possibilities, 
from  the  simple  literal  replacement  of  PSC  to  the  more  sophisticated  abilities  of  PAS  II  to  construct 
new  productions,  rules  in  these  systems  tend  to  embody  only  the  most  basic  conceptual  steps 

Grouped  at  the  other  end  of  this  spectrum  are  the  ‘task  oriented'  systems  like  DENDRAL  and 
MYCIN,  which  are  designed  to  be  competent  at  selected  real  world  problems.  Here  the  conceptual 
primitives  are  at  a much  higher  level,  encompassing  in  a single  rule  a piece  of  reasoning  which  may 
be  based  both  on  experience  and  a highly  complex  model  of  the  domain.  For  example,  the  statement 
that  "a  gram  negative  rod  in  the  blood  is  likely  to  be  an  E.coll"  is  based  in  part  on  a knowledge  of 
physiological  systems,  and  in  part  on  clinical  experience.  Often  the  reasoning  step  is  sufficiently 
large  that  the  rule  becomes  a significant  statement  of  a fact  or  principle  in  the  domain,  and, 
especially  where  reasoning  is  not  yet  highly  formalised,  a comprehensive  collection  of  such  rules  may 
represent  a substantial  portion  of  the  knowledge  in  the  field. 

An  interesting,  related  point  of  methodology  is  the  question  of  what  kinds  of  knowledge  ought 
to  go  into  rules.  Rules  expressing  knowledge  about  the  domain  are  the  necessary  initial  step,  but 
interest  has  been  generated  lately  in  the  question  of  embodying  strategies  in  rules.  One  of  us  has 
been  actively  pursuing  this  in  the  implementation  of  mtta-ruits  in  the  MYCIN  system  [Davis  19751 
These  are  rules  about  rules,  and  contain  strategies  and  heuristics.  Thus  while  the  ordinary  rules 
contain  standard  object-level  knowledge  about  the  medical  domain,  meta-rules  contain  information 
about  rules,  and  embody  strategies  for  selecting  potentially  useful  paths  of  reasoning.  For  example,  a 
meta-rule  might  suggest  that 

if  the  patient  has  had  an  ulcer,  then  in  concluding  about  organism  identity,  rules 
which  mention  the  gastro-intestlnal  tract  are  more  likely  to  be  useful 

There  is  clearly  no  reason  to  stop  at  one  level,  however  - third  order  rules  could  be  used  to  select 

from  or  order  the  meta  rules,  by  using  information  about  how  to  select  a strategy  (and  hence 

represent  a search  through  "strategy  space")-,  fourth  order  rules  would  suggest  how  to  select  criteria 
for  choosing  a strategy,  etc. 

This  approach  appears  to  be  promising  for  several  reasons.  First,  the  expression  of  any  new 

level  of  knowledge  in  the  system  can  mean  an  increase  in  competence.  This  sort  of  strategy 

information,  moreover,  may  translate  rather  directly  into  increased  speed  (since  fewer  ruler  need  be 
tried),  or  equivalently,  no  degradation  in  speed  even  with  large  increases  in  the  number  of  rules. 
Second,  since  meta-rules  refer  to  rule  content  rather  than  rule  names,  they  automatically  take  care  of 
new  object  level  rules  that  may  be  added  to  the  system.  Third,  the  possibility  of  expressing  this 
information  in  a format  that  is  essentially  the  same  as  the  standard  one  means  a uniform  expression 
of  many  levels  of  knowledge.  This  uniformity  in  turn  means  that  the  advantages  which  arise  out  of 

- 28  - 


TMSMMV  fM  MSCUCTIM  I VI TIM 


th«  embodiment  of  my  knowledge  in  ft  production  rule  (accessibility,  and  the  possibility  of 
automated  explanations,  modifications,  and  acquisition  of  rules)  should  be  available  for  the  higher 
order  rules  as  welL 


29  - 


TMONOtlV  FOR  PRODUCTION  SYS TIRS 

{6.3}  Control  cycle  architecture  f 15] 

The  basic  control  cycle  can  be  broken  down  into  two  phases  called  recognition  and  action. 
The  recognition  phase  involves  selecting  a single  rule  for  execution,  and  can  be  further  subdivided 
into  selection  and  conflict  resolution.  In  the  selection  process,  one  or  more  potentially  applicable  rules 
are  chosen  front  the  set,  and  passed  to  the  conflict  resolution  algorithm,  which  choses  on;  of  them. 

There  are  several  approaches  to  selection,  which  can  be  categorized  by  their  rule  Kan  method. 
Most  systems  (eg.  PSC.  PASH)  use  some  variation  of  a LHS  scan,  in  which  each  LHS  is  evaluated 
in  turn.  Many  stop  Kanning  at  the  first  successful  evaluation  (eg.  PSG),  and  hence  conflict 
resolution  becomes  a trivial  step  (although  the  question  then  remains  of  where  to  start  the  Kan  on 
the  next  cycle:  start  over  at  the  first  rule,  or  continue  from  the  current  rule). 

Some  systems,  however,  collect  all  rules  whose  LHS’s  evaluate  successfully.  Conflict  resolution 
then  requires  some  criterion  for  choosing  a single  rule  from  this  set  (called  the  conflict  set).  Several 
have  been  suggested,  and  include: 

i)  rule  order  - there  is  a complete  ordering  of  all  rules  in  the  system,  and  the  rule  in 
the  conflict  set  with  the  highest  priority  is  chosen 

ii)  data  order  - elements  of  the  data  base  are  ordered,  and  that  rule  chosen  which 
matches  element(s)  in  the  data  base  with  highest  priority 

iii)  generality  order  - the  most  specific  rule  is  chosen 

iv)  rule  precedence  - a precedence  network  (perhaps  containing  cycles)  determines  the 
hierarchy 

v)  recency  order  - choosing  either  the  most  recently  executed  rule,  or  the  rule  containing 
the  most  recently  updated  element  of  the  data  base 

For  example,  the  LISP70  interpreter  uses  (iii),  while  DENDRAL  uses  (iv). 

A different  approach  to  the  selection  process  is  used  in  the  MYCIN  system.  It  is  goal-oriented, 
and  uses  a RHS  scan.  The  process  is  quite  similar  to  the  unwinding  of  consequent  theorems  in 
PLANNER  [Hewitt  1972]  - given  a required  subgoal,  the  system  retrieves  the  (unordered)  set  of 
rules  whose  actions  conclude  something  about  that  subgoal.  The  evaluation  of  the  first  LHS  is 
begun,  and  if  any  clause  in  it  refers  to  a fact  not  yet  in  the  data  base,  a generalized  version  of  this 
fact  becomes  the  new  subgoal,  and  the  process  recurses.  However,  because  MYCIN  is  designed  to 
work  with  judgmental  knowledge  in  a domain  (clinical  medicine)  where  collecting  all  relevant  data 
and  considering  all  possibilities  are  very  important,  it  in  general  executes  all  rules  from  the  conflict 
set,  rather  than  stopping  after  the  first  success. 

The  meta-rules  mentioned  above  may  also  be  seen  as  a way  of  selecting  a subset  of  the  conflict 
set  for  execution.  There  are  several  interesting  advantages  to  this.  First,  the  conflict  resolution 
algorithm  is  stated  explicitly  in  the  meta-rules  (rather  than  implicitly  in  the  system’s  interpreter),  and 
in  the  same  representation  as  the  rest  of  the  rule-based  knowledge. 

Second,  since  there  can  be  a set  of  meta-rules  for  each  subgoal  type,  MYCIN  can  specify 


30 


TAXONOMY  FOR  MWOUCTION  SYSTEMS 


distinct,  and  hence  potentially  more  customized  conflict  resolution  strategies  for  each  individual 
subgoal.  Since  the  backward  chaining  of  rules  may  also  be  viewed  as  a depth  first  search  of  an 
AND/OR  goal  tree,  we  have  the  appearance  of  doing  a tree  search  through  a tree  with  an 
interesting  property  - a collection  of  specific  heuristics  about  which  path  to  take  are  stored  at  every 
branch  point  in  the  tree. 

In  addition,  rules  in  the  system  are  inexact,  Judgemental  rules  with  a model  of  "approximate 
implication"  in  which  the  user  may  specif / a measure  of  how  firmly  he  believes  that  a given  LHS 
implies  its  RHS  [Shortliffe 197561  This  admits  the  possibility  of  writing  numerous,  perhaps 
conflicting  heuristics,  whose  combintd  Judgement  forms  the  conflict  resolution  algorithm. 

Control  cycle  architecture  affects  the  rest  of  the  production  system  in  various  ways.  Overall 
efficiency,  for  example,  can  be  strongly  influenced.  The  RHS  scan  in  a goal-oriented  system 
insures  that  only  relevant  rules  are  considered  in  the  conflict  set.  Since  this  is  often  a small  subset 
of  the  total,  and  one  which  can  be  computed  once  and  stored  for  reference,  there  is  no  search 
necessary  at  execution  time,  so  the  approach  can  be  quite  efficient.  (In  addition,  since  this 
approach  seems  natural  to  humans,  the  system’s  behavior  becomes  easier  to  follow). 

Among  the  conflict  resolution  algorithms  mentioned,  rule  order  and  recency  order  require  a 
minimal  amount  of  checking  to  determine  the  -ule  with  highest  priority.  The  generality  order  can 
be  efficiently  implemented,  and  in  fact  the  LISP70  compiler  uses  it  quite  effectively.  Data  order 
and  rule  precedence  require  a significant  amount  of  bookkeeping  and  processing,  and  hence  may 
be  slower  (PSH,  a recent  development  along  the  lines  of  PSC,  attacks  precisely  this  problem.) 

The  relative  difficulty  of  adding  a new  rule  to  the  system  is  also  determined  to  a 
significant  degree  by  the  choice  of  control  cycle  architecture.  Like  PLANNER  with  its  consequent 
theorems,  the  goal  oriented  approach  makes  it  possible  to  simply  "throw  the  rule  in  the  pot"  and 
stilt  be  assured  that  it  will  be  retrieved  properly.  The  generality  ordering  technique  also  admits  of 
a simple,  automatic  method  for  placing  the  new  rule,  as  do  the  data  ordering  and  recency  strategy. 
In  the  latter  two  cases,  however,  the  primary  factor  in  ordering  is  external  to  the  rule,  and  hence 
while  they  may  be  added  to  the  rule  set  easily,  it  is  somewhat  harder  to  predict  and  control  their 
subsequent  selection.  For  both  complete  rule  order  and  rule  precedence  networks,  rule  addition 
may  be  a substantially  more  difficult  problem,  and  depends  primarily  on  the  complexity  of  the 
criteria  used  to  determine  the  hierarchy. 


- 31 


TRXONOHY  FM  PRODUCTION  SYSTEM 


{6.4}  System  augmentability,  extensibility 

Learning,  viewed  as  augment*  ion  of  the  system’s  rule  base,  is  of  concern  to  both  the 
information  processing  psychologists,  who  view  it  as  an  essential  aspect  of  human  cognition,  and 
designers  of  knowledge-based  systems,  who  acknowledge  that  building  truly  expert  systems  requires 
an  incremental  approach  to  competence.  As  yet  we  have  no  range  or  even  points  of  comparison  to 
offer,  because  of  the  scarcity  of  examples.  Instead  we  suggest  some  standards  by  which  the  ease  of 
augmentation  may  be  judged.  {It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  this  discussion  is  oriented 
primarily  toward  an  interactive,  mixed  initiative  view  of  learning,  in  which  the  human  expert 
teaches  the  system,  and  answers  questions  it  may  generate.  It  has  also  been  influenced  by  the 
experience  of  one  of  us  in  attacking  this  problem  for  the  MYCIN  system  [Davis 19761  Many  other 
models  of  the  process  (eg.  teaching  by  selected  examples)  are  of  course  possible,  and  would  most 
likely  require  differenting  sets  of  criteria}. 

Perhaps  the  most  basic  question  is  "How  automatic  is  it?"  The  ability  to  learn  is  clearly  an 
area  of  competence  by  itself,  and  thus  we  are  really  asking  how  much  of  that  competence  has  been 
captured  in  the  system,  and  how  much  the  user  has  to  supply.  Some  aspects  of  this  competence 
include  - 


if  the  current  system  displays  evidence  of  a bug  caused  by  a missing  or 
incorrect  rule,  how  much  of  the  diagnosing  of  the  bug  is  handled  by  the  system, 
and  how  much  tracing  must  be  done  by  the  user? 

once  the  bug  is  uncovered,  who  fixes  it?  Must  the  user  modify  the  code  by 
hand,  tell  the  system  in  some  command  language  what  to  do;  indicate  the  generic 
type  of  the  error;  can  he  simply  point  out  the  offending  rule,  or  can  the  system 
locate  and  fix  the  bug  itself? 

can  the  system  indicate  if  the  new  rule  will  in  fact  fix  the  bug,  or  whether 
it  will  have  side  effects  or  undesired  interactions? 

how  much  must  the  user  know  about  rule  format  conventions  when 
expressing  a new  (or  modified)  rule?  Must  he  know  how  to  code  it  explicitly;  know 
precisely  the  vocabulary  to  use;  know  generally  how  to  phrase  it;  or  can  he  indicate 
in  some  general  way  the  desired  rule  and  allow  the  system  to  make  the 
transformation?  Who  has  to  know  the  semantics  of  the  domain?  For  example,  can 
the  system  detect  impossible  conjunctions  [A  a B,  where  A = not-B,  but  'equivalent' 
in  the  semantic  sense],  or  trivial  disjunctions  [AvB,  where  A = not-B]?  Who  knows 
enough  about  the  system’*  idiosyncracies  to  suggest  optimally  fast  or  powerful  ways  of 
expressing  rules? 

how  hard  is  it  to  enter  strategies? 

how  hard  is  it  to  enter  control  structure  information?  Where  is  the  control 
structure  information  stored:  in  aggregations  of  rules,  or  in  higher  order  rules?  The 
former  makes  augmentation  or  modification  a difficult  problem,  the  latter  makes  it 
somewhat  easier,  since  the  information  is  explicit,  and  concentrated  in  one  place. 

can  you  assure  continued  consistency  of  the  rule  base?  Who  has  to  do  the 

- 32  - 


TAXONOMY  FOR  PRODUCTION  SYSTEMS 


checking? 

We  believe  these  are  questions  that  will  be  important  and  useful  to  confront  in  designing 
almost  any  system  intended  to  do  knowledge  acquisition,  and  especially  for  those  built  around 
production  rules  as  knowledge  representation. 


CONCLUSIONS 


{7}  CONCLUSIONS 

In  artificial  intelligence  research,  production  systems  were  first  used  as  a means  of  embodying 
primitive  chunks  of  information  processing  behavior  in  simulation  programs.  Their  adaptation  to 
other  uses,  and  increased  experience  with  them  has  focussed  attention  on  their  possible  utility  as  a 
general  programming  mechanism.  Production  systems  permit  the  representation  of  knowledge  in  a 
highly  uniform  and  modular  way.  This  may  pay  off  handsomely  in  two  areas  of  investigation  - 
development  of  programs  that  can  manipulate  their  own  representations,  and  development  of  a 
theory  of  loosely  coupled  systems,  both  computational  and  psychological.  Production  systems  are 
potentially  useful  as  a flexible  modelling  tool  for  many  types  of  systems;  current  research  efforts  are 
sufficiently  diverse  to  discover  the  extent  to  which  this  potential  may  be  realised. 

Information  processing  psychologists  continue  to  be  interested  in  production  systems  for  many 
reasons.  PSs  can  be  used  to  study  a wide  range  of  tasks  [21  they  constitute  a general  programming 
system  with  the  full  power  of  a Turing  Machine,  but  use  a homogeneous  encoding  of  knowledge;  to 
the  extent  that  the  methodology  is  that  of  a pure  production  system,  the  knowledge  embedded  is 
completely  explicit,  and  thus  aids  experimental  verification  or  falsifiability  of  theories  which  use  PSs 
as  a medium  of  expression,  productions  may  correspond  to  verifiable  bits  of  psychological  behavior 
[Moran  1973a],  reflecting  the  role  of  postulated  human  information  processing  structures  such  as 
short  term  memory;  they  are  flexible  enough  to  permit  a wide  range  of  variation  based  on  reaction 
times,  adaptation,  or  other  commonly  tested  psychological  variables,  the  space  of  PS  can  be  fit  to 
various  alternative  human  information  processing  strategies;  and  finally,  they  provide  a method  for 
studying  learning  and  adaptive  behavior  [Waterman  1 9?4j. 

For  those  wishing  to  build  knowledge-based  expert  systems,  the  homogeneous  encoding  of 
knowledge  offers  the  possibility  of  automating  parts  of  the  task  of  dealing  with  the  growing 
complexity  of  such  systems  Knowledge  in  production  rules  is  both  accessible  and  relatively  easy  to 
modify.  It  can  be  executed  by  one  part  of  the  system  as  procedural  code,  and  examined  by  another 
part  as  if  it  were  a declarative  expression.  Despite  the  difficulties  of  programming  PSs,  and  their 
occasionally  restrictive  syntax,  the  fundamental  methodology  at  times  suggests  a convenient  and 
appropriate  framework  for  the  task  of  structuring  and  specifying  large  amounts  of  knowledge.  It 
may  thus  prove  to  be  of  great  utility  in  dealing  with  the  problems  of  complexity  encountered  in  the 
construction  of  large  knowledge  bases. 


Acknowl  edgement  $ 

The  creation  and  development  of  this  paper  has  extended  for  several  months,  and  has 
profited  greatly  from  advice  from  many  quarters.  We  are  indebted  to  Bruce  Buchanan  for  several 
careful  readings  and  quite  a few  extended  discussions.  Many  helpful  suggestions  were  offered  by 
Allen  Newell,  Ed  Feigenbaum,  Don  Waterman,  Tom  Moran,  Terry  Winograd,  and  Stu  Card,  who 
were  patient  enough  to  help  debug  early  drafts. 


34  - 


NOTES 


[1]  Some  of  the  observations  reported  here  are  insights  gained  by  listening  to  the  speakers  in 
a seminar  held  at  Stanford  in  late  1974,  and  we  have  tried  to  acknowledge  those  sources  as 
accurately  as  possible.  Apologies  are  offered  in  advance  for  any  omissions;  unattributed 
opinions  are  those  cf  the  authors. 

Despite  out  best  efforts,  inevitable  biases  appear,  so  we  may  as  well  be  explicit:  our 
experience  with  production  systems  as  high  performance  application  programs  is  more 
extensive  than  that  with  the  psychological  modelling  applications,  and  this  is  no  doubt 
apparent  at  times.  We  have  done  our  best  to  minimize  such  occurrences. 

[2]  Newell  A,  Simon  H Human  Problem  Solving  p 44,  Prentice-Hall,  1972. 

[3]  One  class  of  production  systems  we  will  not  attempt  to  treat  at  any  length  here  is  their  use  as 
grammars  for  formal  languages.  While  the  intellectual  roots  are  similar  [Floyd  1951, 
Evans  19641  their  use  has  evolved  a distinctly  different  flavor.  In  particular,  their  use  of 
non-determinism  is  an  important  factor  which  provides  a very  different  perspective  on  issues 
of  control  structure  and  effectively  renders  the  question  of  rule  selection  a moot  point. 

[4]  For  example 

The  critical  evaluation  of  EPAM  must  ultimately  depend  not  upon  the 
interest  which  it  may  have  as  a learning  machine,  but  upon  its  ability  to 
explain  and  predict  phenomena  of  verbal  learning. 

[Feigenbauml963] 

These  phenomena  included  stimulus  and  response  generalization,  oscillation, 
retroactive  inhibition,  and  forgetting,  all  of  which  are  ‘mistakes’  for  a system  intended  for 
high  performance,  but  are  important  in  a system  meant  to  model  human  learning  behavior. 

[5]  Newell  A,  Remarks  on  the  relationship  between  artificial  intelligence  and  cognitive 
psychology,  in  Theoretical  Approach es  to  Non-Numerical  Problem  Solving,  Part  IV,  pp 
363-400,  Springer-Verlag,  1970. 

[3]  E.  Feigenbaum,  private  communication. 

[7]  As  noted  in  [Waterman  1974],  the  production  rule  version  does  not  assume  the  existence  of  a 
successor  function,  instead  rule  5 writes  new  productions  that  give  the  successor  for  specific 
integers.  Rule  3 builds  what  amounts  to  an  addition  table,  writing  a new  production  for  each 
example  the  system  is  given.  Placing  these  new  rules  at  the  ’front’  of  the  rule  set  (i.e.  before 
rule  1)  means  that  the  addition  table  and  successor  function  table  will  always  be  consulted 
before  a computation  is  attempted,  and  the  answers  obtained  in  one  step  if  possible.  Without 
these  extra  steps,  and  with  a successor  function,  the  production  rule  set  could  be  smaller  and 
hence  slightly  less  complex. 

[8]  Note,  however,  that  the  tradition  arises  out  of  i commonly  followed  convention  rather  than 
any  essential  characteristic  of  a PS. 

[9]  The  current  MYCIN  system  makes  strong  use  of  the  concept  of  allowing  one  part  to  the 
system  to  'read*  the  rules  being  executed  by  another  part.  As  one  example,  the  system  does 
a partial  evaluation  of  rule  premises.  Since  a premise  is  a Boolean  combination  of 
predicate  functions  like 


35  - 


NOTES 


(IAND(SAM£  CNTXT  SITE  BLOOD)  {the  site  of  the  culture  is  blood  and 

(SAME  CNTXT  GRAM  GRAMPOS)  the  gramstain  is  gramposittve  and 

(DEFIS  CNTXT  AIR  AEROBIC))  the  aerobicity  is  definitely  aerobic} 

and  since  clauses  which  are  unknown  cause  subproblems  to  be  set  up  which  may  involve 
long  computations,  it  makes  sense  to  check  to  see  if,  based  on  what  is  currently  known,  the 
entire  premise  is  sure  to  fail  (eg.  if  any  clause  of  a conjunction  is  known  to  be  false).  We 
cannot  simple  EVAL  each  clause,  since  this  will  trigger  a search  if  the  value  is  sill 
unknown.  But  if  the  clause  can  be  'unpacked'  into  its  proper  constituents,  it  is  possible  to 
determine  whether  or  not  the  value  is  known  as  yet,  and  if  so,  what  it  is.  This  is  done  via 
a TEMPLATE  associated  with  each  predicate  function.  For  example,  the  TEMPLATE  for 
SAME  is 


(SAME  CNTXT  PARM  VALU) 

and  it  give*  the  generic  type  and  order  of  arguments  to  the  function  (much  like  a 
siimplified  procedure  declaration).  By  using  this  as  a guide  to  unpack  and  extract  the 
needed  items,  we  can  safely  do  a partial  evaluation  of  the  rule  premise.  A similar 
technique  is  used  to  separate  the  known  and  unknown  clauses  of  a rule  for  the  user's 
benefit  when  the  system  is  explaining  itself  (see  [Shortliffel975a]  for  several  examples). 

Note  that,  first,  part  of  the  system  is  ‘reading’  the  code  being  executed  by  the  other 
part,  and  second,  that  this  reading  is  guided  by  information  carried  in  the  rule  components 
themselves.  This  latter  characteristic  .usures  that  the  capability  is  unaffected  by  the 
addition  of  new  rules  or  predicate  functions  to  the  system. 

[10]  How  many  rules  could  be  removed  without  performance  degradation  (short  of 
redundancies)  is  an  interesting  characteristic,  which  would  appear  to  be  correlated  with  the 
issue  of  which  of  the  two  common  approaches  to  PSs  is  taken.  The  psychological  modelling 
systems  would  apparently  degenerate  fastest,  since  they  are  designed  to  be  minimally 
competent  sets  of  rules.  Knowledge-based  expert  systems,  on  the  other  hand,  tend  to 
embody  numerous  independent  subproblems  in  rules,  and  often  contain  overlapping  or 
even  purposefully  redundant  representations  of  knowledge.  Hence  while  losing  their 
competence  on  selected  problems,  it  appears  they  would  still  function  reasonably  well  even 
with  several  rules  removed. 

[11]  One  specific  example  of  the  importance  of  rule  order  can  be  seen  in  our  earlier  example 
of  addition  (Figure  2a).  Here  Rule  5 assumes  that  an  ordering  of  the  digits  exists  in  STM 
in  the  form 

(ORDER  0 I 2...) 

and  from  this  can  be  created  the  successor  function  for  each  digit.  If  Rule  5 were  placed 
before  Rule  1,  the  system  wouldn't  add  a:  all.  In  addition,  acquiring  the  notion  of  successor 
in  subsequent  runs  depends  entirely  on  the  placement  of  the  new  succesor  productions 
before  Rule  3,  or  the  effect  of  this  new  knowledge  would  be  masked. 

[12]  This  basic  technique  of  ‘broadcasting’  of  information  and  allowing  individual  segments  of 
the  system  to  determine  thei,-  own  relevance  has  been  extended  and  generalized  in  systems 
like  HEARSAYII  [Lesserl974],  and  the  BEINGS  system  of  Lenat  [Lenatl975j. 

[13]  The  range  of  conflict  resolution  algorithms  in  this  section  was  suggested  in  a talk  at  the 
seminar  by  Don  Waterman. 


36 


WPW!I"»*5BHW 


JMI.  I .W 


C .. 


KFEftCNCCS 

REFERENCES 


[Anderson  1976] 

A nderson  J,  Language,  Memory  and  Thought,  L Erlbaum  Associates,  1976  (in  preparation) 
[Bobrowl968] 

Bobrow,  D G.  Natural  language  input  for  a computer  problem-solving  system,  in  Smantic 
Information  Proctssing,  Minsky  [edl  pp  146-226,  1968. 

[Davis  1975] 

Davis  R,  Buchanan  B G,  Shortliffe  E H.  Production  rules  as  a representation  for  a 
knowledge-based  consultation  program,  AI  Memo  266,  (October  1975),  Computer  Science 
Department,  Stanford  University. 

[Davis  1976] 

Davis  R,  Knowledge  representation  and  management  in  expert  systems,  Forthcoming  PhD 
thesis,  Stanford  University. 

[Evansl964] 

Evans  A,  An  ALGOL  60  Compiler,  in  Annual  Review  of  Automatic  Programming,  Goodman 
(ed).  4:87-124,  1964. 

[Fetgenbauml963] 

Feigenbaum  E A,  Simulation  of  Verbal  Learning  Behavior,  in  Computes  and  Thought, 
Feigenbaum  and  Feldman  (eds.)  pp  297-309,  McGraw  Hill.  1963. 

[Feigenbaum  1971] 

Feigenbaum  E A,  et.  al.,  On  Generality  and  Problem  Solving  - a case  study  involving  the 
DENDRAL  program,  in  Machine  Intelligence  6,  Meltzer  and  Michie  (eds.),  pp  165-190, 
Edinburgh  University  Press  1971. 

[Floyd  1961] 

Floyd  R,  A Descriptive  Language  for  Symbol  Manipulation,  J ACM,  8:579-584,  1961. 

[Hewitt  1972] 

Hewitt  C,  Description  and  theoretical  analysis  of  PLANNER,  PhD  thesis,  Department  of 
Mathematics,  1972,  MIT,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

[Lenatl975] 

Lenat  D L,  BEINGS:  Knowledge  as  Interacting  Experts,  Proceedings  of  the  Fourth 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Tbilisi,  USSR,  September  1975. 

[Lesser  1974] 

Lesser  R L,  et.  al.,  Organization  of  the  HEARSAYII  Speech  Understanding  System,  IEEE 
Symmposiuh  on  Speech  Recognition,  p 11-21,  April  1974. 

[Moran  1973a] 

Moran  T P.  The  Symbolic  Imagery  Hypothesis:  A Production  System  Model,  Computer  Science 
Department,  Carnegie-Mellon  University,  December,  1973. 


- 37  - 


REFERENCES 


[Moran  1973o] 

Moran  T P,  The  Symbolic  Nature  of  Visual  Imagery,  Proceedings  of  the  Third 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  August  1973 

[Newell  19721 

Newell  A,  Simon  H,  Human  Problem  Solving,  Prentice-Hall,  1972. 

(Newell  1973] 

Newell  A,  Production  Systems:  Models  of  Control  Structures,  in  Visual  Information 
Processing,  William  G.  Chase  (ed.),  pp  463-526,  Academic  Press,  1973. 

[Postl943] 

Post  E,  Formal  Reductions  of  the  General  Combinatorial  Problem,  Am  Jnl  Math,  65:197-268 
For  an  interesting  introduction  to  the  general  principles  involved,  see  Mlnksy, 
Computation:  Finite  and  Infinite  Machines,  Prentice  Hall,  1967,  Chapter  12. 

[Rychenerl975] 

Rychener  M D,  The  studnt  [sic]  production  system:  a study  of  encoding  knowledge  in 
production  systems,  Technical  Report  (in  press),  Computer  Science  Department, 
Carnegie-Metlon  University. 

[Shortliffe  1975a] 

Shortliffe  E,  et.  al.,  Computer-Based  Consultations  in  Clinical  Therapeutics  - explanation 
and  rule  acquisition  capabilities  of  the  MYCIN  system,  Computers  and  Biomedical  Research 
Aug  1975. 

[Shortliffe  1975b] 

Shortliffe  E,  Buchanan  B,  A Model  of  Inexact  Reasoning  in  Medicine,  Mathematical 
Biosc'.ences , 23,  pp  351-379,  1975. 

[Smith  1972] 

Smith  D H,  et.al,  Applications  of  Artificial  Intelligence  for  Chemical  Inference  VIII  Journal 
of  the  American  Chemical  Society,  94,  p 5962  ff,  August,  1972. 

[Tesler  1973] 

Tesler  L G,  Enea  H J,  Smith  D C,  The  LISP70  Pattern  Matching  System,  Proceedings  of  the 
Third  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  p 671-676,  Stanford, 
California,  1973. 

[Waterman  1970] 

Waterman  D A,  Generalization  Learning  Techniques  for  Automating  the  Learning  of 
Heuristics  Aritificial  intelligence, l:\2\-\ 70: 1970. 

[Waterman  1974] 

Waterman  D A,  Adaptive  Production  Systems  Complex  Information  Processing  Working 
Paper  No.  285,  Psychology  Department,  Carnegie-Mellon  University,  December,  1974. 

[Winogradl975] 

Winograd  T,  Frame  representations  and  the  Procedural/Declarative  Controversy,  in 
Representation  and  Understanding,  Bobrow  and  Collins  (eds.).  Academic  Press,  1975 


38  - 


