>S  ESD-TR-75-358 

oEC1!  . ■'■T 

cj>  n 


£ DRI  C 11  No 
S No.  / oLp. 

NLS-SCHOLAR:  MODIFICATIONS  AND  FIELD  TESTING 


Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc. 
50  Moulton  Street 
Cambridge,  MA  02138 


November  1975 


Approved  for  Public  Release; 
Distribution  Unlimited. 


Prepared  for  and  Sponsored  by 

DEPUTY  FOR  COMMAND  AND  MANAGEMENT  SYSTEMS 
ELECTRONIC  SYSTEMS  DIVISION 
HANSCOM  AIR  FORCE  BASE,  MA  01731 

DEFENSE  ADVANCED  RESEARCH  PROJECTS  AGENCY 
1400  WILSON  BOULEVARD 
ARLINGTON,  VA  22209 
ARPA  Order  No.  2984 


The  views  and  conclusions  contained  in  this  document  are  those  of  the  authors 
and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily  representing  the  official  policies, 
either  expressed  or  implied,  of  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
or  the  U.  S.  Government. 


LEGAL  NOTICE 

When  U.  S.  Government  drawings,  specifications  or  other  data  are  used  for  any 
purpose  other  than  a definitely  related  government  procurement  operation,  the 
government  thereby  incurs  no  responsibility  nor  any  obligation  whatsoever;  and 
the  fact  that  the  government  may  have  formulated,  furnished,  or  in  any  way  sup- 
plied the  said  drawings,  specifications,  or  other  data  is  not  to  be  regarded  by 
implication  or  otherwise  as  in  any  manner  licensing  the  holder  or  any  other  person 
or  conveying  any  rights  or  permission  to  manufacture,  use,  or  sell  any  patented 
invention  that  may  in  any  way  be  related  thereto. 


OTHER  NOTICES 


Do  not  return  this  copy.  Retain  or  destroy. 


"This  technical  report  has  been  reviewed  and  is  approved  for  publication." 


f\\ 

SYLVIA  R.  MAYER,  GS-14 
Project  Scientist 

FOR  THE  COMMANDER 


FRANK  J.  EMM/^r  Colonel,  USAF 
Director,  Information  Systems 
Technology  Applications  Office 
Deputy  for  Command  & Management  Systems 


Unclassified 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGE  (When  Data  Entered) 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

1.  report  number 

ESD-TR-75-358 

2.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 

3.  RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 

4.  TITLE  (and  Subtitle) 

NLS-SCHOLAR:  MODIFICATIONS 
AND  FIELD  TESTING 

S TYPE  OF  REPORT  4 PERIOD  COVERED 

6.  PERFORMING  ORG.  REPORT  NUMBER 

7.  authors; 

Mario  C«  Grignetti 
Laura  Gould 

Catherine  Hausmann,  et  al 

8 CONTRACT  OR  GRANT  NUMBERfa; 

FI9628-75-C-0I59 
ARPA  Order  2984 

9.  PERFORMING  ORGANI  ZATION  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman,  lnc0 
50  Moulton  Street 
Cambridge,  MA  02138 

10.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT.  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  4 WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

62706E  Program  Element 

11.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Deputy  for  Command  and  Management  Systems 
Electronic  Systems  Division 
Hanscom  Air  Force  Base.  MA  01731 

12.  report  date 

November  1975 

13.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

77 

14  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  4 ADDRESS (i(  different  from  Controiiing  Office) 

Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  ^gency 
(400  Wilson  Boulevard 
Arlington,  VA  22209 

IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (o  1 Ihl « report) 

UNCLASSIFIED 

ISa.  DECLASSI  F|  CATION/ DOWN  GRADING 
SCHEDULE  |>yA 

16-  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  this  Report) 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 

17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  the  abstract  entered  fn  Biock  20,  if  different  from  Report) 

18  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

19.  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  reverse  side  if  necessary  and  identify  by  biock  number) 

Artificial  Intelligence,  Computer  Assisted  Instruction,  Natural  Language 
Processing,  Semantic  Grammar,  Semantic  Network,  Tutorial  Supervision, 
On-Line  Assistance,  Question  Answering 

20.  ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  reverse  side  if  necessary  and  identify  by  biock  number) 

NLS-SCHOLAR  is  a prototype  system  that  uses  Artificial  Intelligence  techniques 
to  teach  computer-naive  people  how  to  use  a powerful  and  complex  editor.  It 
represents  a new  kind  of  Computer  Assisted  Instruction  (CAI)  system  that 
integrates  systematic  teaching  with  actual  practice,  i.e.,  one  which  can  keep 
the  user  under  tutorial  supervision  while  allowing  him  to  try  out  what  he 
learns  on  the  system  he  is  learning  about. 

(over) 

Unclassified 


DD  i jan^73  1 473  EDITION  OF  I NOV  6S  IS  OBSOLETE 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGE  (When  Data  Entered) 


Unclassified 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGEfWTi  an  Data  Entered) 


20.  (cont) 

NLS-SCHOLAR  can  also  be  used  as  an  on-line  help  system  outside  the  tutorial 
environment,  in  the  bourse  of  a user's  actual  work.  This  capability  of 
combining  on-line  assistance  with  training  is  an  extension  of  the  traditional 
notion  of  CAI . 

The  system  is  now  operational.  Limited  but  realistic  testing  revealed  that 
the  teachings  of  NLS-SCHOLAR  are  very  effective,  and  that  the  system's 
performance  as  an  on-line  help  facility  needs  improvement.  Most  of  the 
problems  encountered  are  very  easy  to  fix. 

The  techniques  used  in  NLS-SCHOLAR  are  general  and  can  be  applied  to  the 
teaching  of  a wide  variety  of  computer  related  activities. 


! 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGEfWTian  Data  Entered) 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Page 

SECTION  I - INTRODUCTION 3 

Overall  Approach  3 

Ob j ec t i ves 5 

Out line 5 

SECTION  II  - DEVELOPMENTAL  WORK 7 

0 ve  r v i e w 7 

The  Control  Structure 12 

Tutorial  Material 16 

New  Text 16 

Branching 17 

Tasks 18 

Questions 18 

Answer  s 19 

English  Front  End 19 

The  Parsing  Process 20 

Fuzziness 26 

Instantiation  of  Variables  27 

Further  uses  of  LISP-NLS  to  answer  questions  . . 29 

Human  Engineering  Features  80 

Stop  and  Resume 30 

Getting  help  from  an  expert 31 

Question  mark 32 

Efficiency 33 

SECTION  III  - OPERATIONAL  TESTING  AND  RESULTS  ....  35 

General  Results 36 

Overview 38 

The  "easy  problems" 39 

Spelling  errors 39 

Unanticipated  synonyms  40 

Common  but  unanticipated  syntax 41 

Lack  of  knowledge 41 

Poor  answers 42 

Unanticipated  environments  43 

The  Harder  Problems 44 

First  scenario 46 

Second  scenario 48 

Third  scenario 50 

Fourth  scenario 54 

Fifth  scenario 57 

SECTION  IV  - RECOMMENDATIONS  AND  CONCLUSIONS 62 

Epilogue 65 

APPENDIX 67 

Review  of  NLS  - SCHOLAR  by  ISI 67 

Comments  on  the  review 74 

REFERENCES 77 


SECTION  I - INTRODUCTION 


This  is  the  Final  Report  on  a six-month  effort  to 
improve  and  field  test  NLS-SCHOLAR  [Grignetti  1975],  a CAI 
system  that  employs  Artificial  Intelligence  techniques  to 
teach  people  how  to  use  the  BASE  subsystem  of  NLS.* 

This  Report  documents  the  changes  made  to  the  August 
197^  version  of  NLS-SCHOLAR  to  prepare  it  for  testing  in  the 
field,  and  documents  the  results  and  conclusions  obtained 
from  this  testing.  Since  NLS-SCHOLAR  was  developed  under  a 
previous  contract , this  re, ort  is  conceived  as  an 
"incremental"  one  that  should  be  read  in  conjunction  with 
the  Final  Report  [Grignetti  1 9 7 ^ J on  our  previous  effort. 

Overall  Approach 

NLS-SCHOLAR  is  oriented  towards  teaching  NLS  to  naive 
users,  such  as  secretaries,  who  have  very  limited  experience 
with  computer-based  text  editing  systems.  Therefore,  its 
tutorial  material  is  written  assuming  practically  no 
knowledge  of  computer  usage  on  the  student's  part;  the 
necessary  conceptual  framework  is  built  up  from  the  most 

*BASE  is  the  powerful  editor  of  the  oN-Line  System  (NLS),  an 
increasingly  used  text  manipulation  system  developed  by 
Douglas  Engelbart  and  his  co-workers  at  the  Augmentation 
Research  Center  of  Stanford  Research  Institute. 


3 


primitive  notions,  such  as  striking  a key  on  a terminal 
keyboard . 

The  two  basic  pillars  on  which  the  system's  approach  is 
founded  are:  a)  interactiveness  and  mixed-initiative,  and  b) 
supervised  practice  of  the  procedural  knowledge  being 
taught  . 

Interactiveness  and  mixed-initiative  are  necessary  so 
that  the  student  doesn't  feel  "caught"  in  a situation  over 
which  he  has  no  control . The  system  is  designed  so  that  any 
time  it  is  the  student's  turn  to  type,  he  can  ask  questions 
himself  (instead  of  just  answering  the  questions  posed  by 
the  system),  or  direct  the  system  to  perform  certain  actions 
for  him  (like  executing  NLS  commands  expressed  in  English). 

Supervised  practice  is  absolutely  fundamental.  Little 
knowledge  about  "how  to  do"  things  can  be  taught  by  mere 
descriptions;  many  procedures  can  only  be  taught  by 
demonstration,  and  practice  is  essential.  A supervised 
"hands  on"  environment  is  crucial  to  impressing  newly 
acquired  procedural  knowledge  in  the  student's  mind. 
NLS-SCHOLAR  provides  such  an  environment  by  requesting 
students  to  perform  NLS  editing  tasks  using  (what  appears  to 
them  to  be)  the  very  system  they  are  being  taught  about,  by 
remaining  "aware"  of  what  they  are  doing,  and  by  commenting 
on  their  performance. 


4 


Objectives 


Our  ultimate  goal  is  to  develop  NLS-SCHOLAR  so  that  it 
can  be  used  as  an  operational  tool  over  the  ARPA  network,  in 
support  of  the  National  Software  Works  (NSW)  users.  The 
specific  objectives  of  the  work  described  in  this  document 
were : 

a)  Expand  and  modify  the  NLS-SCHOLAR  system  as  it  existed  at 
the  end  of  its  first  year  of  development,  incorporate 
features  we  perceived  as  needed,  and  correct  known 
limitations 


Test  the 

newly  deve 

loped  system  in 

a 

1 imi 

fed 

but 

realistic 

operational 

environment 

Use  the  feedback  and  e 

xperience  obtaine 

d in 

the 

field 

to 

evaluate 

the  system 

and  to  formulate 

plans 

for 

the 

next 

stage  of 

modi f ication 

and  expansion 

These  objectives  have 


been  achieved . 


In  Sec 
in  detail 
objectives  ; 
during  fie 


tion  II  of 
the  devel 
in  Section 
Id  testing 


Outline 

the  body  of 
opmental  wor 
III  we  desc 
of  the  prese 


th 

k 

ri 

nt 


is  report,  we  describe 
performed  to  achieve  our 
be  the  results  obtained 
version  of  NLS-SCHOLAR. 


5 


our  conclusions  and 


Finally,  in  Section  IV  we  present 
recommendations  for  further  work. 


6 


SECTION  II 


DEVELOPMENTAL  WORK 


In  this  Section  we  describe  the  work  accomplished  to 
bring  NLS-SCHOLAR  to  a state  sufficiently  stable  and  robust 
so  that  testing  it  operationally  would  yield  meaningful 
results . 

Overview 

Our  initial  aim  was  to  expand  and  improve  NLS-SCHOLAR 
so  that  its  tutorial  material  would  cover  most  of  the  BASE 
subsystem  of  NLS.  This  entailed  bolstering  the  system's 
question-answering  abilities,  expanding  the  task  evaluation 
modules,  and  adding  functions  to  the  underlying  LISP-NLS 
system  (our  own  LISP  implementation  of  the  BASE  subsystem  of 
NLS)  . 

In  the  course  of  our  development  work  we  brought  up 
several  versions  of  newly  expanded  and  modified  NLS-SCHOLAR 
systems,  incorporating  not  only  most  of  the  features 
perceived  as  needed  at  the  beginning,  but  many  others  as 
well.  In  fact,  as  work  progressed  and  our  experience 
running  the  system  increased,  we  identified  new  requirements 
for  both  the  short  and  the  long  term  success  of  our  system, 
and  we  performed  work  in  addition  to  what  was  originally 
specified.  This  additional  work  included: 


7 


1)  In  order  to  provide  the  flexibility  and  modularity 
required  to  effect  changes  easily,  we  designed  and 
implemented  a new  control  structure  that  uses  an 
implementation  of  the  Bobrow/Wegbreit  stack  scheme  for 


multi  pie 

envi 

ronments  ("spaghetti 

stacks" 

) that 

is 

provided 

in 

the  recently  released 

LISP. 

[ Bobrow 

1973, 

INTERLISP 

1975 

]. 

2)  To  increase  the  effectiveness  of  our  tutorial  material, 
we  developed  a prototype  Agenda  Language  that  allows  us 
to  write  English-like  lessons  incorporating  branching, 
remedial  loops,  quizzes,  etc. 


3) 


In  order  to  provide  a useful  tutoring 
spite  of  expected  system  limitations,  we 
fail-back  mode  wherein  a human  helper 
system 's  rescue  whenever  the  user  requests 


environne 
incorpor 
comes  t 
it . 


n 

a 

o 


t in 
ted  a 
the 


H) 


In  order  to  make  it  practical  and  feasible  to 
such  as  ours  in  operational  environments, 
improved  the  efficiency  of  NLS-SCHOLAR ; not  on 
output  package  5 times  faster,  but  the  overall 
is  twice  as  great. 


use  systems 
we  greatly 
ly  is  the 
efficiency 


By  far  the  most  significant  of  these  advan 
design  and  implementation  of  a flexible  cont 
that  uses  the  recently  released  "spaghetti" 


ces 

was  the 

rol 

structure 

LISP.  The 

8 


structure  allows  NLS-SCHOLAR  to  operate  on  multiple 

environments,  making  it  possible  for  the  various  modules  of 
the  system  (the  English  front  end,  the  Quizzer,  the  Tutor 
Scheduler,  NLS,  the  Task  Monitor,  and  the  Evaluator)  to  be 
handled  like  jobs  in  a time-sharing  system.  That  is, 
processes  request  "the  floor"  as  need  arises,  and  gain 
access  to  the  process  queue  with  preassignabl e priorities. 
As  a result  of  this  improvement,  the  system  now  has  the 
capability  of  back-tracking  to  abandoned  contexts,  of 
handling  multiple  tasks,  and  of  coroutining. 

We  expanded  the  tutorials  (the  Primer)  from  the 
original  three  lessons  to  an  introduction  plus  five  lessons. 
The  material  covers  usage  of  the  legal  combinations  of  the 
following  IJLS  verbs  and  nouns: 

a)  Verbs:  Load,  Print,  Insert,  Delete,  Create,  Update,  Jump, 
Substitute,  Set,  Reset,  Show,  Copy,  Move,  Transpose, 
Output,  Help,  and  the  one-character  commands 

' , '\ ' , and  <LF> . 

b)  Nouns:  Character,  Word,  Text,  Statement,  Branch,  Group, 
Plex,  File  and  Rest. 

Numerous  questions,  interspersed  throughout  the  lessons 
and  forming  quizzes  at  the  end,  test  the  students^ 
comprehension  of  the  instructional  material.  Over  100 
supervised  tasks  and  "tutor  demonstrations"  support  our 


9 


claim  that  our  users  learn  "by  doing". 

We  developed  a prototype  Agenda  Language  that  allows  us 
to  write  these  lessons  in  quasi-English  format.  (The 
lessons  were  all  prepared  using  NLS  and  are  in  indented 
outline  format.)  The  lessons  contain  not  only  tasks, 
demonstrations  of  actions,  question-answering  periods,  and 
quizzes,  but  also  branching  and  remedial  loops.  The  new 
control  structure  allows  us  to  design  much  more  flexible 
lessons  than  before,  ones  that  exhibit  truly  mixed 
user/system  initiative.  For  example,  one  of  the  ways  we  can 
handle  students'  mistakes  is  by  means  of  "scratch  actions": 
when  a student  makes  a mistake , the  system  takes  over  and 
shows  him  what  would  happen  if  the  the  mistake  were  enacted. 
This  resembles  what  a human  tutor  would  do  ("Here  let  me 
show  you  what  would  happen  if  you  did  what  you  propose")  to 
show  the  effect  of  the  mistake  while  at  the  same  time 
protecting  the  student  from  the  consequences  of  his  actions. 

In  parallel  with  this  work,  our  LISP  implementation  of 
the  NLS  BASE  subsystem  v/as  augmented  and  updated , so  as  to 
support  all  the  NLS  commands  mentioned  above.  We  also  sped 
it  up  considerably  by  using  block  compiling  techniques. 


Consi 

derable 

work  was 

done  also  on 

the 

English  front 

end  . 

In 

addition 

to  quest 

ions,  this  mod 

ule 

now  handles 

all 

inputs 

from  the 

student , 

including  hi 

s 

answers  to 

the 

"tutor 

' s " 

question 

s and  his 

"directions" 

to 

the  system. 

The 

10 


semantic  network  now  contains  330  entries,  covering  the 
commands  and  NLS  concepts  which  the  simulator  can  handle  and 
which  the  tutorials  describe.  The  output  package  (the  big 
CPU  time  gobbler  in  the  previous  system)  was  streamlined  and 
speeded  up  by  a factor  of  5.  In  addition,  the  responses  it 
produces  are  more  personal  and  friendly. 

Finally,  in  addition  to  the  above,  1)  we  incorporated 
"stop"  and  "continue"  facilities,  so  that  users  could 
proceed  with  the  lessons  at  their  own  pace,  2)  we  began  to 
provide  users  with  some  feedback  on  what  went  wrong  when  a 


question 

could  not  be 

answered  by 

the 

system  and , 

more 

importan 

tiy , 

3)  we  offered  students 

the  he 

lp  of  a human 

user 

if  they 

so 

required 

(the  system 

looks 

for  one  of 

us  , 

establ is 

hes 

a TENEX 

link,  and  a 

Hows 

us  to  come  to 

the 

student's  help  and  to  the  system's  rescue).  Contextual 
information  (what  the  student  has  been  up  to)  is  preserved 


in 

LISP's 

history 

list  and 

is  available  to  us. 

In  short , we 

brought 

up  a new  NLS- SCHOLAR  system 

that 

is 

very 

much 

better 

than  the  old  one  in  terms 

of 

flexibility,  modularity,  capability,  and  efficiency. 

In  the  remainder  of  this  section  we  describe  in  detail 
the  work  performed  in  many  of  the  areas  alluded  to  above: 
the  system's  control  structure,  the  tutorial  material,  the 
English  front  end,  the  human  engineering  features,  and 
overall  efficiency. 


11 


The  Control  Structure 


The  new  control  structure  was  designed  with  several 
goals  in  mind: 

1)  increasing  the  modularity  of  the  system  to  make  it  more 
understandable  and  easily  modifiable 


2)  facilitating  interactions 

by 

a ) 

making 

the  "English 

understanding"  portion 

of 

the 

system 

(ENGLISHEXEC) 

available  at  any  time  by  a simple  interrupt  mechanism, 
and  b)  allowing  the  user  to  experiment  with  NLS  at  any 
time  without  destroying  context 

3)  extending  the  capabilities  of  the  tutorial  material  to 
permit  branching  and  the  conditional  execution  of 
arbitrary  INTERLISP  functions  to  perform  needed  actions. 

The  basic  idea  underlying  the  control  structure  is 
simple.  The  system  continually  evaluates  the  priorities  of 
several  alternative  goals,  which  include  ones  specified  by 
the  user  and  ones  set  by  the  author  of  the  tutorial 
material.  Goals  with  lower  priority  are  postponed,  and  the 
highest  priority  goal  is  executed.  Some  goals,  such  as 
"presenting  all  the  tutorial  material  in  a useful  order", 
are  complex  and  may  continue  over  a long  period  of  time.  To 
facilitate  the  description  of  complex,  long  lasting  goals, 
each  goal  is  represented  by  a "process",  a collection  of 
INTERLISP  procedures  which  when  executed  will  achieve  the 


12 


goal . 


Because  the  spaghetti-stack  control  structure  of 
INTERLISP  permits  any  process  to  be  interrupted  at  an 
arbitrary  point  without  losing  the  context  of  the 
computation,  complex  goals  can  be  represented  by  processes 
which  work  through  a set  of  sub-goals  from  beginning  to  end 
without  interruption.  A process  representing  such  an 
extended  goal  may  be  interrupted  and  temporarily  suspended 
to  allow  other  goals  to  be  met.  This  permits  the  overall 
system  to  "stop  in  its  tracks"  and  interact  with  the  student 
when  the  student  wants  help,  not  just  when  the  system 
decides  to  pay  attention.  In  this  way  the  control  structure 
makes  it  possible  for  us  to  design  a truly 
"mixed-initiative"  system,  rather  than  representing  a 
single-minded  tutor,  since  the  various  goals  of  the  tutor 
may  be  easily  interrupted  and  suspended  to  allow  the  student 
to  request  actions,  ask  questions,  and  experiment  with  NLS . 

The  overall  control  of  the  system  is  based  in  a simple 
"monitor"  which  acts  much  like  a time-sharing  monitor  - it 
has  a set  of  suspended  processes  representing  pending 
priorities  which  must  be  evaluated,  and  it  chooses  the 
highest  priority  process  and  permits  it  to  run. 

At  any  time  there  may  be  several  pending  goals  in  the 
system,  represented  by  suspended  processes.  These  goals  are 
chosen  from  the  set: 


13 


a) 

listening 

for  user  command 

S, 

questions 

and 

answers 

in 

English  (ENGLISHEXEC) 

b) 

deciding  what  tutorial  mat 

eri 

al  to  give 

next 

c) 

presenting 

a tutorial  unit 

d) 

presenting 

a question 

e) 

waiting  to 

evaluate  the  an 

swe 

r of  a prev 

ious 

question 

f) 

running  a 

student  through 

an 

NLS  task 

g) 

providing 

an  experimental 

NLS 

env ironme 

nt 

requested 

by 

the  user 

The  prio 

rity  evaluation 

is 

implemented 

pri 

marily  by 

a 

stack , but  it  is  made  potentially  general  by  having  the 
monitor  evaluate  a priority  setting  process  associated  with 
each  runnable  process,  and  using  that  to  modify  priorities. 
In  addition,  the  stack  of  processes  is  easily  accessible  to 
running  processes,  and  thus  processes  can  (and  do)  add  and 
delete  processes  on  the  stack. 


In 

addition  , 

by  making 

use  o 

f the 

user 

-def  i 

ned 

interrupt 

character 

faci 

lity 

and  the 

features 

avai 

lable 

in 

the  new 

"spaghetti 

stack 

" version 

of  INTERLISP, 

it 

is 

possible 

for  the 

user 

to  i 

nterrupt 

any  proc 

ess  , 

save 

its 

context  c 

ompletely , 

and  st 

art 

up  a copy  of  the 

ENGLISHEXEC 

which  ca 

n answer  ge 

neral 

NLS 

factual 

questions 

, or 

start 

up 

a safe  NLS  environ 

nent 

on 

which  t 

o experi 

ment 

with 

out 

affecting 

the  cu 

rrent 

NLS 

enviro 

nnent . 

This 

enables 

students 

to  try  out 

risky 

pro 

cedures 

without 

fearing 

the 

14 


consequences  of  potentially  costly  mistakes. 


The  spaghetti  stack  features  permit  the  entire  context 
and  state  of  a complicated  (perhaps  recursive)  process  to  be 
saved,  to  be  run  later  or  examined  by  other  programs.  This 
has  been  used  to  implement  a "coroutine  package"  which 
greatly  facilitated  writing  simple,  easy  to  understand 
modules . 


An  example  of  this  is  the  "question  posing  and 
evaluation  module".  This  module  is  run  having  as  arguments 
a question  to  be  posed  to  the  student,  and  evaluation 
procedures  for  possible  answers.  It  would  be  easy  to  write 
if  it  were  expected  simply  to  pose  a question  and  to 
interpret  the  next  student  input  as  an  answer.  However,  we 
wished  to  allow  the  student  to  interact  with  the  ENGLISHEXEC 
once  the  question  is  posed,  by  asking  questions  or  typing  in 
commands  if  he  desires.  Thus  answer  evaluation  must  be  held 
in  abeyance  until  the  student  actually  types  in  an  answer. 


With  the  coroutine  package  this  is  simple  - the 
question-posing  module  calls  a coroutine  which  puts  the 
question-posing-module  on  the  stack  with  the  evaluation 
section  to  be  run  next,  puts  an  ENGLISHEXEC  process  on  the 
top  of  the  stack,  and  then  cedes  control  to  the  monitor. 
When  the  ENGLISHEXEC  recognizes  an  input  as  an  answer,  it 
removes  itself  from  the  stack  and  calls  the  question-posing 
module  as  a coroutine.  To  the  question-posing  module  the 


15 


net  result  is  that  the  student 's  answer  is  made  available  as 
if  from  a subroutine.  While  this  could  have  been  done  with 
subroutines,  the  coroutine  technique  substantially 
simplifies  the  state  of  the  system  during  the  period  after 
the  question  is  posed. 

Tutorial  Material 

The  tutorial  material  has  been  expanded  considerably 
since  November,  197^,  and  now  consists  of  five  lessons 
rather  than  three.  These  lessons  describe  the  BASE 
subsystem  of  the  teletype-oriented*  version  of  NLS  as  it 
appeared  in  March,  1975;  they  are  written  specifically  for 
naive  users  with  no  previous  knowledge  of  NLS  and  (perhaps) 
no  previous  acquaintance  with  terminals  or  computer  systems. 

New  Text  - To  facilitate  the  initiation  of  these  naive  users 
into  the  mysteries  of  computer-assisted  instruction,  an 
interactive  introduction  has  been  written  which  gives  a 
brief  description  of  the  goals  of  the  system  and  explains 
the  use  of  <CR>  to  terminate  commands,  <CTRL-A>  and  <CTRL-X> 
for  line  editing,  <CTRL-T>  to  determine  the  state  of  the 
job,  and  <CTRL-H>  to  get  the  attention  of  the  "tutor" 

*We  use  the  term  teletype  to  denote  generically  a hard-copy 
terminal , as  opposed  to  a display  terminal . 


16 


( ENGLISHEXEC ) , This  introduction  supplants  and  surpasses 
the  instruction  sheet  handout  which  was  used  for  this 
purpose  previously. 


The  five  lessons  differ  in  both  content  and  structure 
from  their  predecessors.  Revision  of  the  content  of  the 
original  three  chapters  was  made  necessary  by  changes  in  the 
NLS  syntax  and  in  a few  NLS  commands.  The  material  was 
extended  to  provide  more  examples  and  to  present  commands 
not  previously  covered.  These  new  commands  include  Print 
File,  Print  Rest,  print  the  context  of  the  CM  (/),  Reset 
Viewspecs,  and  Output  Sequential  File  for  producing  a text 
file  which  can  be  listed  on  a line  printer.  A brief 
description  of  the  Help  command  is  given  at  the  end  of  the 
last  lesson  so  that  the  "graduating"  student  will  know  how 
to  make  use  of  this  facility  when  he  uses  NLS  without 
tutorial  supervision,  A small,  self-contained  help  data 
file  about  viewspecs  has  been  provided  for  practice  with  the 
use  of  this  command . 


Branching  - These  changes  in  conten 
less  significance  than  the  increas 
student  by  the  new  control  structur 
the  tutorial  material  by  the  int 
remedial  loops.  The  ability  to  use 
order  and  the  content  of  what 
student  can  be  made  dependent  on 


t, 

however 

, are  of  i 

much 

ed 

freedom 

granted  to 

the 

e , 

and  to 

the  author 

of 

rod 

uct ion 

of  branches 

and 

branches 

means  that 

the 

is 

being  presented  to 

the 

his 

choic 

es  or  on 

his 

17 


per f ormance . 


The  addition  of  these  facilities  transformed 


the  task  of  providing  the  tutorial  material  from  writing  a 
text  (the  Primer)  to  designing  a programmed  instruction 
course . 

From  the  students'  point  of  view,  each  lesson  (and  the 
introduction)  is  composed,  as  before,  of  short  sections  of 
text  which  are  printed  at  the  terminal . At  the  end  of  such 
presentations,  the  student  is  given  the  opportunity  to 
request  more  text,  to  ask  any  number  of  questions,  or  to 
practice  with  NLS  using  any  commands  that  he  chooses. 

Tasks  - Some  text  sections  are  followed  by  tasks  which  the 
student  is  asked  to  perform.  In  the  course  of  doing  a task, 
the  student  may  use  <CTRL-H>  to  get  the  "tutor's"  attention; 
he  nay  then  ask  questions  , practice  with  NLS  to  see  the 
effect  of  a command,  ask  that  he  be  allowed  to  restart  the 
task,  or  ask  that  the  task  be  done  for  him.  If  the  student 
performs  the  task,  his  work  is  evaluated  and  helpful  comment 
or  criticism  is  provided.  If  his  work  is  unsatisfactory  he 
may  be  asked  to  do  the  task  again,  either  wholly  or 
partially . 

Questions  - Some  text  sections  are  followed  by  questions  for 
the  student  to  answer.  In  the  course  of  trying  to  answer 
the  question  he  may  ask  questions  himself,  or  practice  with 
NLS  in  an  attempt  to  determine  the  answer. 


18 


A set  of  questions  (a  quiz)  has  been  placed  at  the  end 
of  the  introduction  and  of  the  first  two  lessons  so  that  the 
student  may  have  this  additional  method  of  assessing  his 
progress.  Answers  are  evaluated  and  appropriate  responses 
made.  Considerable  latitude  is  provided  in  the  judging  of 
answers  so  that  the  student  is  not  constrained  to  a 
particular  form.  For  example,  the  question  "What  is  the 
statement  number  of  the  origin  statement"  may  be  answered  0, 
statement  0,  or  zero;  all  are  equally  correct.  In  cases  in 
which  an  answer  has  several  parts,  missing  information  is 
often  supplied  in  the  evaluation. 

Answers  - The  handling  of  students'  answers  is  made  easy  by 
the  use  of  answer  predicates.  A sequence  of  these 
predicates  can  be  written  by  the  author  after  each  question; 
the  predicates  are  then  tested  one  after  the  other  until  one 
of  them  succeeds.  They  operate  in  two  steps:  the  first  one 
provides  for  extracting  expected  words,  for  testing  those 
words  in  various  ways,  and  for  filtering  out  irrelevant 
parts  of  the  answer;  the  second  step  is  some  action  which  is 
undertaken  or  not,  depending  on  the  outcome  of  the  first. 
These  actions  generally  consist  of  some  text  being  printed 
followed  by  an  optional  branching  instruction. 


English  Front  End 


19 


The  English  front  end  handles  all  language  input  from  the 
student . It  therefore  must  be  powerful  enough  to 
distinguish  between  commands,  ("Start  lesson  5",  "Delete 
branch  2");  queries,  ("How  do  I print  the  whole  file?");  and 
replies  to  tutor-generated  questions  ("The  statements  are  4A 
and  4B").  We  decided  to  use  the  notion  of  a semantic 
grammar  [Burton  1975]  with  two  important  additions,  namely 
instantiation  of  variables  and  Case  assignments  [Fillmore 
1968],  These  two  processes  will  be  described  later. 


The  key  notion  underlying  the  semantic  grammar  approach 
to  parsing  is  the  replacement  of  the  search  for  syntactic 
constructs  by  a search  for  semantic  ones.  Parsing  a 
student's  request  in  this  way  yields  its  meaning  directly , 


i.e.,  it  produces  an 

executable  ret 

rieval 

f ormula 

that 

prescribes  a search 

in 

the  system' 

s "data 

base" 

( the 

semantic  network  plus 

the 

user's  work 

space ) . 

The 

search 

can  then  be  carried 

out 

and  the  resul 

ts  used 

to  synthesize 

an  answer  to  the  request.  Notice  that  in  such  a parsing 
process  there  are  no  separate  syntactic  and  semantic  phases 
(as  there  are  in  systems  like  the  LUNAR  parser  [Woods 
1972]) . 


The  Parsing  Process-  The  parsing  process  begins  with  a 
prescan  of  the  student's  input.  Abbreviations  are  expanded, 
synonyms  are  recognized  and  rewritten  into  a canonical  form, 
and  compounds  are  collected  into  one  word.  These  processes 


20 


the 


ease  the  work  of  the  parser  itself  by  cutting  down  on 
number  of  alternatives  that  must  be  considered. 


After  the  input  is  prescanned, 
parse  it  using  an  embodiment  of  the 
in  Figure  1 . Each  non-terminal  nod 
semantic  category  which  takes  into 
ways  of  expressing  it . Each  semant 
in  a LISP  function  that  tests 
substring  of  it)  to  determine  if  it 
If  successful,  the  function  return 
the  "meaning"  of  the  string. 


an  attempt  is  made 
grammar  described  in 


e of  the 

grammar  is 

account  a 

11 

the 

predic 

ic  catego 

ry 

is 

embod 

the  inp 

ut 

string  (o 

belongs 

to 

the 

catego 

s a value 

which 

conden 

to 

BNF 

a 

ted 
ied 
r a 

ry. 

ses 


The  top  level  rule  is  <REQUEST>,  which  can  be  realized 
by  four  semantic  categories:  <DIRECTIVE>,  <QUESTI0N>, 
<NLS/ACTION/REQ> , and  <ANSWER>.  This  means  that  an  input 
from  the  user  (a  request)  can  be  either  a directive,  a 


question,  an 

NLS  command  expressed 

in  English 

, or  an 

answer 

to  a ques 

tion  asked  previousl 

Y by 

the 

system . 

Each 

alternative 

is  tried  sequentially 

until 

one 

succeeds 

If 

none  succeed,  an  error  message  is  typed  to  the  student  ("I 
didn't  understand  that.  Please  rephrase.")  A good  way  to 
describe  the  parsing  process  is  by  example.  We  shall  follow 
the  parsing  of  the  request  "What  command  prints  the  next 
statement?"  (see  Figure  1). 


21 


<REQUEST> : = <DIRECTIVE> 

< QUESTION> 

<NLS/ACTION/REQ> 

<ANSWER> 

<DIRECTIVE>  : = ? ! CHECK  ! PLAY  RESTART  ! GO  ! HELP  ! STOP 

< QUESTION> : = <DEFINE/REQ> 

<WHATIS/REQ> 

<CONTENT/REQ> 

<PARTS-IN-PART/REQ> 

< PARTS- IN- LEVEL/REQ> 

<PROCEDURE/REQ> 

<TYPE/REQ> 

<INSTR/REQ> 

<POSITION/REQ> 

<NLS/ACTION/REQ>:=  < ACTION/SPEO 

<ANSWER> : = <THE-ANSWER> 

<DONT-KNOW-ANSWER> 

<LIST- ANSWER> 

<THE-ANSWER> : = [THE  THEY  IT]  [IS  ARE] 

<DONT-KNOW-ANSWER>  :=  TELLXME  ! I DON'T  KNOW 

<LIST-ANSWER> : = a list  that  doesn't  begin  with  a <VERB> 

or  a question  word  like  What,  Is,  Why,  etc. 

<DEFINE/REQ> : = [DEFINE  DESCRIBE]  <NOUN> 

WHAT  DOES  <NOUN>  [DO  MEAN  STANDX FOR ] 

HOW  DOES  <NOUN>  WORK 

<WHATIS/REQ> : = WHAT\ IS* 

[ PURPOSEXOF  <NOUN> 

CONTENTXOF  <STR+ADDR> 

LEVELXOF  <STR+ADDR> 

PROCEDUREXFOR  <ACTION/SPEC> 

ADDRESSXOF  <STR+ADDR> 

EXAMPLESXOF  <NOUN> 

EXAMPLEXOF  <NOUN> 

DEFINITIONXOF  <NOUN> 

<CURRENT/PART> 

<STR+ADDR> 

<NOUN> ] 

* A1 so  SHOWXME  TELLXME  GIVEXME  TELL\ME\ ABOUT 
WHAT\ ARE 

<CONTENT/REQ> : = WHAT  <STRUCTURAL>  CONTAINS  <STRING> 


Figure  1.  BNF  description  of  the  grammar. 


22 


<PARTS-IN-PART/REQ>:=  WHAT  <STRUCTURAL>  ARE  IN  <FILE/PART> 

WHAT  ARE  <STRUCTURAL>  IN  <FILE/PART> 

<PARTS-IN-LEVEL/REQ>:=  WHAT  <STRUCTURAL>  ARE  <LEVEL/PART> 

<PROCEDURE/REQ>:=  [HOW\DO\I  SHOW\ME\HOW\TO  TELL\HE\ ABOUT ] < ACTION/SPEO 

<TYPE/REQ> : = WHAT  CAN  I TYPE  AFTER  [<VERB>  <STRING>  <PROMPT>] 

WHAT  CAN  FOLLOW  [<VERB>  <STRING>  <PROMPT>] 

<INSTR/REQ> :=  WHAT  (COMMAND)  < ACTION/SPEO 

<POSITION/REQ> :=  WHERE  AM  I 

WHERE  IS/ ARE  <STR+ADDR> 

<ACTION/SPEC> :=  <VERB>  [<OBJ>] 

<VERB>:=  word  whose  part  of  speech  is  Verb 

<OBJ>  : = [ <RELATIONAL> ] [ <NOUN/PHRASE> ] [<OBJ>] 

<RELATIONAL>  : = words  like  NEXTXTO  FROM  AT  TO,  etc. 

<NOUN/PHRASE> :=  <TASK> 

<STR+ADDR> 

<FILE> 

<NOUN> 

< TASK> : = TASK  <NUMBER> 

<STR+ADDR>:=  <FILE/PART> 

THE  <STRUCTURAL>  <STRING> 

THE  <TEXTUAL>  <STRING> 

<CURRENT/PART> 

<STRING> 

<FILE> : = (NLSXFILE)  [BREAKFAST  DINNER  MYBREAKFAST ] 

<NOUN>:=  any  word  whose  part  of  speech  is  Noun 

<NUMBER>:=  a number 

<FILE/PART> : = STATEMENTXO 

GROUP  <ADDRESS>  <ADDRESS> 

[STATEMENT  STATEMENTX NUMBER  BRANCH  PLEX]  <ADDRESS> 
<ADDRESS>:=  a word  whose  first  character  is  a number 
<STRUCTURAL> :=  STATEMENT  ! BRANCH  ! GROUP  ! PLEX 
<STRING>:=  a string  delineated  by  double  quotes 

Figure  1 (cont) 


23 


<TEXTUAL> : = WORD  ! CHARACTER  ! TEXT 

<CURRENT/PART>:=  CURRENTXNLSX COMMAND 

CURRENTWIEWSPECS 
CURRENTX STATEMENT 
NEXT\ STATEMENT 
BACKXSTATEMENT 
CURRENTXADDRESS 
POSITIONXOFXTHEXCM 
CURRENTXSTATEMENTX NUMBER 
CURRENTXFILE 


Figure  1 (cont) 


24 


In  the  prescan  the  words  "next  statement"  are 
recognized  as  a compound  word  or  concept  and  are  rewritten 
as  nextXstatement . Starting  with  the  grammar  rule 
<REQUEST>,  the  first  check  is  to  see  if  the  sentence  is  a 
<DIRECTIVE>.  It  fails  and  the  next  one  is  tried, 
<QUESTION>.  The  first  seven  realizations  of  the  rule  fail; 
but  <INSTR/REQ>  succeeds  with  "What"  being  followed 
optionally  by  the  word  "command",  followed  by  an 
< ACTION/SPEO . <ACTION/SPEC>  succeeds,  since  "print  the 
nextXstatement"  is  indeed  an  action  specification. 
< ACTION/SPEO  returns  as  its  value  (remember  it  is  a LISP 
function)  an  expression  that  is  the  "meaning"  of  the  action 
specification : 


( ( VRB  PRINT)  (OBJ  NEXTXSTATEMENT) ) 

This  says  that  the  action  is  represented  by  the  verb  "print" 
and  the  object  of  the  action  is  "nextXstatement " . In  turn, 

<INSTR/REQ>  returns: 

( QFIND/INSTR  ((VRB  PRINT)  (OBJ  NEXTXSTATEMENT))) 

which  represents  the  "meaning"  of  the  sentence.  At  this 
point  the  parsing  phase  is  complete, 

To  find  the  correct  answer,  this  "meaning"  is  executed 
as  a LISP  expression.  (QFIND/INSTR  is  the  function  and  VRB 
and  OBJ  are  its  arguments).  The  function  QFIND/INSTR  first 
checks  to  see  if  there  is  an  OBJ.  If  there  is  one,  it  looks 


25 


under  the  OBJ's  data  base  entry  for  a section  of  data  base 
beginning  with  the  VRB.  If  that  search  fails,  a general 
reply  is  given  by  finding  all  instruments  (commands)  under 
the  VRB  print  and  printing  out  the  procedure  for  using  each 
one.  In  this  way,  most  of  the  knowledge  the  data  base 
contains  about  printing  would  be  given  to  the  student.  The 
belief  is  that  a complete  description  is  better  than  a 
simple  "I  don't  know".  Among  all  these  procedures,  the 
student  may  find  the  one  he  was  looking  for. 

In  our  example,  the  search  for  the  VRB  under  the  OBJ 
succeeds  (see  figure  2). 


Figure  2 

NEXT\ STATEMENT 

(PRINT  (I  2)  (AGENT  NIL  USER) 

(OBJ  NIL  NEXTXSTATEMENT) 

( INSTR  NIL  <LF>\COMMAND) ) 

The  English  output  routines  take  the  piece  of  data  base  and 
form  the  English  sentence: 

YOU  PRINT  THE  NEXT  STATEMENT  USING  THE  <LF>  COMMAND. 

Fuzziness  - The  parser  allows  for  fuzziness;  that  is,  it  is 
able  to  skip  over  words  in  a controlled  way  in  order  to 
achieve  a parse.  The  hope  is  that  these  words  are  noise 
words  or  at  least  that  they  can  be  skipped  over  and  still 
permit  a parse  that  is  not  far  from  the  real  meaning  of  the 


26 


request.  The  problem  is  that  in  some  cases  fuzziness  leads 
to  a completely  different  meaning.  For  example,  consider 
the  sentence  "What  are  the  default  viewspecs?".  In  pushing 
for  an  object,  let's  say  the  parser  doesn't  recognize  the 
word  "default".  Fuzziness  would  allow  the  parser  to  skip 
over  this  word.  It  recognizes  "viewspecs",  and  in  effect 
parses  the  sentence  as  "What  are  the  viewspecs?" . Applying 
fuzziness  techniques  well  is  a very  tricky  business! 

Instantiation  of  Variables  - An  effort  was  made  to  see  what 
it  would  take  to  build  an  English  front  end  for  NLS  that 
would  allow  the  student  to  express  NLS  commands  in  English. 
The  added  bonus  from  this  research  was  the  ability  to  answer 
with  greater  precision  questions  that  dealt  with  more 
specific  information  than  the  data  base  explicitly  contains. 
An  example  is  the  sentence  "How  do  I delete  a structure 
unit"  versus  the  more  specific  request  "How  do  I delete  plex 
2?"  This  ability  was  achieved  by  adding  to  the  data  base  a 
new  construct:  instantiation  variables  that  may  get  set 
during  parsing  and,  if  so,  will  be  used  in  place  of  the 
general  term  — otherwise  the  more  general  term  is  used . 
For  example,  in  the  data  base  entry  for  DELETEXCOMMAND , the 
string  $INS  appears  3 times.  Each  time  it  is  followed  by  a 
variable  name,  (XOBJ,  XOBJSTR , or  XADDSTR ) and  then  followed 
by  a regular  piece  of  SCHOLAR  data  base  (see  Figure  3) • 


27 


Figure  3 


DELETEXCOMMAND 

[PURPOSE  (I  2)  (DELETE  NIL 
(AGENT  NIL  USER) 

(OBJ  NIL  ( $INS  XOBJ  ($EOR  (NAME  NIL  (OF  NIL  STRUCTUREXUNIT) ) 

(NAME  NIL  (OF  NIL  STRING XUNIT) ) ) ) ) 

( INSTR  NIL  DELETEXCOMMAND) 

(PROCEDURE  NIL  (TYPE  NIL 
(AGENT  NIL  USER) 

(OBJ  NIL  ( $SEQ  "DELETE  " 

[ $ INS  XOBJSTR 

( $EOR  (NAME  NIL  (OF  NIL  STRUCTUREXUNIT) ) 
(NAME  NIL  (OF  NIL  STRINGXUNIT ] 

( $INS  XADDSTR  ADDRESS) 

< CR > <CR> ] 


In  processing  "How  do  I delete  a structure  unit"  none  of  the 
instantiation  variables  is  set  and  so  a general  response  is 


given  : 


YOU  DELETE  A STRUCTURE  UNIT  OR  A STRING  UNIT  USING  THE 
DELETE  COMMAND. 

PROCEDURE:  YOU  TYPE  ' DELETE  FOLLOWED  BY  THE  NAME  OF  A 
STRUCTURE  UNIT  OR  THE  NAME  OF  A STRING  UNIT,  THE  ADDRESS, 
<CR > , AND  <CR> . 


In  processing  "How  do  I delete  plex  2" , all  of  the  variables 
are  set  during  parsing  so  a very  specific  reply  can  be 
given  : 


YOU  DELETE  PLEX  2 USING  THE  DELETE  COMMAND. 

PROCEDURE:  YOU  TYPE  'DELETE  ' FOLLOWED  BY  'PLEX  ',  '2', 

<CR> , AND  <CR > . 


Now,  not  only  can  the  question  be  answered,  but  it  can 
be  turned  into  a command  to  NLS  to  perform  the  action 
"Delete  plex  2"  on  a copy  of  the  user's  file.  It  parses  as 


28 


an  <NLS/ACTION/REQ> . The  form  returned  from  the  parse  is 

( QDO/PROCEDURE  ( VRB  DELETE) 

(OBJ  PLEX  ( ADDR  2)) 

QDO/PROCEDURE  is  a function  which  first  retrieves  the 
appropriate  piece  of  data  base  and  checks  to  see  if  all  the 
instantiation  variables  in  this  piece  are  filled  in.  If 
then  calls  LISP-NLS,  handing  down  to  it  the  legal  command 
sequence.  (If  all  the  instantiation  variables  were  not  set 
during  the  parse,  a reply  is  generated  felling  the  student 
what  is  missing.)  Using  a copy  of  the  student's  current 
file,  LISP-NLS  executes  the  command  sequence: 

BASE  C:  Delete  C:  Plex  (at)  A:  2; 

OK : ; 

Further  uses  of  LISP-NLS  to  answer  questions  - We  have  just 
described  one  use  of  LISP-NLS:  responding  to  an  English 
request  to  have  NLS  perform  a command.  A second  use  is  to 
respond  to  queries  like  "Where  am  I now"  and  "What  is  the 
address  of  the  statement  containing  "PRIME"?"  These  kinds  of 
requests  imply  that  at  least  one  NLS  command  be  performed. 
In  the  first  case  the  answer  can  be  found  by  performing  the 
».»  command;  in  the  second  by  performing  a series  of 
commands  - Jump  Address  0,  Jump  Address  "PRIME",  then  "."  to 
get  the  current  address. 


29 


Hunan  Engineering  Features 


In  order  to  make  NLS-SCHOLAR  an  easy  and  pleasant 
systen  to  use,  we  strived  to  endow  it  with  a number  of  human 
engineering  features  that  will  be  described  next. 

Stop  and  resume . - Sessions  with  NLS-SCHOLAR  have  natural 
breaking  points,  such  as  lesson  boundaries  or  large  topic 
changes,  at  which  it  is  convenient  and  even  desirable  for  a 
user  to  quit.  Having  stopped  at  one  of  these 
system-provided  breaks,  the  user  can  resume  the  lesson  at  a 
later  time  by  asking  the  system  something  like  "start  lesson 
3 now,  please".  Often,  however,  users  find  the  time  between 
these  natural  breaks  to  be  too  long,  either  because  their 
own  performance  has  required  a longer  time  than  average,  or 
because  something  else  demands  their  attention.  We  have 
provided  the  system  with  the  necessary  mechanism  for 
allowing  those  users  to  stop  the  lesson  at  any  time,  in 
whatever  situation  they  may  find  themselves:  in  the  middle 
of  a lesson,  performing  a task,  answering  a question,  or 
even  working  with  NLS  doing  their  own  thing.  All  they  have 
to  do  is  get  the  attention  of  the  "tutor"  (by  typing 
<CTRL-H>)  and  then  tell  it  they  want  to  stop.  The  system 
responds  by  asking  the  user  to  confirm  his  request  and  to 
indicate  if  he  intends  to  continue  at  a later  time.  If  both 
answers  are  affirmative,  the  system  writes  out  a file  (a 
LISP  SYSOUT  file)  in  the  user's  directory.  When  the  user 


30 


comes  back,  the  system  reminds  him  of  the  existence  of  a 
suspended  work  session;  if  the  user  wants  to,  he  can 
continue  exactly  where  he  left  off  by  simply  typing  RESUME 
(which  causes  a LISP  SYSIN).  This  feature  was  very  sorely 
needed  and  was  used  by  almost  all  those  involved  in  the 
field  testing. 

Getting  help  f rom  an  expert . - Since  we  did  not  expect  our 
system  to  be  able  to  comprehend  all  user  requests  and  to 
always  provide  useful  answers,  we  endowed  NLS-SCHOLAR  with  a 
feature  that  allows  a human  expert  to  come  smoothly  to  the 
system's  rescue  when  the  system  fails.  This  facility 
operates  as  follows.  Let's  suppose  that  a user  is  in  the 
middle  of  a task,  asks  a question  whose  answer  is  badly 
needed,  and  the  system  either  fails  to  understand  his 
question  or  gives  him  an  unsatisfactory  answer.  If  he  asks 
for  help  at  this  point,  the  system  will  seek  a logged-in 
human  expert,  establish  a link,  and  report  the  failure  to 
the  expert.  If  it  isn't  possible  for  the  expert  to  provide 
the  answer  solely  on  the  basis  of  an  isolated  question,  he 
can  examine  a history  list  maintained  by  the  system.  This 
list  is  a record  of  previous  interactions  between  user  and 
system  which  provides  the  context  the  expert  often  needs  to 
answer  a question  appropriately. 

The  main  reason  for  the  incorporation  of  this  facility 
was  to  allow  our  students  to  utilize  lesson  time  more 


31 


effectively;  we  wanted  their  experience  using  NLS-SCHOLAR  to 
be  a profitable  one  in  spite  of  the  system's  limitations, 
and  we  hoped  the  facility  would  minimize  frustration  and 
unnecessary  breaks.  In  spite  of  our  hopes,  the  facility  was 
hardly  used  at  all:  only  one  of  our  users  ever  attempted  to 
take  advantage  of  it,  but  unfortunately  no  expert  was 
logged-in  at  the  time  help  was  sought. 

Question  mark . - Given  the  great  flexibility  of  the  control 
structure,  the  student  may  well  be  confused  as  to  what  to  do 
when  he  gets  the  "tutor's"  attention.  A question  mark 
facility  was  implemented  to  help  users  remember  what  they 
could  request  the  system  to  do  for  them.  When  the  student 
types  a "?",  the  system  responds  with  a list  of  one-word 
commands  which  may  be  used  to  initiate  actions,  such  as 
starting  a lesson,  restarting  a task,  stopping  a lesson, 
resuming  it,  summoning  help,  calling  NLS,  etc.  These 
actions  are  not  necessarily  invoked  specifically  by  their 
associated  command;  rather,  it  is  the  combination  of  command 
and  situation  that  decides  which  action  will  be  undertaken. 
Thus,  if  a user  types  "continue",  several  things  may  happen: 
a)  if  he  was  in  the  middle  of  a lesson,  the  lesson 
continues;  b)  if  he  was  performing  a task,  he  goes  back  to 
the  task's  environment;  c)  if  he  just  entered  NLS-SCHOLAR 
and  there  is  a stopped  lesson  under  his  name,  the  lesson  is 
resumed;  d)  if  he  was  working  with  NLS  doing  his  own  thing, 


32 


he  is  returned  where  he  left  off. 


Efficiency  - The  newly  brought  up  NLS-SCHOLAR  system  is 
remarkably  more  efficient,  in  terms  of  CPU  utilization,  than 
its  predecessor:  it  takes  about  3 minutes  of  CPU  time,  on 
the  average,  per  lesson  hour.  This  efficiency  measure 
applies  to  a lightly  loaded  TENEX  system;  under  these 
circumstances  the  lesson  proceeds  at  a good  fast  clip. 

This  relatively  good  efficiency  is  due  to  three 
improvements  made  to  NLS-SCHOLAR.  The  first  improvement  was 
to  redesign  and  streamline  the  output  routines,  the  ones 
which  are  responsible  for  producing  English  sentences  out  of 
information  encoded  in  the  semantic  network.  This  resulted 
in  a package  that  operates  5 times  as  fast  as  the  old  one. 

The  second  improvement  was  to  block-compile  LISP-NLS. 
This  technique  provides  a way  of  compiling  several  functions 
(LISP  routines)  into  an  entity  called  a block.  Once  a block 
is  entered,  function  calls  within  it  are  very  fast  and 
variables'  values  are  looked  up  directly,  resulting  in 
considerable  execution  speed-ups.  It  is  not  rare  to  see 
order  of  magnitude  improvements  from  judicious  use  of  this 
technique . 

The  third  big  improvement  was  to  pre-compute  the  tasks ' 
vectors.  Previously,  when  a user's  performance  of  a task 
was  to  be  evaluated,  the  system  used  LISP-NLS  to  perform  the 


33 


correct  sequence  of  commands  and  to  obtain  the  correct  image 


of  the  work 

space . 

This  was  then 

compared  with 

the  result 

of  the 

user  ' s 

commands.  -In 

the  present 

version  of 

NLS-SCHOLAR 

, these 

correct  images 

are  obtained 

for  each  task 

at  system  generation  time,  and  are 

stored  away 

in  a separate 

file. 

acces 

that 

Conse 

waste 


A file  handle  is  provided  for  eac 
sible  from  the  semantic  network 
the  correct  image  can  be  retri 
quently,  when  a task  is  evaluate 
d in  generating  the  correct  image 


h task,  an 
entry  for 
eved  from 
d there  is 


d is  made 
the  task  so 
the  file, 
no  CPU  time 


34 


SECTION  III  OPERATIONAL  TESTING  AND  RESULTS 


As  described  at  the  beginning  of  Section  II, 
"operational"  testing  of  successive  versions  of  NLS-SCHOLAR 
started  early  in  the  course  of  our  work.  For  this  purpose 
we  used  BBN  personnel  ranging  from  completely  naive  users, 
through  secretaries  with  experience  using  other 
computer-based  text  editors,  up  to  experienced  computer  and 
behavioral  scientists. 

When  our  system  was  (reluctantly)  pronounced  ready,  it 
was  used  in  an  informal  but  realistic  testing  environment  by 
14  non-BBN  users.  Among  them  were  DOD  personnel  from  the 
Air  Force  Data  Services  Center  --  an  outfit  chosen  by  the 
Contracting  Agency  --  whose  sophistication  in  using  NLS 
ranged  from  very  naive  to  experienced.  In  addition,  the 
Contracting  Agency  solicited  an  independent  evaluation  from 
qualified  Technical  Personnel  of  the  Information  Sciences 
Institute  (ISI)  of  the  University  of  Southern  California. 
The  results  of  this  evaluation  are  described  in  a report 
which  is  included  in  this  document  as  an  Appendix. 

The  data  obtained  from  the  operational  testing  is  in 
the  form  of  dribble  protocols  recording  the  "dialogue" 
between  users  and  NLS-SCHOLAR.  Over  50  protocols  were  of 
significant  length  (ranging  from  20  to  90  minutes  of  on-line 
time)  to  be  considered  useful  and  to  warrant  their  analysis. 
In  addition  to  this  data,  an  amount  roughly  equivalent  was 


35 


obtained  via  our  own  internal  testing  using  BBN's  personnel. 
Taking  everything  into  account,  protocols  representing 
approximately  100  hours  of  on-line  time  were  analyzed.  This 
amount  of  data  is  not  sufficient  to  establish  statistically 
valid  results,  but  it  is  enough  to  sustain  very  definite 
qualitative  conclusions  about  the  system's  capabilities  and 
1 imitations . 


General  Results 

The  main  thrust  of  this  section  is  to  describe  and 
discuss  a number  of  specific  problems  and  problem  areas 
identified  in  the  course  of  the  field  testing.  In  order  to 
frame  the  descriptions  and  to  focus  the  discussions,  we  find 
it  necessary,  at  the  risk  of  being  considered  unscholarly, 
to  present  the  general  results  of  our  analysis  here  rather 
than  at  the  end  of  this  section.  They  are: 

1)  The  tutorial  set-up  appears  to  be  very  effective.  New 
information  is  presented  in  bits  and  pieces  of  digestible 
size  and  users  are  kept  on  their  toes  (albeit  in  a very 
friendly  environment)  with  dozens  of  questions  they  are 
asked  to  answer  and  NLS  tasks  they  are  asked  to  perform. 
Users  dc>  learn  NLS:  this  is  evident  not  only  in  the 

progress  of  their  work,  but  also  from  personal 
communications  (telephone  calls,  messages,  and  link  ups). 


36 


2)  The  "supervised  task  environment",  whereby  the  system 
evaluates  the  results  of  a user's  performance  of  an  NLS 


task  and  offers  comments  about  it,  appears  to  be  very 
valuable.  The  system  succeeds  in  pointing  out  mistakes 
and  provides  information  useful  for  rectifying  them. 
However,  the  system  is  sometimes  over-zealous  (rejecting 


outrightly  th 

e pe 

rformance  of 

a task  fo 

r some 

trivial 

discrepancy ) 

and 

sometimes 

fails  to 

point 

out  some 

erroneous  ac 

tion 

undertaken 

by  the 

user  . 

These 

shortcomings 

are 

not  seriou 

s but  they 

detract 

from  the 

system's  "intelligent"  appearance. 

3)  A substantial  part  of  the  system's  "smarts"  resides  in 
its  English  front  end;  NLS-SCHOLAR  is  designed  so  that 
the  user  can  take  the  initiative  anytime  it  is  his  turn 
to  type  and  formulate  requests  (usually  questions)  to  the 
system.  Not  surprisingly,  however,  this  feature  of 
NLS-SCHOLAR  performed  less  satisfactorily  than  the  rest 
of  the  system;  only  about  1/3  of  the  requests  formulated 
were  answered  relevantly  and  usefully.  This  poor 
performance  may  have  inhibited  many  users  from  asking 
more  questions. 

In  view  of  the  results  outlined  above,  the  rest  of 
this  section  is  concentrated  on  a detailed  discussion  of 
the  performance  of  our  English  front  end,  and  on  the 
general  issues  it  raises  in  the  area  of  Natural  Language 


37 


Comprehension . 


Overview 

Two  points  must  be  considered  in  order  to  view  this 
last  result  in  the  proper  perspective.  In  the  first 
place,  a large  majority  of  the  requests  that  the  system 
failed  to  answer  or  answered  incorrectly  could  have  been 
handled  satisfactorily  with  minor  changes  to  the  system 
and  additions  to  its  semantic  network.  Undetected 
spelling  errors,  unanticipated  synonyms,  common  but  not 
anticipated  sentence  syntax,  lack  of  specific  knowledge, 
etc.,  are  examples  of  problems  of  this  kind  which  are 
relatively  easy  to  rectify  as  each  one  is  found.  As  a 
whole,  however,  much  time  and  effort  must  be  expended  to 
eradicate  such  problems  entirely. 

Secondly  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  tutorial 
material  is  very  clear  and  complete.  It  leaves 
relatively  little  room  for  doubt  within  the  domain  of 
procedural  and  conceptual  knowledge  that  the  question 
answering  system  is  designed  to  handle.  Consequently, 
the  relatively  few  unanswered  requests  not  covered  in  the 
"easy  problems"  category  described  above,  reflected  a 
combination  of  subtler  doubts  and  the  efforts  of 
sophisticated  users  to  concoct  a question  to  assess  the 
system's  capabilities. 


38 


These  questions  remained  unanswered  either  because 
they  were  expressed  in  round  about  ways  (i,e.,  outside 
the  set  of  paraphrases  the  system  can  recognize  or  had 
convoluted  sentence  structures),  or  because  they  were 
imprecisely  formulated.  The  round  about  problem  was  not 
important  in  our  case.  It  is  more  likely  to  occur  in 
questions  posed  by  users  returning  to  the  system  after  a 
partially  forgotten  previous  exposure  to  its  tutorial 
material . This  situation  could  not  develop  within  the 
period  the  system  was  tested . 

Imprecisely  formulated  requests  were  much  more 
common,  within  the  relatively  small  number  of 

hard-to-answer  questions  we  are  focussing  on,  than 
precise  circumlocutionss . The  relatively  high  frequency 
of  imprecisely  formulated  requests  and  their  inherent 
interest  justifies  the  more  detailed  description  and 
analysis  of  their  nature  which  will  be  found  later  in 
this  section . 

The  "easy  problems" 

Some  examples  of  problems  that  are  relatively  easy 
to  rectify  are  presented  next: 

Spelling;  errors  - Consider  for  example, 


39 


"What  is  ray  current  stateraent>?" 
or  "What  does  OK/C  mean?" 

In  the  first  case,  the  system's  spelling  error  correction 
list  contained  both  the  words  "statement"  and 

"statements",  which  resulted  in  "statements  being 

corrected  to  "statements".  The  system  knows  what  a 

"current  statement"  is  (both  the  meaning  of  the  concept 
and  how  to  find  out  its  present  value),  but  it  was 
hopelessly  confused  by  "current  statements".  Given  our 
current  approach  that  emphasizes  speed  and  expediency, 
the  remedy  is  to  eliminate  "statements"  from  the  spelling 
correction  list.  A better  solution,  such  as  performing 
morphological  analysis  and  checking  the  agreement  of  verb 
and  predicate  numbers,  would  have  required  a 

fundamentally  different  approach. 

In  the  second  example,  the  system  knows  the  meaning 
of  most  prompt  symbols,  and  in  particular  that  of  the 
OK/C:  prompt  (notice  the  colon).  While  the  system  is 
prepared  to  accept  many  common  abbreviations  and 
misspellings  of  these  symbols,  OK/C  was  not  anticipated. 

Unanticipated  synonyms  - A very  common  group,  exemplified 

by, 

"Please  review  the  one-character  commands" 

"How  do  I logout?" 


40 


"Explain  the  OK:  prompt" 

The  system  would  have  answered  these  requests  correctly 
if  they  had  contained  the  verbs  "list"  or  "tell  me  about" 
or  "give  me"  instead  of  "review";  "stop"  or  "quit" 
instead  of  "logout";  and  "describe"  instead  of  "explain". 
Fixing  this  may  be  trivially  done  by  incorporating  those 
verbs  in  the  internal  synonym  lists  of  the  system,  or  by 
incorporating  their  definitions  and  usages  in  the 

semantic  network.  Observe  that  "review"  could  have  been 
used  to  mean  something  different  from  "list",  e.g.,  to 
mean  something  like  "Let's  go  over  the  one-character 
commands  again",  after  they  have  been  presented  once.  To 
handle  this  kind  of  request  is  feasible  but  less  trivial. 

Common  but  unanticipated  syntax 
"What  NLS  commands  are  there?" 

The  almost  equivalent  question  ("What  are  the  NLS 

commands?")  would  have  been  answered  correctly,  but  that 
format  didn't  occurred  to  this  particular  user.  (Neither 
did  we  anticipate  the  "are  there"  format!) 

Lack  of  knowledge  - A few  examples  are, 

"How  do  I delete  a file?" 

"Tell  me  about  control  commands" 


41 


"What  is  an  illegal  delete?" 


Deleting  files  was  not  possible  from  within  NLS  until 
very  recently.  This  negative  knowledge  should  have  been 
incorporated  in  the  semantic  network,  enabling  the  system 
to  generate  its  canonical  negative  answer  ("YOU  MAY  NOT 
DELETE  AN  NLS  FILE  USING  AN  NLS  COMMAND").  This 
particular  question  generated  a rather  amusing  dialogue 
(albeit  very  frustrating  for  the  user)  in  which  the 
system  told  him  how  to  delete  all  sorts  of  things,  except 
files.  Also,  although  grouping  certain  commands  under 
the  category  of  "control  commands"  is  certainly 
reasonable,  the  category  was  not  anticipated  and  an  entry 
for  it  is  not  contained  in  the  semantic  network.  The 
same  applies  to  "illegal  delete". 

Poor  answers . - In  some  cases  the  answers  generated  by 

the  question  answering  system  were  unsatisfactory. 
Examples  are: 

"Describe  play" 

PLAY  IS  THE  COMMAND  YOU  TYPE  TO  THE  TUTOR  TO  PLAY  WITH 
NLS. 

"What  do  you  mean  play  with  NLS?" 

PLAY  IS  THE  COMMAND  YOU  

"What  is  a field?" 

A FIELD  IS  A SEQUENCE  OF  CONTIGUOUS  DIGITS  OR  CONTIGUOUS 
LETTERS  WITHIN  A STATEMENT  NUMBER. 


42 


"What  does  that  mean?" 


PLEASE  REPHRASE  YOUR  REQUEST. 

Obviously,  giving  more  coherent  and  complete  responses  is 
something  that  can  be  taken  care  of.  In  the  above  case, 
since  "field"  is  a particularly  difficult  entity  to 
define  in  a more  useful  way,  a specific  example  could  be 
appended  to  the  definition  (FOR  EXAMPLE,  THE  FIELDS  OF 
1 2A2  ARE  12 , A , AND  2) . 

Unanticipated  environments . - Many  of  our  users  worked 
on  display  terminals.  Since  NLS-SCHOLAR  is  geared  for 
users  of  hard  copy  terminals,  many  of  the  requests 
originating  in  display  environments  were  not  contemplated 
in  our  design.  For  example,  users  of  display  terminals 
would  often  forget  what  task  they  were  supposed  to 
perform,  or  what  question  they  were  expected  to  answer. 
Every  time  the  system  reminded  these  users  about  their 
pending  obligation,  they  would  request  a restatement  of 
the  question  or  task.  Handling  such  requests  ("What  was 
the  task?",  "Ask  the  question  again",  "What  did  you  want 
me  to  do?")  is  possible,  but  again,  we  did  not  anticipate 
them . 

As  can  be  inferred  from  the  preceding  descriptions,  the 
common  trait  that  unifies  these  classes  of  failures  is  our 
incomplete  anticipation  of  what  users  would  do  in  otherwise 


43 


expected  situations.  An  elucidating  comment  to  forestall 
our  readers  from  reaching  hasty  conclusions  is  in  order 
here  . 


It  is  very  easy  to  disregard  the  importance  of  these 
"little  failures"  and  attribute  them  solely  to  our  lack  of 
foresight.  This  condescending  attitude,  that  can  perhaps  be 
subsumed  as  "How  could  they  have  forgotten  X,  or  not  taken  Y 
into  account?"  fails  to  perceive  the  real  issue.  It  is 
false  to  believe  that  incorporating  X or  bringing  Y into  the 
fold  will  make  a substantial  difference.  The  authors  of 
this  report  did  nothing  else  during  the  last  2 months  of 
their  work,  and  still  the  system  is  plagued  with  "little 
problems"!  The  crux  of  the  matter,  what  must  be  recognized, 
is  that  when  one  is  faced  with  the  fantastic  variety,  the 
multitudinous  aspects,  and  the  changing  modalities  of  the 
behavior  of  a human  engaged  in  a dialogue  with  a machine, 
converging  to  a system  relatively  free  of  these  "little 
problems"  is  a very  long  process.  All  we  can  say  at  this 
time  is  that  this  first  round  of  field  testing  has  been 
extremely  useful  in  uncovering  a large  number  of  problems  of 
this  type,  and  that  we  expect  the  next  round  to  uncover  a 
smaller  number. 


The  Harder  Problems 

We  turn  our  attention  now  to  the  more  interesting 


44 


failures  of  our  English  front  end,  those  involving  questions 


that  were  too  imprecisely  formulated  for  our  system  to 
answer.  The  imprecision  of  these  questions  stemmed  from  the 
anaphora  they  contained  or,  more  seriously,  from  their 
"situational"  character;  that  is  to  say,  comprehending  them 
would  have  involved  understanding  the  process  of  the  user's 
interactions  with  the  system.  These  questions  arose  in  such 
a form  because  the  user  assumed  that  the  system  was  aware  of 
the  entire  situation  as  it  appeared  to  him;  it  is  surprising 
to  see  how  large  an  amount  of  contextual  information  must  be 
taken  into  account  before  such  questions  can  be  properly 
understood . 

The  difficulty  resides  not  so  much  in  the  literal 
interpretation  of  questions,  as  if  they  were  precise 
formulations  of  the  specific  bits  of  knowledge  the 
questioner  might  seek,  but  rather  in  figuring  out  what  each 
particular  person  may  have  meant  to  ask,  given  his 
background,  his  previous  experience,  his  previous 
performance,  what  he  ought  to  know  vs.  what  he  seems  to 


have  learned. 

i the  environment  he 

is  working 

on,  etc, 

. These 

are  very 

hard 

problems ; 

they  lie  a 

t the 

heart 

of  the 

Natural 

Language 

Comprehension 

research 

area 

and 

their 

general 

solution  still  eludes  us.  Our  purpose  is  to  explain  why 
these  problems  are  so  difficult,  and  to  show  the 
advisability  of  indirect  solutions. 


45 


Many  of  these  problems  are  rather  subtle  and  it  is  easy 
to  dismiss  them  because  one  can  often  stumble  upon  a 
seemingly  general  solution  whose  real  underlying  "ad-hoc" 
character  is  hard  to  perceive.  To  appreciate  the 
difficulties  involved,  we  shall  see  how  a solution  that 
seems  satisfactory  for  a particular  problem  fails  to  apply 
to  an  apparently  similar  one.  We  shall  proceed  by  analyzing 
five  scenarios  taken  from  our  protocols.  Each  scenario 
comprises  a description  of  a particular  situation,  the 
relevant  context,  and  the  question  formulated.  The 
scenarios  are  ranked  in  order  of  increasing  difficulty,  in 
terms  of  the  mechanisms  that  have  to  be  invoked  in  order  to 
handle  them. 

Anaphoric  reference 

First  scenario  - The  curtain  rises  after  the  student  has 
been  taught  the  purpose  and  usage  of  a fairly  large  number 
of  "viewspecs"  - characters  used  to  specify  how  an  NLS  file 
is  to  be  printed  or  viewed.  Before  leaving  the  subject,  the 
system  mentions  several  additional  viewspecs,  and  then  tells 
the  user: 


As  you  can  see,  there  are  a great  many  viewspecs.  If 
you  are  interested  in  what  they  control , you  may  ask  me 
questions  about  them.  However,  the  ones  that  have  been 
introduced  here  are  likely  to  be  sufficient  for  most 
purposes . 


46 


At  this  point,  the  student  asks: 

"What  do  they  control?" 

This  example  is  deceiving  because  it  would  appear  that 
handling  such  a simple  anaphoric  reference  is  within  the 
state  of  the  art  [Woods  1972].  The  difficulty,  however , 
resides  in  the  lack  of  coupling  between  the  question 
answering  system  and  the  tutorial  material;  in  other  words, 
the  question  answerer  does  not  know  the  details  of  what  the 
tutor  has  just  finished  teaching  and  cannot  place  the 
request  in  context. 

A conceivable  way  to  cope  with  this  problem  would  be  to 
have  a complete  internal  representation  (in  the  semantic 
network)  of  the  tutorial  material,  and  then  synthesize  the 
text  the  user  reads  from  that  internal  representation. 
Given  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  on  how  to  represent 
information  in  a semantic  network  and  how  to  generate 
passable  English  from  it,  such  an  approach  would  fall  short 
of  our  needs  and  would  be  totally  inadequate  for  teaching 
naive  users. 

Another  way  to  cope  with  this  problem  would  be  to 
re-write  the  text  so  that  such  anaphora  would  be  inhibited 
from  occurring,  rather  than  being  encouraged  as  they  are  in 
this  example.  The  student  is  likely  to  frame  his  questions 
in  terms  of  the  words  of  the  text,  ("If  you  are  interested 


47 


in  what  they  control " ) . so  the  elimination  of  referential 
pronouns  in  the  text  might  encourage  him  to  eliminate  them 
in  his  questions. 

But  even  if  we  could  synthesize  the  text  gracefully 
from  a semantic  network  or  re-write  it  carefully  with  an  eye 
towards  forestalling  anaphoric  questions,  other  difficulties 
would  arise  as  indicated  by  the  next  scenarios. 

Elliptic  structure 

Second  scenario  - The  system  tells  the  student: 


NLS  FILES 


In  order  to  begin  using  NLS  you  will  need  to  specify 
which  'file'  of  information  you  want  to  work  with. 

Each  file  is  sort  of  like  a notebook  or  folder  in 
which  you  can  keep  information. 

You  may  keep  as  many  different  notebooks  (files)  as 
you  like. 

Files  are  automatically  stored  when  you  are  not  using 
them . 

Before  you  can  work  with  a file  you  must  'load'  it  from 
the  storage  into  the  working  space  of  the  computer. 

Each  file  has  a name  so  you  may  refer  to  it  easily. 

File  names  are  made  up  of  letters  and  digits  and  may 
be  quite  long  - like  BUDGETFORFISCAL75 . 

No  distinction  is  made  within  file  names  between 
upper  and  lower  case  letters  - both  are  treated  as 
the  same  character. 


48 


At  this  point,  the  student  asks: 

"What  about  blanks  and  other  special  characters?" 

(Before  going  on  to  point  out  the  new  problems  inherent  in 
this  example,  we  should  mention  in  passing  that,  here  again, 
the  occurrence  of  this  question  could  have  been  prevented  by- 
re-writing the  text  so  that  it  specified  in  exact  detail 
what  characters  could  be  used  in  designating  file  names. 
This  would  provide,  however,  more  detail  than  most  users 
really  want  and  is  the  sort  of  information  that  belongs  more 
properly  in  a reference  manual  than  in  a tutorial.) 

Let  us  ignore  the  problem  of  the  conjunctional  form  of 
the  question,  which  we  are  presently  unable  to  handle,  and 
simplify  it  to  be 

"What  about  blanks?" 

The  new  problems  that  face  us  here  are  the  elliptical 
form  of  the  question  (it's  not  a sentence)  and  the 
multiplicity  of  logically  acceptable  referrents.  For 
example,  focusing  on  the  last  sentence  uttered  by  the 
"tutor",  the  answer  would  be 

UPPER  CASE  BLANKS  ARE  TREATED  THE  SAME  AS  LOWER  CASE 
BLANKS. 

If  instead  one  focused  on  files  (rather  than  on  file  names), 
one  might  generate  the  answer 

YOU  MAY  KEEP  BLANKS  (as  well  as  other  special 
characters)  IN  FILES. 


49 


In  order  to  generate  the  answer  that  the  student  is 
actually  seeking,  i.e., 

FILE  NAMES  MAY  NOT  CONTAIN  BLANKS 

we  need  a crucially  important  new  component:  a model  of  the 
user . 


Such  a model  would  be  used,  perhaps  unconsciously,  by  a 
human  tutor  in  answering  this  question.  An  experienced 
tutor  knows  that  the  rules  about  permissible  characters  in 
file  names  vary  from  system  to  system  and  might  be  expecting 
such  an  enquiry  about  file  names  from  a non-naive  student. 
The  fact  that  this  student  chose  the  term  "special 
characters",  not  mentioned  in  the  text,  indicates  that  he 
has  some  previous  experience.  He  certainly  wouldn't  be 
asking  whether  blanks  could  be  stored  in  files,  or  imagine 
that  blanks  come  in  both  upper  and  lower  case  varieties. 
Thus  for  a system  to  cope  with  a question  like  this,  it 
would  need  to  have  a broader  knowledge  base  than  that 
describing  NLS;  it  would  need  to  have  knowledge  about  the 
capabilities  and  expectations  of  the  user. 

Indeterminate  Reference 

Third  Scenario  - A similar  situation  (but  with  an 
interesting  twist)  appears  next. 


Anticipating  students'  uneasiness  and  nervousness 


50 


before  performing  their  first  task,  NLS-SCHOLAR  gives  them 
rather  precise  instructions.  To  wit: 


LOADING  A FILE 

I'd  like  to  show  you  the  file  named  DINNER  so  you  can 
see  how  an  NLS  file  is  structured. 


Your  first  task  is  to  load  this  file  so  you  can  work 
with  it. 


When  the  BASE  C:  appears,  type  the  command 
load  <SP>  file  <SP>  DINNER  <CR> 


Note  that  you  should  terminate  each  word  of  the 
command  with  a space  (<SP>);  you  should  terminate 
the  entire  command  with  a carriage  return  (<CR>). 


(You  may  type  DINNER  in  either 
case  letters.) 

upper 

or 

lower 

As  this  single  command  completes  the 
next  BASE  C:  appears  type 

quit  <SP>  <CR> 

task , 

when 

the 

I'll  then  check  what  you've  done  and 

point 

out 

any 

mistakes  you  may  have  made.  Please  be  sure  you  type  a 
<SP>  after  "quit",  before  you  type  the  <CR> . 


If  you  make  a typing  error  while  doing  this  task,  you 
may  use  <CTRL-A>  to  remove  the  last  character,  or 
<CTRL-X>  to  delete  the  entire  line. 

These  commands  work  in  the  same  way  whether  you're 
typing  to  me  or  to  NLS. 

Do  you  have  any  questions  before  doing  this  task? 


And  here  the  user  asks: 


51 


"Do  I type  the  entire  command?" 


This  is  a situation  in  which  even  a human  tutor  might  have 
difficulty  figuring  out  what  this  user  wants  to  know.  Let's 
consider  some  of  the  possible  answers. 

1 ) Focusing  on  the  last  two  sentences  before  questions  are 
invited,  the  system  could  reply 

NO.  YOU  DELETE  THE  LAST  CHARACTER  USING 
THE  <CTRL-A>  COMMAND. 

PROCEDURE:  YOU  DEPRESS  THE  CTRL 
KEY  AND  THE  A KEY  SIMULTANEOUSLY. 

This  is  NLS-SCHOLARese  for  "No.  You  don't  have  to  spell 

out  <CTRL-A>  to  delete  a character.  You  only  have  to 

depress  the  CTRL  key  and  the  A key  simultaneously." 

2)  Focusing  on  the  third  and  the  fourth  sentences,  the 

system  could  answer  with  something  akin  to  "Yes.  You 

must  spell  out  the  entire  command  exactly  as  you  are 
told . " 

3)  Finally,  the  answer  could  be  directed  to  the  fact  that 
all  parts  of  a command  must  be  specified,  and  to  type 
only  the  first  part  of  a two  part  command  leads  nowhere. 

The  twist  is  that  the  user  model  in  most  people's  minds 

would  not  be  sufficient  to  identify  the  purpose  of  the 

question.  Why  would  anyone  ask  it?  Indeed,  isn't  the  manner 
in  which  the  commands  for  the  first  task  are  to  be  typed 
clearly  described?  Isn't  it  self-evident  that  all  parts  of  a 
command  must  be  specified  before  it  can  be  executed?  And 


52 


haven't  students  already  used  the  <CTRL-A>  command  in  the 
introduction? 

The  solution  to  this  riddle  is  that  this  particular 
questioner  was  familiar  with  NLS  and  was  accustomed  to 
typing  just  the  first  letter  (or  two)  of  each  command,  using 
NLS's  expert  input  mode.  His  question  reflected  his  doubt 
that  NLS-SCHOLAR  really  meant  for  him  to  type  each  and  every 
character  of  a command,  and  wanted  the  system  to  confirm  its 
instructions.  This  familiarity  can  be  gleaned  from  watching 
his  performance  on  subsequent  tasks,  but  not  at  the  time  the 
question  was  asked,  just  before  the  first  task  in  Lesson 
One ! 


It  might  be  argued  that  the  needed  information  could 
have  been  obtained  from  a user  profile  collected  beforehand. 
The  problem  of  acquiring  it  might  be  handled  by  inserting 
questions  into  the  introduction  about  his  previous 
experiences.  One  could  find  out,  for  example,  whether  he 
was  familiar  with  terminals,  computer  systems  (if  so, 
whether  TENEX  or  others),  editors  (if  so,  whether  NLS  or 
others,  and  if  NLS,  which  version),  etc.  If  his  answers 
warranted  it,  certain  parts  of  the  introduction  might  be 
skipped;  a fairly  detailed  user  profile  could  be  generated 
from  this  information. 

A limited  user  profile  could  be  easily  gathered  and 
should  be  of  assistance  in  coping  with  questions  like  the 


53 


above,  but  using  it  in  the  way  we  have  described  implies 
that  the  requisite  knowledge  about  other  computer  systems, 
terminals,  characteristics  of  user  behavior,  etc.  will  all 
have  to  be  within  the  system's  knowledge  domain.  This 
multifold  expansion  of  the  system's  field  of  expertise  and 
its  integration  into  a coherent  whole,  would  be  a formidable 
undertaking . 

It  may  be  argued  that  the  adjective  "entire",  appearing 
in  the  fifth  sentence  of  the  tutorial  material  and  in  the 
question,  is  a clue  that  helps  to  link  the  question  with  the 
desired  answer.  As  mentioned  earlier  in  another  context,  a 
person  involved  in  a dialogue  often  adopts  the  same  words 
that  were  just  used  by  the  oth^r  party.  Here  then,  we  have 
a possible  way  out:  lexical  clues  can  help  disambiguate  what 
a student's  question  is  about.  But  that  won't  help  us 
sufficiently  as  the  next  scenario  will  show. 

Fourth  scenario  - After  having  learned  how  to  use  the  Delete 
command,  and  after  having  actually  practiced  the  command  by 
deleting  three  statements  in  his  own  working  file,  the  user 
is  told: 

Please  print  the  modified  DINNER  file  so  you  can  see 
that  the  statements  containing  "tomato",  "rhubarb",  and 
"strawberry  shortcake",  have  all  been  deleted  from  the 
DINNER  file. 


54 


After  he  prints  what  he  is  asked,  the  system  continues  with: 


Note  how  the  statement  numbers  have  been  changed  by 
NLS.  You  can  see  that  many  statements  have  been 
renumbered  ('promoted"),  some  of  them  acquiring  the 
statement  numbers  of  the  deleted  statements. 


Although  statements  1A,  3 A 1 , and  3B  were  all 
deleted,  these  statement  numbers  still  exist  in  our 
file  — but  the  statement  contents  are  now 
di f f eren t . 


Would  you  like  to  ask  any  questions? 


At  this  point,  the  user  asks: 

"Can  I delete  these  modifications?" 

Since  many  people  find  it  hard  to  understand  this  question, 
let  us  clarify  it  with  the  help  of  a paraphrase 

"Can  I restore  the  contents  of  the  file  to  what  they 

were  before  anything  was  deleted?" 

Several  new  problem  elements  are  introduced  into  the 
picture  by  this  scenario. 

In  the  first  place,  the  anaphoric  reference  is  to 
previous  actions  undertaken  by  the  student  (or  on  the 
student's  behalf)  using  NLS.  The  reference  is  directed 
neither  to  concepts  explained  earlier,  nor  to  anything 
represented  in  the  semantic  network  (the  question  is  not 
"Can  I delete  modifications").  This  illustrates  the  need  to 


55 


bring  into  focus  the  history  of  changes  (modifications)  made 
to  the  user's  work  file,  which  is  not  hard  to  do  in  our 
system . 

In  the  second  place , here  we  have  a case  where 
"modifications"  could  be  misconstrued  as  being  inspired  by 
"the  modified  DINNER  file"  in  the  tutorial  material.  In 
reality,  "modifications"  for  this  user  turns  out  to  have  a 
much  firmer  root:  experienced  NLS  users  know  about  the 
"modification  file"  (a  file  where  all  the  changes  made  to  a 
working  file  are  kept  until  the  working  file  itself  is 
updated)  and  how  to  manipulate  them.  This  user  is  not 
naive:  he  knows  that  NLS  provides  specific  ways  of 
"undeleting"  and  he  is  simply  and  benevolently  testing  how 
much  NLS-SCHOLAR  knows  about  them. 

In  the  third  place,  we  have  the  rather  incongruous  use 
of  the  verb  "delete"  with  the  object  "modifications".  All 
that  the  student  has  learned  up  to  this  point  indicates  that 
"deleting"  is  a positive  action  resulting  in  something  being 
eliminated  from  his  work  file,  but  here  deleting  something 
would  result  in  the  reappearance  of  that  which  was  deleted 
earlier!  If  we  know  what  kind  of  "modifications"  the  student 
is  talking  about,  we  can  make  sense  out  of  the  question 
without  too  much  regard  to  the  verb  used  (try,  for  example, 
"restore"  or  "undelete",  or  "do  something  about"). 
Therefore,  here  we  have  a case  where  what  the  student  must 


56 


be  speaking  about  outweiphs  other  interpretations  stcmminp 
from  his  choice  of  words,  such  as  "Can  I delete  (the 
statements  containing'  these  modifications0" 

Fi f th  Scenario  - We  begin  at  a point  where  the  system  has 
just  taught  the  student  how  to  load  and  print  a particular 
file,  an  the  student  has  successfully  performed  two  tasks 
requiring  him  to  perform  these  actions.  The  student  then 
has  available  the  following  printout  of  the  contents  of  the 
file. 


< TUTOR,  DINNER .LNLS; 1 , >,  lH-SEPT-75  13:^3  LAC  ; ; ; ; 

1 SOUPS 

1A  tomato 
IS  vepetable 
1c  cream  of  mushroom 

2 ENTREES 

2A  fried  chicken 
2E  prime  ribs 
2C  scallops 
2C1  broiled 
2C2  fried 
2D  salmon 

2D1  with  cream  sauce 

3 DESSERTS 

3A  pie 

3 A 1 rhubarb 
3A2  blueberry 
3B  strawberry  shortcake 
3C  ice  cream 

3 C 1 blueberry 
3C2  naplenut 
3C3  chocolate 
3C coffee 
3C5  peppermint 
3C6  cherry 


The  system  begins  to  describe  this  file  as  follows: 


57 


THE  ORIGIN  STATEMENT 


Let's  look  at  the  information  in  the  file. 

Notice  that  there  is  a line  at  the  top  which  rives 
identifying  information  about  the  file 

This  line  is  called  the  'origin  statement'  and  is 
supplied  by  NLS. 

First  it  gives  vou  the  name  of  the  'directory'  (a  place 
in  the  memory)  in  which  this  file  was  stored.  Then  it 
gives  the  full  name  of  the  file,  and  the  date  and  time 
of  its  creation. 

The  file  name  includes  an  'extension'  specifying 
what  kind  of  file  it  is. 

In  this  case  it  says  that  this  is  an  "LNLS"  file. 
(LNLS  stands  for  LISP-NLS  and  indicates  that  this 
file  was  made  by  our  LISP  implementation  of  NLS.) 

The  number  after  the  file  name  is  called  the 
'version  number'. 

The  "1"  here  indicates  that  this  is  the  first 
version  of  the  DINNER  file  that's  been  made. 

Do  you  have  any  ouestions? 


And  the  student  asks: 


'Are  the  brackets  part  of  the  statement?" 


Here  we  have  two  anaphoric  references  ("the  statement"  and 
"the  brackets")  and  a questioned  inclusion  relationship 
between  them. 


Finding  the  referrents  (the  first  line  of  the  printout 
as  a realization  of  "the  statement",  and  the  left  and  richt 
an?le  brackets  within  it  as  "the  brackets")  involves  methods 
of  solution  not  required  previously,  "The  statement"  can 


58 


readily  be  assigned  the  referrent  "origin  statement"  by 
means  of  the  previously  hypothesized  representation  of  the 
tutorial  material  and  by  focusing,  but  from  there  on  we  face 
entirely  new  problems.  In  the  first  place,  the  student  uses 
"the  brackets"  to  describe  some  portion  of  the  content  of  a 
statement.  Surely  we  can  not  expect  the  system  to  be 
capable,  in  general,  of  dealing  semantically  with  the 
contents  of  user  files.  In  fact,  referring  to  statement  2D 
as  "the  fish"  is  possible  only  because  of  our  knowledge  of 
zoo lory , which  has  little  to  do  with  text  editing  systems  or 
with  NLS  in  particular. 

Secondly,  although  "origin  statement"  is  a perfectly 
valid  referrent  for  "the  statement",  what  is  really  meant  is 
"the  particular  realization  of  an  origin  statement  that  is 
represented  in  the  first  line  of  the  print  out". 
Presumably,  quite  a bit  of  inconclusive  inferencing  will 
have  to  go  on  before  the  system  quits  trying  to  find  a 
connection  between  brackets  and  the  concept  of  an  origin 
statement  (after  all,  square  brackets  can  be  used  in  file 
names ! ) 

In  the  third  place,  even  after  the  correct  referrents 
have  been  identified,  what  sense  does  the  question  have?  Why 
shouldn't  a part  of  the  content  of  a statement  not  be  a part 
of  the  statement?  Isn't  this  obvious?  And  if  so,  why  would 
such  a question  be  asked?  If  the  interpretation  "upper  case 


59 


blanks  are  treated  the  sane  as  lower  case  blanks"  could  be 
rejected  for  being  trivial  whv  can't  this  one  be  rejected 
similarly? 

The  truth  is  that  wc  don't  know  why  this  particular 
user  asked  the  question.  We  can  only  speculate  that  he  was 
a TENEX  user  and  was  wondering  if  the  angle  brackets  were 
used  in  a fashion  similar  to  the  way  directory  names  are 
denoted  in  TENEX;  or  he  may  have  been  prompted  to  ask  this 
Question  because  of  the  wav  NLS-SCHOLAR  denotes  certain  keys 
( <CR>  , <CTRL-A>  , etc. 

This  is  a pood  place  at  which  to  stop  and  recapitulate 
the  preceding  analyses  and  discussions.  We  have  seen  how 
each  scenario  has  introduced  new  problems,  and  how  each  new 
problem  has  reauired  more  and  more  complex  methods  of 
solution  --  and  yet,  there  is  no  indication  that  this 
escalation  of  complexity  has  ceased. 

Proposing  those  methods,  we  stretched  available  ones 
and  hypothesized  new  ones  to  such  an  extent  that  continuing 
to  do  so  would  have  been  utterly  unrealistic.  For  example, 
the  user  models  we  require  would  have  to  encompass  a large 
amount  of  "world  knowledge"  in  order  to  cope  with  situations 
such  as  the  ones  exemplified  in  our  scenarios,  and  yet  the 
theory  underlying  such  models  is  in  its  infancy  at  best. 

The  exercise  we  engaged  in  is  certainly  useful  and 


60 


illustrates  the  need  for  continuing  research,  but  above  all 
it  demonstrates  the  need  for  a pragmatic  approach,  i.e.,  one 
based  on  accepting  the  seriousness  of  the  difficulties  and 
finding  a way  around  them.  Rather  than  exploring  a large 
number  of  plausible  interpretat ions  of  a user's  request,  it 
is  better  to  either  forestall  the  request,  or  to  seek  its 
clarification . 


t 


61 


SECTION  IV  - RECOMMENDATIONS  AND  CONCLUSIONS 


In  this  section  we  summarize  conclusions  reached  for 
the  most  part  in  previous  sections,  and  we  formulate 
recommendations  for  further  work.  Our  contention  is  that 
one  more  year  of  relatively  low  level  effort  can  make 
NLS-SCHOLAR  a very  useful  operational  system. 

Our  first  recommendation  is  to  continue  to  improve  the 
English  front  end  module  to  rid  it  of  the  nagging  little 
problems  described  extensively  in  the  preceding  section. 
This  can  only  be  done  on  a continuing  basis,  correcting  the 
problems  as  they  appear  in  the  course  of  bona  fide  usage  of 
the  system  by  the  type  of  users  for  whom  it  is  intended. 
This  process  will  be  long,  but  tne  result  should  be  a system 
able  to  answer  as  many  as  80%  of  the  reciuests  posed.  In 
parallel  with  this  effort,  techniques  such  as  the  ones 
sketched  in  the  previous  section  for  circumventing  the 
harder  problems  should  be  developed  and  tested,  and  research 
efforts  aimed  at  attacking  these  problems  head-on  should  be 
stepped  up. 

Our  second  recommendation  is  to  improve  the  task 
evaluation  module  in  the  following  ways: 

1 ) Make  it  point  out  more  clearly  what  is  wrong  with  a 
student's  result.  For  example,  when  this  module  responds 


62 


"I  wanted  you  to  change  A into  B but  you  changed  A into  C" 


it  is  hard 

to 

see  sometimes 

what  the 

difference 

between  B 

and  C is. 

In  other  words,  in 

our 

efforts 

to  avoid 

presenting 

the  offending 

text 

in 

isolation 

without 

contextual 

information,  we 

went 

too 

much  in 

the  other 

direction ; 

we 

showed  so  much 

of  the 

surroundings 

that  the 

specifics  rot  drowned! 


2) 

Augment 

the 

ex 

network 

with  a 

list 

o 

report 

them.  Th 

is 

wo 

repor ti 

ng  format 

if 

on 

istinr  task  entrie 
f expected  errors 
uld  permit  by-pa 
e of  these  specifi 


s in  the  semantic 
and  specific  ways  to 
ssing  the  standard 
c errors  were  found. 


3)  Implement  a "let  me  fix  it"  facility  to  avoid  the 
sometimes  costly  consequences  of  the  task  evaluators 's  zeal. 
This  facility  will  hand  back  a task  environment  to  the  user 
after  the  system  has  found  fault  with  it  and  has  required 
the  user  to  do  it  all  over  again.  In  this  way,  users  that 
realize  what  is  wrong  and  what  is  expected  of  them  could 
patch  up  their  work  and  satisfy  the  task  evaluator's 
requirements  in  their  own  wav. 

Finally,  what  would  really  make  this  module 
"intelligent"  would  be  to  give  it  the  ability  to  understand 
and  interpret  the  user's  intentions  and  to  offer  helpful 
comments.  It  is  not  enough  to  point  out  what  is  wrong  with 
a result;  the  most  helpful  situation  is  one  where  the  user's 
solution  methods  are  scrutinized  and  criticized.  This  area 


63 


is  certainly  one  where  further  development  is  needed. 

Our  third  recommendation  addresses  the  tutorial 
material.  Although  it  is  certainly  in  good  shape,  it  could 
be  improved  by  adding  the  capability  for  the  user  to 
redirect  the  order  of  presentation  of  a lesson  via  requests 
such  as  : 

"Let's  go  back  to  DELETING  BRANCHES" 

"Tell  me  again  about  <CTRL-X>" 

We  have  the  necessary  groundwork  to  handle  these  requests 
for  review.  The  only  problem  is  how  to  apprise  the  user  of 
the  new  context  he  is  to  work  on  after  his  request  has  been 
fulfilled;  that  is,  how  to  indicate  gracefully  that  his  file 
has  been  restored  to  an  appropriate  earlier  incarnation. 

We  could  also  handle  requests  like 
"Let's  skip  this  task" 

without  too  much  difficulty.  Here  the  necessary  changes  to 
the  user's  file,  to  bring  it  to  the  state  it  would  have 
acouired  after  the  task  had  been  completed,  must  be 
explained  and  justified.  Reauests  of  the  form 
"Let's  skip  all  about  INSERTING" 
and 

"Teach  me  about  VIEWSPECS"  (implying  a large  forward 

jump) 

raise  other  issues  as  well.  Not  only  is  the  problem  of 
bringing  the  file  up  to  date  more  complex  to  explain  as  many 


64 


tasks  nay  be  involved,  but  also  some  of  the  concepts  and 
terminology  skipped  over  may  be  needed  by  the  student  in 
order  to  comprehend  the  following  material.  Allowing  the 
student  to  review  is  relatively  easy;  allowing  him  to  skip 
forward  is  ouite  difficult  given  the  linear  development  of 
the  textual  material. 


Epilogue 

It  is  easy  to  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
unresolved  problems  we  have  dealt  with  so  extensively, 
preclude  systems  such  as  NLS-SCHOLAR  from  becoming  useful  in 
an  operational  environment.  This  conclusion  would  be 

erroneous  for  several  reasons: 

a)  The  frequency  of  occurrence  of  "hard  problems'  is  very 
small.  Most  of  the  users'  requests  we  have  seen  belong 
to  the  "easy  to  answer"  category,  regardless  of  the 
actual  performance  of  the  present  version  of  NLS-SCHOLAR. 
2)  As  more  and  more  of  the  little  problems  are  ironed  out, 
users  will  be  positively  reinforced  towards  expressing 
their  requests  in  the  kind  of  English  the  system 
understands,  and  with  the  precision  of  formulation  the 
system  requires. 

c)  As  the  number  of  failures  decreases  and  the  number  of 
users  increases,  it  becomes  both  feasible  and  economical 
to  provide  a human  expert  to  back  up  the  system  as  a kind 
of  "consultant".  In  a computer  network  environment,  many 


65 


users  from  different  sites  could  take  advantage  of  this 
immediate  and  most  effective  form  of  help.  Notice  also 
that  while  human  expertise  is  concentrated  in  the  hands 
of  one  expert  at  any  one  time,  experts  located  in  many 
sites  can  take  turns  at  minding  the  system;  i.e.,  human 
expertise  may  be  concentrated  but  not  centralized. 

Waiting  until  "intelligent"  CAI  systems  become  capable 
of  1002  stand  alone  operation  is  both  futile  and 
counterproductive.  It  is  futile  because  that  kind  of 
performance  is  probably  impossible  to  obtain  (Just  think  of 
how  few  people  can  do  it!).  But,  more  importantly,  it  is 
counterproductive  because  widespread  use  of  an  802  effective 
facility,  for  example,  would  multiply  by  a very  larre  factor 
the  consulting  capacity  of  a human  expert,  enabling  him  to 
reach  more  people  than  he  could  otherwise  and  to  address 
himself  to  the  relevant  problems  quickly. 


66 


APPENDIX 


Review  of  NLS-SCHOLAR  by  ISI 


The  following  evaluation  report 
Wilczynski,  of  the  Information 
University  of  Southern  California, 
of  the  Contracting  Agency. 


was  written 
Sciences  Inst 
at  the  speci 


by 

David 

itute 

of  the 

fic 

request 

I.  INTRODUCTION 


This  review  is  based  on  my  own  experience  in  early  August 
1975  with  NLS-Scholar,  a mixed-initiative  tutorial  CAI 
system  for  teaching  a basic  subset  of  the  text  editing 
subsystem  of  SRI  's  NLS  programming  system. 

NLS-Scholar,  programmed  in  INTERLISP,  was  written  by  Mario 
Grignetti  and  his  group  at  BBN . The  system  has  evolved  from 
Jaime  Carbonell's  Scholar  (which  teaches  South  American 
geography)  together  with  substantial  influence  from  Brown's 
SOPHIE  system.  The  system  is  organized  to: 

a 1 Present  textual,  tutorial  material  to  introduce  the 
user  to  a terminal  and  to  NLS. 

b)  Provide  a simulated  MLS  system  to  the  user  on  which  to 
practice  what  he  has  learned,  as  well  as  to  do 
system-generated  NLS  tasks. 

c)  Provide  a natural  language  question -answering 
component  which  responds  to  user  queries  by:  1)  doing 
Al-like  searches  in  its  fixed  data  base,  or  2) 
"executing"  the  right  NLS  commands  on  the  user's  current 
file  to  answer  dynamic  questions. 

d ' Present  various  NLS  tasks  to  the  user  to  test 
comprehension  of  the  material  just  presented. 

The  course  is  divided  into  the  following  lessons.  Each 
lesson  takes  about  1 hour,  with  manv  variables  determining 
the  exact  length,  load  average,  attention  span,  competence, 
etc . 

Introduction  - Control  characters 


67 


Lesson  1 


Commands:  Load  File,  Print  File,  Delete,  Update 

Concepts:  MLS  files,  MLS  commands,  MLS  prompts,  structure 
units  (statement,  branch),  string  units 

Lesson  2 - 

Commands:  Print  Rest,  Jump,  one-character  commands 
Concepts:  Control  Marker,  content  addressing 
Lesson  3 - 

Commands:  Insert,  Create  File,  Substitute 
Concepts:  Level,  level  adjustment 
Lesson  4 - 


Commands:  Print,  Transpose,  flove,  Copy 
Concepts:  Plexes,  Grouns 
Lesson  5 - 

Commands:  Show  V iewspecs,  Set  ViewsDecs,  Reset 

Viewspecs,  Output,  and  Help. 

Concents:  Viewsnecs,  Text  File 

II.  GENERAL  IMPRESSIONS 

NLS  is  well  suited  for  CAI  methods;  NLS  concepts  are  short, 
factual,  and  "nonphilosophic , " a good  method  is  available 
for  testing  competence  (either  interfacing  directly  to  NLS, 
or  simulating  it),  and  the  information  is  incremental  and 
additive  rather  than  diffuse. 

The  main  point  is  Scholar  did  teach  me  NLS.  At  the  start  of 
the  program  I knew  nothing  about  NLS  other  than  what  it  is; 
now  I know  the  NLS  terminology  and  how  to  use  the  system. 
However,  improvement  is  necessary  in  several  areas  if 
Scholar  is  to  be  a finished  oroduction  program,  competitive 
with  possible  alternative  teaching  methods.  The  following 
two  sections  will  review  Scholar's  strengths  and  weaknesses. 

III.  THE  ENVIRONMENT  OFFERED  BY  SCHOLAR 

The  Scholar  CAI  system  is  classical  in  that  text  is 
presented  to  the  student  in  prearranged  frames  with  tests 
usually  following  each.  The  inclusion  of  a natural  language 
interpreter  is  an  innovation  which  allows  the  student  to  ask 


68 


questions  during  the  program.  It  turns  out  that  this  node 
of  operation  has  advantages  for  nonstudent  types.  Studies 
have  shown  that  people  relate  well  to  computers,  suffer  less 
anxiety,  and  feel  freer  to  experiment  and  ask  Questions  in  a 
C A I environment.  The  critical  aspect  of  such  a system  is 
its  transparency. 

If  the  student  notices  (or  becomes  preoccupied  by)  the  CAI 
machinery,  he  can  perform  in  the  short  term  (answer 
questions,  do  short  tasks'1,  but  lacks  rlobal  comprehension. 
Thus  the  type  of  display  and  the  "smoothness"  of  the  system 
become  important  factors  for  people  not  used  to  operating 
such  devices.  Specifically,  NLS-Scholar  is  intended  for 
typewriter  terminals.  Having  written  a CAI  system  for  such 
terminals  myself,  I have  verified  that  all  students  are 
acutely  aware  of  the  typing  noise  and  slow  speed.  I used 
NLS-Scholar  on  a 2*100  baud  video  terminal  and  was  much  more 
satisfied  with  the  results.  Since  there  are  times  when 
hardcopy  is  needed  for  back  referrals,  BBN  would  do  well  to 
offer  the  appropriate  hardcopy  text  to  the  student  as  an 
addition  for  the  video  terminal. 

A parameter  of  system  smoothness  is  its  responsiveness.  A 
high  load  average  (virtually  anything  above  *0  combined  with 
the  slowness  of  INTERLISP  made  Scholar  move  at  an  unbearable 
crawl.  When  the  load  average  cane  down  to  1 or  less,  the 
system  moved  about  sprightly.  The  difference  here  is  more 
than  one  of  convenience.  No  user  (unless  he  is  forced  or 
paid11  will  sit  through  a session  of  Scholar  on  a machine 
with  a high  load  average.  If  he  must,  it  will  turn  out  to 
be  a painful,  wasteful  way  to  learn  NLS. 

A few  of  the  INTERLISP  features  caused  some  unnecessary 
distractions.  I found  the  garbage  collect  messages  ("Excuse 
me,  v/hile  I rearrange  my  memory!")  disconcerting  since  they 
caused  a visual  break  in  my  concentration.  I appreciate  the 
attempt  to  explain  the  impending  delay,  but  I think  the 
typed  message  is  too  visible. 

The  preprocessing  of  all  questions  and  responses  by  DWIM 
also  caused  some  amusing  incidents.  For  example,  in 

answering  the  Question,  "What  character  prints  the  context 
of  the  CM?",  I responded  M/".  DWIM  turned  the  slash  into  a 
(a  common  IIJTEPLISP  occurrence)  and  then  MLS-Scholar 
told  me  that  not  "?"  was  the  correct  answer.  Those 

sort  of  bugs  are  not  serious  and  easily  repairable,  but  must 
not  exist  in  a released  product. 

NLS-Scholar  offers  a medium  which  can  be  started  when 
desired  (assuming  machine  availability11,  stopping  at 

arbitrary  points,  and  proceeding  in  whatever  pace  is 
comfortable.  If  NLS-Scholar  were  set  up  to  operate  at 
different  modes  (beginner,  expert,  review1  then  the  problem 


69 


of  retraining  and  refreshing  previous  NLS  users  v/ould  be 
simplified.  This  nay  not  be  a simple  addition  to  make  in 
NLS-Scholar,  but  judging  from  discussions  with  users  at 
Gunter  A F S , it  would  be  powerful  and  useful. 

IV.  TEACHING  COMPONENTS  OF  NLS-SCHOLAR 

The  three  main  components  of  NLS-Scholar  are:  a)  the 
tutorial  information,  b)  the  natural  language  interpreter, 
and  c ^ the  test  management.  The  first  and  third  are  CAI 
standards,  while  the  second  is  in  the  realm  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  ''AI). 

A)  The  text  material  was  impressive;  it  was  presented 
concisely  and  accurately.  At  no  time  did  I feel  that  I 
was  being  either  overloaded  or  nursed  through,  both 
factors  which  led  to  effective  and  willing  comprehension 
of  the  material.  It  is  easy  to  overlook  or  underestimate 
Duality  in  this  area  because  good  tutorial  services  are 
not  as  visible  as  poor  ones.  Because  of  this  phenomenon 
I want  to  emphasize  the  excellence  of  the  tutorial 
inf  ormation . 

B 1 The  natural  language  interpreter  is  more  complicated 
to  evaluate.  Most  likely,  it  is  the  most  complex  part  of 
the  system,  yet  Drobably  the  least  useful  in  its  present 
form.  The  main  problem  concerns  its  robustness.  Often  I 
asked  a simple  question  like  "Please  review  the 
one-character  commands,"  and  got  only  a "Please  rephrase 
your  request"  reply.  In  this  case  I think  the  problem  is 
that  "review"  is  not  part  of  Scholar's  dictionary. 
However,  in  rephrasing  the  question  to  something  like 
"Tell  me  about  the  one-character  commands,"  I would  just 
ret  a list  of  them  without  functional  definitions.  To 
get  what  I wanted  I would  have  to  ask  for  each 
individually  (c.g.,  "Tell  me  about  the  command.").  It  is 
disconcerting  to  have  the  parser  or  retrieval  mechanism 
fail  on  a simple  reauest,  but  not  to  know  why  is  worse. 
Just  asking  for  a rephrase  does  not  indicate  what  the 
failure  was;  this  information  will  surely  be  useful  in 
composing  a different  reouest.  Whether  most  users  would 
want  such  information  is  a different  Question;  I would 
have  liked  it. 

It  is  hard  to  be  critical  of  this  natural  language 
business,  since  the  problem  is  still  a major  research, 
not  developmental  issue.  Still,  I wonder  if  Scholar's 
interpreter  is  state  of  the  art;  I am  thinking  of  Woods' 
moon  rock  program.  Since  that  program  is  also  a BBN 
product,  it  would  be  interesting  to  get  a comparison  of 
the  two  systems  from  the  NLS-Scholar  group. 


70 


The  lack  of  robustness  of  the  Enrlish  interpreter 
detracts  somewhat  from  Scholar;  I found  myself  not  using 
that  component.  The  table  look-up  kind  of  questions  it 
could  answer  would  be  better  solved  by  just  having  access 
to  the  table  in  some  primer  format.  Again,  the  lack  of 
field  testing  may  indicate  that  this  is  just  a personal 
reaction;  but  the  shallow  range  of  questions  and  answers 
makes  the  current  worth  of  this  subsystem  suspect. 
Certainly,  it  doesn't  fulfill  the  capabilities  of  a human 
tutor . 

C)  The  test  management  phase  of  Scholar  is  composed  of  a 
series  of  questions  which  are  answered  either  by  doing  an 
MLS  task,  or  talking  directly  to  the  Scholar  top-level. 
In  both  cases  the  answers  or  performance  are  evaluated 
with  feedback  as  to  correctness.  The  abilitv  to  check 
answers  is  one  of  the  more  difficult  tasks  for  a CAI 
system  when  the  domain  of  true-false  or  multiple  choice 
questions  is  not  used.  Scholar  does  admirably  here  but 
is  far  from  perfect. 

The  top-level  type  questions,  (e.g.,  "What  is  the 
statement  number  of  the  statement  that  will  be  printed  if 
I now  use  the  backslash  command?")  will  be  looked  at 
later.  The  NLS  tasks,  the  heart  of  the  testing 
component,  will  be  reviewed  in  depth. 

The  basic  mechanism  for  matching  a task  answer  to  the 
correct  one  seems  to  be: 

a)  If  a file  manipulation  task  is  involved  (e.g., 
INSERT,  DELETE),  then  the  resulting  file  and  the  CM 
(control  marker)  are  checked  against  Scholar's 
expectation . 

b 1 If  a printing  task  is  involved,  the  output  of  the 
print  command  is  trapped  and  matched  against  expected 
print,  and  the  CM  is  checked  for  positioning. 

At  no  time  does  it  appear  that  Scholar  looks  at  the 
student's  input  seouence.  This  lack  leads  to  many 
unfortunate  experiences.  For  example,  one  task  asked 
to  delete  two  consecutive  statements,  expecting  the 
user  to  use  the  sequence,  "delete  statement  1B5,  delete 
statement  1B5,"  to  account  for  the  renumbering  done  by 
NLS.  I tried,  "delete  statement  1B6,  delete  statement 
IBS,"  to  accomplish  the  same  effect.  Scholar  told  me  I 
did  the  task  correctly  and  then  the  next  frame 
described  how  I could  have  accomplished  the  same  task 
by  deleting  statement  1 B 6 and  then  deleting  statement 
135.  Not  serious,  but  the  question  of  system 
transparency  arises. 


71 


A more  serious  flaw  in  this  purely  extensional  form  of 
testing  appeared  in  the  task  to  test  the  use  of 
'CTRL-E>  for  inserting  a series  of  statements.  I did 
the  task  by  inserting  all  the  statements  at  the  same 
level  (superfluously  using  CTRL-E  after  each  insert) 
before  going  back  to  insert  substatements.  Even  though 
the  resulting  file  was  correct,  the  CM  was  not  where 
Scholar  expected  it  and  so  I was  informed  of  this 
"error"  and  told  to  redo  the  entire  task  from  scratch! 
Heedless  to  say,  I didn't  enjoy  retyping  the  whole 
thing.  Worse,  however,  was  the  failure  of  Scholar  to 
recognize  what  I did,  tell  me  the  right  way  to  do  the 
task  (i.e.,  use  one  CTRL-E  and  move  up  and  down  levels 
using  the  L:  prompt)  and  then  let  me  proceed.  It  is, 
however,  easier  to  be  critical  of  this  flaw  than  to 
suggest  an  alternative.  A deep  understanding  of  the 
intensional  command  strings  represents  a large  (perhaps 
unknown"!  effort.  If  accomplished,  there  is  no  oue3tion 
that  the  system  will  appear  much  more  intelligent  then 
it  currently  does,  as  well  as  being  more  useful. 

Other  examples  of  situations  where  this  type  of  problem 
come  up  can  be  given,  but  are  not  necessary  to  this 
review.  Some  of  the  techniques  used  to  check  top-level 
questions  (those  not  requiring  the  NLS  simulator)  are 
also  open  to  improvement.  For  example,  one  question 
expected  CTRL-X  as  the  answer;  I typed  <CONTROL-X>  and 
was  told  I was  wrong.  Another  time  I answered  a 
question  with  LINE-FEED  and  Scholar  wanted  <LF> . These 
two  cases  should  not  be  construed  as  nitpicking,  but  as 
an  attempt  to  point  out  situations  which  make  Scholar 
seem  less  suitable  as  a training  method  than  standard 
teaching  methods.  Too  manv  of  these  trivial  flaws  will 
discourage  the  CAI  user. 

V.  SUMMARY  AND  CONCLUSIONS 

As  I mentioned  before,  it  is  much  easier  to  point  out  flaws 
in  a CAI  system  then  to  recognize  its  Qualities.  Experience 
with  standard  methods  give  rise  to  expectations  which  are 
then  used  to  judge  CAI  systems*.  Yet,  criticisms  of  Scholar 
should  be  tempered  by  one  observation,  Scholar  does  teach 
the  student  MLS  effectively.  Assuming  that  the  local  bugs 
in  Scholar  are  fixed  (a  few  have  been  described  in  this 
paper  a useful  system  exists  which  can  be  used  to  train 
potential  NLS  users. 

Still,  changes  can  be  made  which  might  expand  its  range  of 
use  as  well  as  improve  its  performance.  Several  have  been 
pointed  out  in  this  paper,  for  example,  making  the  natural 
language  component  more  robust,  adding  analysis  of  the 
user's  input  to  the  current  extensional  analysis,  endowing 
Scholar  with  other  training  modes,  expert,  review,  etc. 


72 


None  of  these  possib 
is  necessary  before 
the  other.  Yet,  one 
coverage  of  NLS,  i 
evaluated  as  such  by  agencies 


more  field  testin'1, 
can  be  made  one  way  or 
made  more  complete  in  its 
a viable  product  and  should  be 
interested  in  NLS. 


ilities  are  simple; 

firm  conclusions 
e Scholar  is 
t will  be 


Some  purely  system  questions  also  need  addressing.  Can 
NLS-Scholar  be  a viable  product  as  an  INTERLISP  program 
(thus  bound  to  TENEX)?  Are  there  enough  machines  with  enough 
time  slots  of  low  load  average  to  accommodate  the  potential 
Scholar  users?  I am  sure  other  questions  of  this  tyne  will 
arise  if  research  into  Scholar  is  continued. 


73 


Comments  on  the  review 


by  Mario  C.  Gripnetti 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  review  is,  overall,  a rather 
positive  one.  MLS-SCHOLAR  seems  to  be  able  to  do  its  most 
important  job,  i.e.,  teach  NLS . 

Many  of  the  problems  that  Dave  points  out  are  trivial 
to  take  care  of:  garbage  collection  messages,  DWIM's 
busy-bodiness  in  unwarranted ly  exchanging  "/"  for  "?",  and 
more  ways  to  represent  CTRL-X  or  <LF>  than  we  anticipated. 
After  all,  the  main  goal  of  the  field  testing  performed 
under  this  contract  was  precisely  to  bring  up  these  kinds  of 
problems . 

Dave  is  wrong  in  his  assertion  that  "at  no  time  does  it 
appear  that  Scholar  looks  at  the  student's  input  sequence": 
The  system  does  look  at  the  student 's  actual  input  when  he 
answers  questions.  The  fact  that  Dave's  clever  answer 
(delete  statement  1B6  and  then  delete  statement  1B5)  was  not 
handled  intelligently  was  due  to  a stupid  bug  in  one  of  the 
predicate  functions  in  our  answer  evaluation  module.  Again, 
this  is  a case  in  ooint  for  the  usefulness  of  this  type  of 
testing  to  the  system's  designers.  In  general,  however, 
Dave's  criticism  is  valid:  when  the  student  performs  a task 
using  NLS,  the  commands  he  types  are  not  looked  at  and  only 
their  consequences  are  used  to  evaluate  what  he  has  done. 
We'd  like  very  much  to  tackle  the  difficult  problem  of 


74 


intentional  comprehension ; if  solved  we  would  have  a much 
smarter  system! 

Other  difficulties  referred  to  in  the  review  are  more 
serious.  Indeed,  we  need  to  provide  feedback  as  to  why  a 
request  fails  to  be  understood.  We  had  wanted  to  tackle  the 
problem  of  partial  comprehension  and  try  a few  strategies 
that  appear  promising.  However,  the  pressures  arising  from 
limited  time  and  resources,  and  the  purely  developmental 
type  of  work  in  which  we  have  had  to  confine  our  efforts, 
precluded  the  performance  of  sorely  needed  research  work. 
With  respect  to  our  use  of  "Wood's  moon  rock  program" , this 

is  another  thing  we've  kept  on  the  back  burner  for  some 

time.  However,  it  is  questionable  that  just  a more  powerful 

parser  would  have  made  a lot  of  difference  in  the  system's 

ability  to  respond  to  student's  requests.  The  difficulty 
here  resides  not  so  much  in  the  literal  interpretat ion  of 
Questions  as  if  they  were  precise  formulations  of  the 
specific  bits  of  knowledge  the  questioner  seeks,  but  rather 
in  figuring  out  what  each  particular  student  may  have  meant 
to  ask,  gi^en  where  he  is,  his  previous  performance,  what  he 
ourcht  to  know,  what  he  seems  to  have  learned,  etc.,  etc.  It 
is  surprising  to  see  how  many  questions  are  unanswerable , 
even  to  a human,  when  taken  in  relative  isolation. 

Finally,  a word  about  efficiency.  We  do  not  think  that 
3 CPU  minutes  per  hour  is  a terribly  inefficient  and 


75 


unacceptable  way  to  administer  a CAI  lesson.  We  agree 
however  'and  wholeheartedly ! ) with  Dave's  observation  that 
when  the  load  average  in  a general  nerpose  time-sharing 
system  such  as  TENEX  reaches  about  ^ , it  is  better  to  quit 
and  go  hone.  This  is  not  a problem  that  affects  NLS-SCHOLAR 
alone;  when  a large  system  such  as  TENEX  is  saturated, 
nobody  gets  anything  done  efficiently,  including  NLS  users. 


76 


REFERENCES 


[1]  Grignetti,  M C.,  Hausmann,  C.  and  Gould,  L.  "An 
"intelligent  ' on-line  assistant  and  tutor 
NLS-SCHOLAR , " National  Computer  Conference,  1975. 


[2]  Grignetti,  M.C. 
Harris,  G.  and 
Tutorial  System  to 


Gould , L . , Bell , 


C.L 


Passaf iume , 
Aid  Users 


A . G . , Hausmann 
J.J.  "Mixed-Initiative 
of  the  On-Line  System 


( NLS ) , " ESD-TR-75-58 , AD  A007  828,  November  1974. 

[3]  Bobrow,  D.G.  and  Wegbreit,  B.  "A  Model  and  Stack 
Implementation  of  Multiple  Environments,"  Communications 
of  the  ACM,  Vol . 16,  No.  10,  October  1973- 


[4]  Teitelman,  W. , et  al,  Interlisp  Reference  Manual . 
Beranek  and  Newman  and  Xerox  Corporation,  1974. 


Bolt 


[5]  Burton,  R.R.  "A  Semantically  Centered  Parsing  System 
for  Mixed-Initiative  CAI  Systems,"  paper  presented  at 
the  Association  for  Computational  Linguistics 
Conference,  Amherst,  Massachusetts,  July  1974. 

[6]  Brown,  J.S.  and  Burton,  R.R.  "Multiple  Representations 
of  Knowledge  for  Tutorial  Reasoning,"  Representation  and 
Understanding : Studies  in  Cognitive  Science . Editors  D. 
Bobrow  and  A.  Collins,  Academic  Press  1975. 


[7]  Woods,  W.A.,  Kaplan,  R.  and  Nash-Webber, 
Sciences  Natural  Language  Information 
Report,  BBN  #2378,  June  1972. 


B.  "The 
System , " 


LUNAR 

Final 


[8]  Fillmore,  C.J.  "The  Case  for  Case 


m 


Linguistic  Theory . 
and  Winston,  1968. 


(eds.)  Bach  and  Harms, 


Universals  in 
Holt,  Rinehart 


77 


