It  HLt  t»»> 


';4  I  »  S 

V:-»i,  fi-t-C  iS-- 

i'fe?  JAN  02 1390 


7  /C7C7CDC30  C3  C3  O  C31=3« 

'  /ooooooooq  o 

laCZDOOCDOCDCDKA  o 
h - inr-i/ 


0  I  -s  %  t 


#  g>^£ 


1 


^®TjapacaM  awiii.aigis'jci 
^  "  lyiigsi  f soimY"" 

aiTBWMCMIEL 

I  distribution  statement  a 

1  Ar^.-iri-vtcl  lor  public  release; 

^wwnzz^  _ L  uu- _ 


AIR  UNIVERSITY  (AU) 
MAXWELL  AIR  FORCE  BASE,  ALABAMA 

90  01  02  0  0 


Cut  Along  Dotted  Line 


I 


After  you  have  read  the  research  report,  please  give  us  your  frank 
opinion  on  the  contents.  All  comments — large  or  small  ,  compi imentary  or 
caustic — will  be  gratefully  appreciated.  Mail  them  to;  CADRE/RI,  Maxwell 
AFB  AL  36112. 


Thank  you  for  your  assistance 


'\T 


irpower 
'  ^  Research 
Institute 


•  'F-S;  •. 


Research  Report  No.  AU-ARI-85-1 


;  ■)' 


? 

n 


ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE 
A  "USER  FRIENDLY" 
INTRODUCTION 


by 


E7__ _ 

‘  "  t  rj,  I  ■  i  t 0  n  y 

Availability  Codes 
iA-/oil  and/or 
Special 


Dlst 


Pat  O.  Clifton 
Colonel,  USAF 
Research  Fellow,  ARI 

Center  for  Aerospace  Doctrine,  Research,  and  Education 


Air  University 
Air  University  Press 

Maxwell  Air  Force  Base,  Alabama  36112-5532 


March  1985 


niSCLMMER 


This  study  represents  the  views  of  the  author  and  does  not 
necessarily  reflect  the  official  opinion  of  the  Air  University  Center 
for  Aerospace  Doctrine,  Research,  and  Education  (CADRE)  or  the 
Department  of  the  Air  Force.  This  manuscript  has  been  reviewed  by 
security  and  policy  review  authorities  and  is  cleared  for  public 
release . 

This  document  is  the  property  of  the  United  States  Government  and 
is  not  to  be  reproduced  in  whole  or  in  part  vvithont  permission  of  the 
Commander,  CADRE,  Maxwell  Air  Force  Rase,  Alabama. 


n 


CONTENTS 


DISCL'\IMER - - - 

FOREWORD - - - - -  y 

ABOUT  THE  AUTHOR - - - 

PREFACE - 

INTRODUCTION - 

1  BACKGROUND  INFORMATION _ _ _  1 

Introduction - 

Definitions -  2 

0>"iqins  of  AI -  4 

Conventional  Comnuters — - -  7 

Basic  Computer  Operations -  g 

AI  Compute'"  Systems -  9 

System  Comnarison -  10 

AI  Research  Progress -  12 

Notes-- - 14 

2  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  APPLICATION .  17 

Expert  Systems -  17 

System  Components . ig 

Search  Procedures -  2^ 

Existing  Expert  Systems -  23 

Natural  Language -  24 

Natural  Language  Inte^'face  System -  25 

Translation  Projects -  26 

Voice  Recognition - 27 

Vision  Systems -  29 

Robotics -  31 

Development  Problems -  go 

Notes - 35 

3  FUTURE  PROSPECTS - 37 

Overview -  37 

Fifth  Generation  Projects -  39 

Japan's  Fifth  Generation  Computer  Project -  39 

US  Fifth  Generation  Projects -  41 

Government  Projects -  42 

Commercial  AI  Projects -  44 

Great  Britain -  45 

Common  Market  Project -  45 

Soviet  Fifth  Generation  Project -  45 

Potential  Applications  for  AI  Technology -  47 

Mi  i  itary  Aopl  ications - 49 

Natural  Language - 50 

Civilian  Applications -  52 

i  i  i 


Page 

Surnmarv  and  Conclusions -  54 

Notes -  53 

ATTACHMENT  1 - 


iv 


FOHRVVORO 


The  Flectronie  Seciritv  ContTnand,  like  other  frovernnent  agencies, 
is  studvinrT  the  potential  applications  of  artificial  intellircence  CM). 
Our-  initial  Iook  at  M  research  indicated  that  ve  should  first  pursue 
an  in-depth  review  of  the  state  of  \1  development.  '\s  part  of  that 
studv  we  tasked  our  Command-soonsored  Research  Fellow  at  4ir  Universitv 
for  lhS4-S5,  Col  ^at  O.  Clifton,  to  prepare  an  introductorv  handbook  on 
\I.  'Ve  believe  it  essential  that  senior  members  of  our  staff  become 
more  familiar  with  M’s  rapidly  evolving  tcchnolorfy.  Artificial 
intellif^ence  has  become  a  popular  "buz?. word”  amon'^  those  workinf^  with 
computer  support  systems.  It  is  a  complex  subiect  offerintr  potential 
capabilities  that  are  not  clearly  understood.  vVhat  this  study  proyides 
is  an  introduction  to  artificial  intellifrence  for  senior  civilian  and 
military  leaders.  It  should  help  clear  away  some  of  the  nromotional 
"hype”  that  clouds  what  AI  really  can  and  can't  do.  This  project  was 
completed  in  coordination  with  Air  Uniyersity's  new  Center  for  Aerospace 
Doctrine,  Research,  and  Education  (CADRE) .  We  at  ESC  belieye  CADRE  will 
continue  to  provide  critical  support  to  our  future  operational  needs. 


Electronic  Security  Command 


V 


\ROUT  THE  \UTHOR 


Col  Pat  O.  Clifton  was  the  Electronic  Security  Conmand's  (ESC) 
Research  Fellow  at  CA.r)RE  for  W  84-S5.  He  is  a  ^radnate  of  Squadron 
nfficers  School  and  the  'Vir  War  Collej^e,  and  a  distinguished  military 
(Tpaduatc  of  the  Air  Cotnnnnd  and  Staff  Collef^e.  He  receiyed  a  BA  det^ree 
from  'Hklahoma  State  Uniyersity  and  an  M\  from  Creighton  University.  Col 
Clifton  is  a  career  intellicrence  officer  whose  assignments  include  tours 
as  an  intelligence  support  squadron  commander  and  a  winq  operations 
officer.  Col  Clifton  was  recently  selected  to  be  the  commander  of  the 
AASn  Technical  Training  Croup,  Coodfellow  AFB. 


PREF\CK 


C\r)RE'ti  value  to  the  Air  Force  is  the  collection  of  academic  skills 
it  can  focus  on  any  given  research  project.  This  unique  center  brings 
together  civilian  and  military  t'csearch  fellows  who  were  extremely 
helpful  in  reviewing  and  providing  comments  on  this  handbook.  The  entire 
Air  University  Press  (AUP)  editorial  staff  ah.o  helped  with  guidance  on 
research  and  writing  procedures.  1  avast  single  out  Mr  Preston  Bryant 
and  Dr  Paul  Godwin  who  served  as  mv  primarv  editors.  Their  suggestions 
al  ways  improved  the  clarity  of  the  text  wtiile  eliminating  needless 
verbiage.  I  also  want  to  thank  the  A!JP  document  processing  staff.  Led 
by  Marcia  '.Villiams.  they  worked  miracles  turning  a  mishmash  of  scribbles 
into  a  finished  product. 

Dr  John  Romo,  who  received  his  PhD  in  Mathematics  from  Oklahoma 
State  University,  provided  invaluable  technical  advice  and  assistance 
on  the  entire  paper.  He  is  assigned  to  the  Systems  Technology 
Directorate  at  HQ  ESC. 

Dr  Alan  Roecks,  who  received  his  PhD  from  the  University  of 
Wisconsin-Madison,  in  Computers  in  Education,  provided  numerous  source 
materials  and  editorial  comments.  He  is  also  assigned  to  the  Systems 
Technology  Directorate  at  HQ  ESC. 

This  handbook  would  never  have  been  started,  much  less  completed, 
without  continuing  support  from  Coi  Rolf  Smith,  Director  of  Plans  and 
Requirements,  Headquarters  Electronic  Security  Command  (ESC).  Colonel 
Smith  is  a  PhD  candidate  (ABD)  in  computer  science  at  Texas  A&M 
University.  He  suggested  the  research  topic  and  ensured  that  it 
received  headquarters  support  during  its  development.  Colonel  Smith 


IX 


provided  the  kind  of  maior  eommand  support  that  CA.ORE  must  have  to 
succeed.  4ny  ultimate  success  this  handbook  mi^ht  enjov  is  a  testament 
to  the  C4r)RE  concept.  It  is  '.vorkinj;. 


?4T  O.  CLIFTON 
Colonel,  US4F 
Research  Fellow 
4irpower  Research  Institute 


X 


iN'Titnouc  rioN 


I  ntfl  li  ifpTice  (\i)  mav  he  one  of  the  ^ost  promisinc^  and 
-li  snri'h' r  ^  too'1  tr  chnolo'rjies  evolvinf^  todav.  The  tei’m  artificial  intelli- 
■  I'ric'  oftc'.  'Tir, notes  super-h'nasr,  '-oaiDiite  ps .  mvsterions  blackboxes,  and 
T^'eharih;al  vizards.  In  fac't .  developments  in  -M  are  based  on  almost 
-  iprn  iecade.,  of  deliberate  research.  With  the  advent  of  the  first 
hH-trr'rh"  'e'a!  cuiatin^T  machines'  in  the  -iid  - 1  h4''is .  M  pioneers  realized 
b  au'hir.e--  coukl  he  'Tiade  tr,  aanintilate  sviihols  and  concepts  as  well 
IS  a  imeric a!  values.  The  sear<‘h  for  'intelligent'  systems  was  on. 

'smart'  "ompaters  wuri'  tanyhl  to  plav  -tfames  such  as  chec.'kers  and 
(••i.'ss.  Research  nroepcssed  to  ether  tvpes  of  problem  solving  svstems. 

irh  ittmipt-,  t  use  \I  techniques  in  laneitafce  translations  were  such 
failures,  howeier.  that  XI  research  in  general  suffered.  In  the  late 
..e vei , f ie ,  new  computer  t e chn 0 ! !';£» i e s  Ti'vived  interest  in  XI.  Vew  verv 
larqe  scale  integrated  (VhSI)  chips,  for  example,  provided  the  memory 
•anacitv  necessary  for  successful  XI  applications.  Hoth  government 
and  commercial  organizations  began  renewed  efforts  to  exploit  the  new 
pro’oise  of  XI.  In  19S1,  the  Japanese  announced  their  intention  of 
buildinq  a  whole  new  fifth  generation  of  computers  featuring  XI 
tec'u.ologv ;  and  other  countries  rushed  to  launch  their  own  fifth 
generation  prelects.  Controlling  information  and  or  knowledge,  it  has 
been  predicted,  will  be  a  key  to  future  national  survival.  Information 
will  become  a  com^'iditv  in  and  of  itself.  The  nation  that  first  builds 
an*"!  ,uc(  ossful ;  V  applies  the  capabilities  of  'intelligent'  or  super 
eowoufers  will  havc  tremendous  economic  and  political  leverage. 


T’.iS  handbook  traces  the  devolop-Ticnt  aT’tificial  intelli<Tr;nce  and 
discusses  current  and  future  applications.  The  concluding  chapter  also 
(Contains  r eco'-a  nended  steos  for  onTani^ations  to  follow  to  successfully 
interTpat'"'  \1  te(^'hf^,-)]ri.Tv . 


Xll 


CHAPTER  I 


HACKCROUMO  INFORMATION 

Introduction 

Artifici'il  intclli^encr:  (AI)  is  considered  bv  ^anv  to  be  one  of  the 
kev  tcchnolo(Tii.>al  innovations  that  -.vill  continue  to  shape  the  trans- 
for'nation  of  our  society  into  the  next  century.  We  have  Tioved  steadily 
an  industrially  based  econo^ny  to  one  that  is  dominated  by  the 
creation  and  processinpr  of  information.  The  larE^est  US  manufacturing 
industry  is  now  newspaper  nublishinfr,  and  the  lare^st  organization  in 
the  world  in  terms  of  e  nplovees  is  the  Hell  System.^  Computer  systems 
iiave  clearly  become  a  doaiinatin^r  feature  of  our  complex  society. 
Science  fiction  movies  such  as  2001  and  War  Games  create  the  illusion 
that  super  smart  computers  may  soon  take  over  the  world.  Despite  almost 
on  years  of  research,  practical  intellijjent  systems  are  still  in  their 
infancy.  A  fTfoat  deal  of  work  must  yet  be  accomplished  if  AI  systems 
are  to  become  commonplace.  It  is  this  ambiguity  over  the  state  of 
computer  development  that  makes  it  difficult  to  separate  fact  from 
fiction . 

Artificial  intellijrence  is  not  clearly  understood'.  There  appears 
to  he  confusion  over  what  A I  is  and  what  sort  of  functions  it  will  be 
able  to  perform  or  support.  The  pooular  literature  on  AI  is  repleat 
with  promises  of  spectacular  feats  waiting  in  the  vvinf^s.  Only  in  the 
small  print  do  we  see  that  additional  technological  improvements  must  be 
accomplished  first.  Part  of  the  mystique  surrounding  At  is  that  most 
people  sec  it  as  a  very  complex,  highly  technical  field  of  study.  And 
A[  systems  are  sophisticated.  One  need  not  be  a  computer  scientist. 


1 


h.,\v't'ver,  to  maki'  decisions  about  ho'.v  to  use  and  apply  AI 

ct'fectivel V .  The  first  step  any  indiyidual  or  organization  should  take 
Is  tc.  become  i-renerallv  familiar  -vith  Al'-its  potential  and  limitations. 

This  handbook  is  offered  as  a  starting  point.  It  is  intended  as  an 
ir.t  roduction  to  a  yerv  complex  subject.  Many  of  the  articles  on  AI  are 
leehnical  document-,  difficult  tor  the  layman  to  understand.  I  haye 
i'ti  sipted  to  pr  jvide  a  steaichtforward  discussion.  Artificial 

ir.relli:’ence  does  appear  to  have  tremendous  possibilities  for  the 
'  iiitarv.  This  handbook  is  designed  to  help  the  reader  determine  how  to 
*)(■  PT,  to  use  this  new'  lechnolo'^v. 

definitions 

Is  Al  a  field  of  scientific  research,  a  tccbnolo^v.  an  advanced 
•  -  iputor  svster,  or  what'’  Part  of  the  uncertainty  about  AI  is  that 
■'crt'  is  no  simple  and  universally  accepted  definition.  One  must  be 
.  tr-  ful  in  dibcussina  AI,  for  the  frame  of  reference  of  the  discussant 
determines  what  AI  mav  mean.  1  have,  therefore,  included  several 
••vorkins;  concepts  of  AI,  You  will  note  that  some  speak  of  AI  as  a  field 
f,f  computer  ocience  while  others  approach  the  subject  as  a  working 
o.-'-item.  In  all  of  these  definitional  -iis.^’ussions ,  it  is  important  to 
r-  ciize  that  'intelligence'  refers  to  the  power  or  act  of  understanding. 
Xrtiiicial  intelligence  does  not  refer  to  facts  or  information  about  a 
petential  adversary.  Avron  Bar'’  and  Kdward  Fiegenbaum's  book  The 
Haridbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence  is  becoming  the  standard  reference 
••ork  for  \I  research.  tJo^hans  their  definition  is  the  one  we  should 
k  .r,k  .at  fir-,!. 


9 


Artificial  intelligence  is  that  part  of  computer  science 
concerned  with  designing  intelligent  computer  systems;  that 
is,  computer  systems  that  exhibit  the  characteristics  we 
associate  with  intelligence  in  human  behavior--understanding 
language,  learning,  reasoning,  solving  problems,  and  so  on. 


Patrick  Winston,  in  his  popular  introductory  textbook  on  A.I,  states 
that  "41  is  the  study  of  ideas  which  enable  computers  to  do  the  things 
that  make  people  seem  intelligent."^  In  trying  to  define  AI,  Winston 
and  others  find  themselves  making  frequent  references  to  man's  ability 
to  think  and  act  intelligently.  Winston  goes  on  to  say; 


41  excites  people  who  want  to  uncover  principles  that  apply 
to  all  intelligent  information  processors,  not  just  those  that 
happen  to  be  made  of  wet  nervous  tissue  instead  of  dry 
electronic  gadgetrv.  Consequently,  there  is  neither  an 
obsession  with  mimicking  human  intelligence  nor  a  prejudice 
against  using  methods  that  seem  involved  in  human 
intelligence . 

Others  see  41  not  so  much  a  revolutionary  change  as  an  evolution 
in  computer  technology.  Thev  argue  that  while  one  goal  is  to  make 
compTiter  systems  'smarter,'  thev  do  not  necessarily  have  to  replicate 


the  human  thought  process,  "41  is  the  use  of  the  computer  to  perform 


tasks  that  currently  require  human  intelligence,  AI  is  not  a 
computerized  re-creation  of  thought.  This  distinction  between  thinking 
like  a  human  and  performing  tasks  like  a  human  is  the  kev  to  under¬ 
standing  Al's  future  opportunities  and  limitations."^  Those  that  see  AI 
as  an  improved  computer  tool  feel  that  the  term  'artificial  intelligence' 
mav  be  misleading.  It  conjures  up  images  of  an  electronic  Frankenstein. 
Thev  argue,  instead,  that  41  is  merely  a  tool  to  extend  the  capabilities 


of  machines.  4nd  men  have  been  searching  for  wavs  to  replicate  and 
expand  their  physical  and  mental  powers  throughout  history. 


3 


Ori^int:  of 


The  development  of  weapont;  and  mechanical  tools  was  simply  a 
manifestation  of  man's  desire  to  extend  his  own  capabilities.  That  ^oal 
has  long  existed  in  the  area  of  mental  powers  as  well.  Mechanical 
adding  machines  were  developed  as  early  as  1642  bv  Pascal.  In  the  last 
century.  Charles  Pabhage  designed  an  'analytical  engine'  that  was  to 
operate  using  punched  cards.  While  his  design  was  sound  (punched  cards 
were  eventually  used  in  calculating  machines),  engineering  difficulties 
precluded  successful  completion  of  the  project.  Mechanical  calculating 
machines  eventually  ov^-'roame  the  problems  that  stopped  Babbage,  however, 
and  were  in  widespread  use  by  the  start  of  WW  II.  These  machines  were 
used  to  enable  man  to  manipulate  numbers  at  ever  increasing  speeds.  In 
1946,  an  electronic  calculating  machine  (ENIA,C)  was  developed  to  help 
calculate  ballistics  info'^mation.  It  was  with  the  development  of  EN1\C 
that  artificial  intelligence  research  was  born. 

Artificial  intelligence  pioneers  such  as  Herbert  Simon  and  Alan 
Newell  of  Carnegie-Mellon  University,  Marvin  Minsky  of  the  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology,  and  John  McCarthy  of  Stanford  realized  that  if 
computers  could  manipulate  symbols  for  numbers  they  could  also 
meaningfully  manipulate  the  symbols  for  words,  musical  notes,  or  any 
other  complex  notion,^  The  work  of  these  original  AI  researchers  did 
not  go  unnoticed. 

Popular  magazines  such  as  Life ,  Time ,  and  Atlantic  Monthly  began 
printing  stories  on  the  new  computer  age  in  general  and  "thinking 
machines"  in  particular.  Predictions  were  made  about  machines  that  one 
would  be  able  to  cor.verse  with  in  ordinary  English  and  not  have  to  know 


4 


what  went  on  inside  the  machine.  These  new  marv^cls  would  be  able  to 
eornplete  complex  computations  exceedingly  fast  and  never  make  mistakes. 
A  1961  Life  magazine  article  entitled  "Machines  are  Taking  Over"  stated 
that  computers  were  slowly  replacing  man  in  many  endeavors  but  that  man 
could  alwavs  "reach  down  and  pull  the  plug."^  Sales  executives  at  IBM 
were  afraid  that  their  computers  would  be  psvcnologically  threatening 
and  that  customers  would  refuse  to  buy  them.  Ads  were  developed  to  show 
that  computers  were  really  pretty  dumb  after  all.^ 

The  mainstream  of  computer  development  during  these  early  years 
dealt  with  straightforward  number  or  data  manipulation.  AI  pioneers, 
however,  struggled  with  the  concept  of  creating  machines  that  could 
demonstrate  reasoning  and  learning  capabilities.  Early  projects 
centered  on  games  such  as  checkers  or  chess.  If  a  machine  could  be  made 
to  play  chess  reasonably  well,  it  was  argued,  then  machines  could  be 
considered  intelligent.  While  advocates  of  artificial  intelligence 
began  researching  'smart’  systems,  others  were  already  claiming  that 
machines  were  not  like  humans  and  could  never  be  made  to  'think.' 

Can  machines  think?  No  present  models  for  understanding  knowledge, 
how  the  mind  works,  etc.,  suffice  to  even  attempt  to  answer  this 
question.  This  introductory  handbook  will  not  attempt  to  dwell  on  a 
point  that  may  be  moot  anyway.  But  it  should  be  helpful  to  discuss  the 
basic  arguments  surrounding  this  debate.  Perhaps  it  will  help  remove 
some  of  the  mystique  that  envelops  AI .  Hopefully  it  will  also  provide  a 
common  basis  for  appreciating  the  use  of  terms  such  as  'intelligent 
machine'  or  'smart  systems.' 


1 


Those  who  said  machines  could  be  made  to  demonstrate  human-like 
intelligence  developed  the  theory  of  the  "Turing  Test"  to  prove  their 
point.  In  this  test,  an  interrogator  would  be  separated  from  the  person 
or  machine  being  interrogated  and  could  communicate  only  by  teletype. 
If  the  interrogator  could  not  tell  whether  he  or  she  was  communicating 
with  a  person  or  machine,  then  a  machine  could  be  said  to  think.  (^.M. 
Turing  was  a  British  AI  pioneer).^ 

A  number  of  AI  researchers  believe  that  machines  do  perform 
thinking  functions.  The  fact  that  computers  can't  write  like 
Shakespeare,  they  argue,  doesn't  mean  they  aren't  intelligent.  Very  few 
humans  are  that  creative.  Does  this  mean  the  rest  of  humanity  doesn't 
think  either?  Artificial  intelligence,  they  stress,  will  "extend  those 
human  capacities  we  value  most--properties  we  sum  up  as  our  intelligence 
or  our  reason;  the  thinking  machine  would  amplify  these  qualities  as 
other  machines  have  amplified  other  capacities  of  our  body."^0  The  crux 
of  the  debate  over  'thinking  machines'  comes  down  to  perceptions  and 
definitions  of  intelligence  or  intelligent  behavior. 

Those  who  do  not  believe  machines  can  or  ever  will  think  argue  that 
it  is  impossible  to  replicate  the  human  mind  in  a  mechanical  device. 
Computers  are  not  innovative;  they  can  only  do  what  they  are  programmed 
to  perform.  Humans  approach  problem  solving  from  a  holistic  sense  of 
the  world.  That  is,  they  use  all  their  senses,  knowledge,  and  heuristic 
abilities  to  think  and  respond.  Computers  could  never  achieve  this 
level  of  awareness.  The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  primary  arg\iments 
against  the  concept  of  thinking  machines ; 


6 


.  .  .  intelligence  ic  an  exclusive  human  property;  for  rea^onc 
of  iivine  origin  or  biological  accident.  Human  beingo  are  the 
only  creaturec  on  the  planet  who  have  or  will  ever  have 
genuin-'  intelligence  .  .  .  machines  can't  be  eaid  to  think 

because  intelligence  requires  creativity  or  originality,  and 
no  machine  has  been  or  can  be  creative  and  original.  .  . 
Given  that  computers  might  be  capable  of  intelligent  behavior 
ought  \e  to  pursue  the  possibility'’  Can  we  foresee  the  outcome 
of  such  an  awesome  step"’^^ 

\  leading  critic  of  the  notion  that  aiachines  could  think  is  Hubert 
L.  Dreyfus.  He  attacks  what  he  believes  to  be  the  exaggerated  claims  of 
the  A.I  researchers.  He  argues  that  human  intelligence  is  unique  and 
that  the  general  misunderstanding  about  \1  is  a  result  of  researchers  in 
A1  stating  that  thinkin?  machine^-,  already  here  or  just  around  the 

corner.^-  Dreyfus  believes  that  effort:  to  .Teate  thinking  machines  are 
doomed  to  failure  because  information  files  f which  replicate  the  human 
holistic  view  of  things)  would  become  overwhelming.  Dreyfus  compares  A1 
research  to  a  man  climbing  a  tree  to  get  t-<  the  moon.  Progress  is  made 
in  the  early  going,  but  it  quickly  gets  harder  and  finally  peters  out  in 
the  upper  branches. One  of  the  most  telling  points  the  critics  of 
'thinking  machines'  make  is  the  difficulty  of  giving  computers  common 
sense.  This  is  a  formidable  problem  that  does  not  appear  close  to 
solution;  but  the  nonbelievers  have  not  weakened  the  faith  of  M 
experts  such  as  Patrick  Winston.  He  stated  the  case  in  this  way:  "Of 
course  to  believe  in  human  superiority  is  a  tradition.  Once  our 
intelligence  was  unchallenged,  yet  someday  computers  may  laugh  at  us  and 
wonder  if  biological  information  processors  could  be  really  smart. 


Conventional  Computers 

To  understand  how  AI  systems  work,  let  us  first  briefly  review  a 
few  fundamentals  aboiit  conventional  computers.  Computers,  in  general. 


7 


are  devices  that  accept  and  manipulate  data  in  a  sequence  ordered  by 
some  prearranf^ed  program.  These  operations  result  in  some  further 
action  or  output.  Computers  that  perform  these  operations  are  generally 
divided  into  two  basic  types--analog  and  digital.  \nalog  computers 
operate  on  a  constant  but  varying  input  (like  an  automobile  speedometer) 
while  digital  computers  operate  on  inputs  that  are  eithei  on-off  or 
incrementally  stepped  quantities  represented  by  numerical  digits.^'’  \I 
systems  generally  employ  digital  computers,  so  let's  quickly  review  how 
they  work. 

Hasic  Computer  Operations 

Digital  computers  have  three  main  parts  or  subsystems:  Input/ 
output,  memory,  and  central  processing  unit  (CPU).  The  input/output 
device  (keyboard,  monitor,  printer,  etc.)  provides  the  means  to  enter 
programs  and  to  display  results.  Programs  and  instructions  arc  stored 
in  the  second  basic  component,  the  memory  module.  Interim  results, 
computations  and  data  are  also  stored  in  memory  until  they  are  needed 
for  further  operations.  Memory  modules  may  also  use  storage  devices 
such  as  magnetic  tape  or  discs.  The  key  component  of  a  conventional 
computer,  the  central  processing  unit  or  CPU,  processes  the  programs  or 
instructions  in  the  memorv  module  and  executes  the  required  operations. 
It  controls  the  entire  operation. 

\11  conventional  computers,  from  the  first  generation  machines  built 
in  the  late  1940s  and  early  1950s  through  the  current  fourth  generation 
systems,  are  essentially  the  same  in  design  and  operation.  Generational 
dividing  lines  came  about  as  a  result  of  several  changes  in  hardware 
technology,  software  developments,  and  operational  techniques.  First 


8 


iTcne ration  machines,  for  cxa^iiplc,  ut;cd  vacuim  tubes,  oreated  a  jrreat 
deal  of  heat,  and  were  very  large.  Seoond  generation  machines  featured 
transistors  which  reduced  both  size  and  heat  problems.  Integrated 
circuit  computers  introduced  the  third  generation,  and  very  large-scale 
integrated  (VLSI)  computers  initiated  yet  a  fourth  generation.  Edward 
Fiegenbaum,  a  leading  AI  expert,  believes  that  we  are  currently  at  the 
end  of  the  third  generation  and  that  fourth  generation  VLSI  (computers) 
will  dominate  the  1980s. 

Conventional  computers  built  during  all  four  generations  follow  an 
operational  design  known  as  the  Von  Neumann  process.  (John  Von  Neumann 
was  a  computer  pioneer  and  mathematician.)  This  means  that  computer 
programs  are  processed  serially  in  a  step-by-step  operation.  Each  step 
the  computer  takes  is  spelled  out  in  a  detailed  program.  It  can  only  do 
what  it  is  instructed  to  do.  A  conventional  computer  receives  data, 
perforns  simple  arithmetic,  and  produces  answers  consisting  of 
individual  digits.  Special  programs  in  the  computer  can  convert  these 
individual  digits  to  alphabetic  characters. Conventional  computers, 
then,  follow  rigidly  formatted  programs,  completing  one  process  at  a 
time;  but  technological  improvements  have  enabled  conventional  computers 
to  perform  these  tasks  at  remarkable  speeds.  Artificial  intelligence 
computer^  operate  in  a  fundamentally  different  fashion. 

AI  Computer  Systems 

Artificial  intelligence  systems  differ  in  both  their  hardware  and 
operational  programs.  AI  computers  are  built  to  manipulate  symbols 


9 


!  Mt*'ier  than  nnan  i’h-  val  le;  .  So'ne  of  the;n’  'rtauhinen  are  oonntructed  to 
!-('  'inia.un  pro^raamins  languaejen  nuch  at;  LISP  (List  Processing 
iP^aag^').  USP  was  developed  by  John  McCarthy  in  1957  for  the  express 
■  irt'w'  f  of  handlir;  i  er)inpt''<  concepts  and  symbol  aanipulatiori .  These 
o  i  ’  tl  CO  nputer;.  ar-"  made  primarily  by  three  companies:  Symbolics. 

'  f  Camoridfif  Mas- actnisetts  ;  Lisp  'lachinos.  Inc.,  of  Culver  City, 
.■.do  r:,;  i;  and  Xi-rox  F.loctrs  Optical  Systems  of  Pasadena.  California. 
\  -rativp  lo'.'k  ;U  At  sv\>te  ms  and  conventional  computers  should 

ir-i’e  ■  .V  the  t  vo  systems  differ. 


S  y  s  t  e  ai  mp 

' 'vyriV!;ntional  computers  and  \I  systems  have  a  number  of  significant 
Lfterences  in  the  wav  they  operate.  You  will  recall  that  conventional 
•vstems  use  primarilv  numeric*  operations,  following  very  precise 
t's-hv -sTe!.i  direction*.  That  is,  to  solve  problems,  they  follow 
'  licit  algorithmic  .olutif/ns-  Meiiause  of  the  wav  information  and 
issf  ructions  are  stru«'tured,  it  can  be  difficult  to  modify  or  change  a 
program.  Conventional  ccnputer  programs  are  designed  to  provide 
specific  answers  to  a  given  proble:n.  They  are  not  designed  to  guess, 
it  rather  to  provide  solutions  previouslv  calculated  and  stored  some¬ 
where  in  the  computer's  :memory.  It  was  this  inflexibility  that  led  A.I 
r:‘searchers  to  design  machines  that  could  simulate  human  performance. 

\rtificial  intelligence  systeais  are  primarily  symbolic  processors, 
'lather  than  following  a  predefined  algorithm,  the  M  program  can  more 
’’ealily  sort  through  its  stored  memory  to  determine  what  procedures  to 
foil  y.  In  this  approach  to  problem  solving,  solution  steps  are  implied 


10 


but  not  ypecifioally  spelled  out.  The  ability  of  AI  systems  to  use 
'heuristics'  instead  of  just  algorithais  gives  them  their  most  unique 
characteristic.  Heuristics  have  been  called  the  art  of  good  guessing. 
Heuristics  enable  us  (or  machines)  to  recognize  promising  approaches  to 
solving  problems,  to  break  problems  down  into  smaller  problems,  to 
overcome  incomplete  information,  and  to  make  educated  guesses.  It  is 
this  flexibility  that  enables  AI  systems  to  develop  'satisfactory' 
answers  that  may  not  be  precisely  correct  but  are  acceptable.  Another 
important  aspect  of  this  flexibility  is  the  AI  system's  ability  to 
'explain'  why  certain  decisions  were  made.  In  an  AI  system,  the 
structure  of  the  components  allows  the  program  to  be  more  easily 
modified  and  the  knowledge  base  updated.  The  table  below  provides  a 
comparison  of  conventional  and  AI  systems. 

Table  1 

A I -Conventional  Syste  m  Comparison 
(From  An  Overview  of  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Robotics. 

NASA  Technical  Memorandum  85836) 

Artificial  Intelligence  Conventional  Computer  Programming 

•  Primarily  symbolic  processes  •  Often  primarily  numeric 

•  Heuristic  search  •  Algorithmic  (solution  steps 

(solution  steps  implicit)  explicit) 

•  Control  structure  usually  •  Information  and  control  integrated 

separate  from  domain  knowledge  together 

•  Usually  easy  to  modify,  •  Difficult  to  modify 

update  and  enlarge 

•  Some  incorrect  answers  often  •  Correct  answers  required 
tolerable 

•  Satisfactory  answers  usually  •  Best  possible  solution  usually 

acceptable  sought 


11 


AI  Research  Progreba 

.Artificial  intelligence  research  progressed  significantly  in  its 
first  three  decades.  It  has  grown  from  a  part-time  pursuit  of  a  few 
individuals  on  the  fringes  of  computer  science  to  a  full-fledged  field  of 
study.  AI  researchers  now  hold  international  conferences,  publish 
several  journals,  and  collect  a  sizable  share  of  Defense  Department 
contract  money.  AI  work  has  moved  rapidly  fron  isolated  university 
laboratories  to  a  nunber  of  commercial  ventures.  As  AI  research  work 
matured,  some  of  the  early  goals  were  .nodified. 

An  early  goal  of  AI  was  to  recreate  human  thought  processes  with 
machines.  Many  of  the  AI  pioneers  sp>ent  a  lot  of  time  studying  the 
hunan  cognitive  process  and  then  tried  to  build  progra3T\s  that  could  act 
in  a  similar  manner.  This  task  quickly  grew  too  enormous  for  all  but 
the  most  sinnple  programs.  More  recent  research  has  concentrated  on 
solving  specific  problems,  beading  A'  experts  such  as  Edward  A. 
Fiegenbaum  now  say  tnat  "it  is  not  critical  whether  the  methods  mimic 
the  internal  structure  of  human  behavior. In  the  early  years  of  AI 
research,  too  many  promises  were  made  for  near-term  major  breakthroughs. 
When  these  goals  were  not  realized,  AI  went  through  a  period  (the  1980s 
and  early  1970s)  of  disenchantment.  Recent  technological  developments, 
such  as  VLSI  chips,  have  given  new  life  to  AI  research.  More  AI  tools, 
such  as  syntoolic  processors,  are  available  to  help  design  new 
'intelligent'  sys terns. 

From  the  formative  years,  through  the  lean  times  and  into  the 
present  period  of  popularity,  one  agency  almost  single-handedly  ensured 
AI's  survival.  The  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  (DARPA) 


12 


i^upported  A I  research  through  two  decades  of  important  (and  highly 
risky)  research  efforts.  D4RP\'s  steady  support  enabled  A1  to  develop 
the  fundamental  knowledge  and  tools  that  are  finally  delivering  the 
long-promised  'intelligent  systens.’  In  the  next  chapter,  we  will 
discuss  some  of  those  systems  and  their  potential  value  to  the  military. 

j 

I 

I 


13 


NOTES 


CHAPTER  I 

1.  -lohn  Naisbitt,  "Compulep  Trends;,”  Speutru'n ,  Novenber  1083, 

1  I 

‘2.  Avron  Rarr  and  Edward  Feificnbaum,  The  Handbook  of  Artificial 
Intelligence ,  Vol.  I  (Stanford,  Calif.:  Heurio  Tech  Press,  1081),  3. 

3.  Patrick  H.  Winston,  Artificial  Intelligence  (Reading,  Mass.: 
Addison- Wesley  Publishing  Co.,  1977),  1. 

4.  Ibid.  ,  3. 

5.  Richard  P.  Ten  Dyke,  "Outlook  on  Artificial  Intelligence," 
Auerbach  Publishers  Inc.,  undated,  1. 

6.  William  M,  Alpert,  "Computers  With  Smarts,"  Barron's , 
23  January  1984,  13. 

7.  Warren  R.  Young,  "The  Machines  Are  Taking  Over , "  Life  ,  3  March 
1961,  108-110. 

8.  Pamela  McCorduck,  Machines  Who  Think  (San  Francisco:  W.  H. 
Freeman  and  Co.,  1971),  159. 

9.  Ibid.,  57. 

10.  Ibid.,  113-114. 

11.  Ibid.,  171-172. 

12.  Ibid.,  182. 

13.  John  O.  Green,  "Making  Computers  Smarter,"  Popular  Computing, 
January  1984,  102. 

14.  Winston,  Artificial  Intelligence,  252. 

15.  Roger  S.  Walker,  Understanding  Computer  Science  (Dallas:  Texas 
Instruments  Inc.,  1981),  1-5. 


14 


16.  Ibid. .  1-6. 


17.  Edwird  V  FfMqcnbau'Ti  and  Pamela  MeCorduck.  The  Fifth  Generation 
(Reading,  Ma^;  .  ;  \ddison  'V>  lev  PublinhinR  Co.,  19S3).  17. 

1'^.  -Tame;,  \.  Saxon  and  Roi)e)0  K.  Fri*’z,  Refs^inninfr  Programming  with 
Ada  ( Enc;ie fcvood  Clift'v,  N  .J  .  ■  p rer  tine -Mall .  Ine,.  1983),  3. 

19.  -Joel  N.  Shurkin.  "Expert.  Sve3tem^  '  Tb.e  Practical  Face  of 
Artificial  Intelligence."  Technology  Review.  Mov-!)cc,  19R3.  74. 

20.  Feigcnbaum.  fhc  Fifth  Generation,  77. 


15  /  (  0 


I 


CHAPTER  2 


ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  APPLICATION 
nearly  three  deoadea  of  AI  research,  four  major  areas  of 
application  have  one rged- -Expert  Systems.  Natural  Language,  Vision 
Systems,  and  Robotics.  These  areas  present  special,  and  semetimes 
extremely  difficult,  problems  to  overcome.  Progress,  as  a  result,  has 
not  been  equal  across  the  ixaard.  Expert  systems  and  natural  language 
application  appear  to  offer  the  most  immediate  possibilities  for 
military  application.  They  will  be  discussed  in  seme  detail  while 
Vision  and  Robotics  will  be  mentioned  only  briefly.  Artificial 
intelligence  research  was  initiated  to  extend  the  use  of  man's  mental 
powers  through  the  use  of  computer  systems.  It  is  therefore  not 
surprising  that  the  most  mature  area  of  AI  research  and  application  is 
the  so-called  Expert  System. 

Expert  Systems 

Expert  or  knowledge  base  systems  resulted  from  the  initial  AI 
effort  to  develop  computer  assisted  problem  solving  systems.  AI 
advocates  believed  that  computer  systems  could  imitate  intelligent  htman 
behavior.  They  felt  confident  that  computer  systems  would  be  capable  of 
solving  the  most  complex  problems.  All  one  had  to  do  was  build  a 
comprehensive  data  or  knowledge  base  and  teach  the  computer  how  to  sort 
through  the  facts  and  come  up  with  an  acceptable  answer.  The  first 
'problems'  that  were  tackled  were  games  such  as  checkers  and  chess.  It 
was  assumed  that  if  computers  could  be  taught  to  solve  gaming  problems, 


17 


thon  wthep  'probleiriL:'  coali  bo  solved.  Researchers  soon  discovered  that 

limiting  the  scope  of  a  problen  through  effective  search  techniques  was 

tiie  key  to  building  an  'intelligent'  systen.  A.I  pioneers  also 

disccA'ered  that  the  domain  or  "-.vorld"  that  was  being  investigated  had  to 

bt^  liaiited  for  a  systen  to  provide  acceptable  results.  \  great  deal  of 

research  effort  in  the  1  ddOs  and  lh70s  was  invested  in  atte  npting  to 

•1:  Vi.'lop  riore  effective  search  techniques.  Researchers  also  began  to 

locus  on  the  data  within  the  knowledge  base  of  the  computer.  They 

realized  that  by  carefully  representing  and  limiting  the  domain  of 

knowledge  contained  in  the  computer’s  knowdedg^^  base,  they  could  make  it 

easier  to  extract  acceptabbr  answers  for  a  given  problem.  Edward 

Fiegenbaum  describes  an  expert  system  as  follows: 

A.n  "expert  system"  is  an  intelligent  computer  program  that 
uses  knowledge  and  inference  procedures  to  -solve  problems 
that  are  difficult  enough  to  require  significant  human 
expertise  for  their  solution.  The  knowledge  necessary  to 
perform  at  such  a  level,  plus  the  inference  procedures  used, 
can  be  thought  of  as  ?  model  of  the  expertise  of  the  best 
practitioners  of  the  field.- 

Expert  system:,  are  int^-nded  to  provide  a  method  of  codifying 
.,’.;rtain  human  capabilities  in  an  intelligent  computer  system.  They  are 
to  not  only  'magnify'  human  mental  abilities,  but  perform  tasks  with  an 
unerring  tirelessnes;,  while  serving  as  'intelligent'  advisors  or 
I  jr,mjltants .  Most  expert  sy;, terns  are  constructed  similarly,  and  most 
use  si-nilar  search  techniques.  There  are,  however,  no  specific  models 
tor  designing  an  expert  system. 

■Syst em  Components 

bx[jcrl  ^ystem  components  differ  from  those  of  a  conventional 
ioutor.  The  basic  structure  consists  of  four  primary  parts:  an 


18 


interface  device,  an  inference  engine,  a  knowledge  base,  and  a  memory 
section  (see  fig.  1). 

The  interface  device  provides  the  user  with  a  method  of  'talking 
to'  or  instructing  the  system  about  what  needs  to  be  accomplished.  It 
also  provides  the  means  to  determine  results  through  a  video  screen, 
printer,  or  other  output  device.  Efforts  to  give  the  interface 
component  the  ability  to  converse  in  a  'natural'  language  are  receiving 
increased  emphasis.  (Natural  language  usage  will  be  discussed  later  in 
this  chapter.) 

The  inference  engine  is  the  critical  component  in  an  expert  system. 
It  provides  the  control  structure  for  sorting  through  the  knowledge 
base.  It  determines  vvhich  rules  or  facts  should  be  applied  to  solve  a 
given  problem.  The  inference  engine  draws  conclusions  based  on  the  rules 
in  the  data  base.  It  controls  program  procedures  and  data  manipulation. 

The  knowledge  base  in  an  expert  system  also  has  unique  character¬ 
istics.  Unlike  conventional  programs,  it  stores  more  than  just  facts; 
it  also  contains  heuristic  knowledge  which  replicates  the  expertise  an 
expert  develops  in  a  specific  domain.  It  is  this  heuristic  knowledge 
that  allows  both  humans  and  machines  to  make  educated  guesses  to  solve 
problems.  Heuristics  enable  us  to  break  problems  down  into  more 
manageable  pieces.  Both  the  facts  and  the  heuristic  knowledge  stored  in 
the  knowledge  base  are  generally  represented  in  the  form  of  production 
rules  or  IF-THEN  rules — "if  the  patient  has  a  fever  of  108  degrees, 
then  the  patient  is  probably  very  sick."  4n  effectively  constructed 
knowledge  base  is  critical  to  the  performance  of  an  expert  system. 
Useful  knowledge  an  expert  system  might  contain  is  discussed  in  4vron 
Barr's  The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence: 


19 


INPUT/OUTPUT 
,  INTERFACE  , 


2 


N  ASA  rcchnical  Memorandum  l!?H36 


1.  Facts  about  the  domain:  ’’The  shin  bone  is  connected  to 
the  ankle  bone." 

2.  Hard-and-fast  rules  or  procedures;  "41  ways  unplug  the  set 
before  you  stick  a  screwdriver  into  the  back." 

3.  Problem  situations  and  what  might  be  good  things  to  try  to 
do  when  you  are  in  them  (heuristics);  "If  it  won't  start  but 
you  are  getting  a  spark,  check  the  fuel  line." 

4.  Global  strategies:  differential  diagnosis. 

5.  4  "theory"  of  the  domain;  "4  casual  explanation  of  how 
an  internal  combustion  engine  works." 

Barr  goes  on  to  say. 

Much  of  the  knowledge  that  characterizes  human  expertise  is 
hunchlike,  in  the  sense  that  it  does  not  constitute  definite 
consequences  of  actions  or  certainty  of  conclusions.  ...  In 
particular,  inexact  reasoning,  using  hunches  or  heuristics  to 
guide  and  focus  what  would  otherwise  be  a  search  of  an 
impossibly  large  space  has  resulted  iti  systems  with 
human-level  problem  solving  abilities. ^ 

Developing  these  special  knowledge  bases  has  been  labeled 
"knowledge  engineering."  It  is  the  job  of  a  knowledge  engineer  to  work 
with  a  domain  expert  to  convert  his  or  her  knowledge  into  workable  rules 
that  can  be  manipulated  by  the  inference  engine.  Knowledge  engineering 
has  become  one  of  the  critical  links  m  developing  expert  systems.  The 
procedures  they  follow  vary  and  are  quite  time  consuming.  4s  mentioned 
previously,  an  expert  system  is  only  as  good  as  its  knowledge  base. 
Knowledge  engineers  sometimes  spend  months  developing  a  workable  data 
base.  It  is  not  unusual  to  see  over  six  months'  research  being  performed 
before  even  one  rule  is  written.  Therefore,  it  could  take  years  to 
develop  a  complex  knowledge  base!  Another  factor  that  adds  to  the  time 
Ik  consuming  process  may  be  the  requirement  to  have  only  one  expert  as  a 

source  for  rules.  This  can  preclude  conflicting  rules  being  built  into 
a  system.  It  is  realized,  however,  that  the  sum  of  experience  of 
several  experts  may  be  required  for  some  systems. 


21 


The  menopy  area  provider  a  place  for  data  to  be  stored  while 
possible  conclusions  or  solutions  are  being  developed.  This  'global 
data  base'  keeps  track  of  the  problem's  status — what  has  already  been 
done  to  solve  the  problem  and  what  is  needed  for  a  particular  step  in 
the  problca. 

Search  Procedures 

The  control  strategy  determines  how  the  rules  within  the  expert 
system  are  applied.  There  are  a  number  of  ways  to  control  the  inference 
engine's  manipulation  of  the  knowledge  base.  One  of  the  more  common 
procedures  is  known  as  a  'forward  chaining'  or  data  driven  control 
strategy.  In  this  procedure,  the  knowledge  base  is  scanned  to  sort  out 
those  rules  that  are  relevant  to  the  problem  or  question  presented. 

When  a  match  is  found,  the  rule  is  sent  to  the  memory  area  and  the 
search  continues  until  no  more  matches  can  be  made  or  until  the 
instructions  are  modified  to  renew  the  search.  Another  search  procedure 
is  to  select  a  desired  goal  and  then  scan  the  rules  to  find  those  whose 
consequent  actions  can  lead  to  the  desired  state.  This  is  known  as  a 
goal -driven  or  "backward-chaining  control  strategy.  More  complex 
expert  systems  might  use  a  combination  of  search  procedures.  The 
control  structure  might  also  employ  meta-rules,  which  would  either 
select  relevant  rules  from  an  entire  set  of  rules  or  focus  the  search  in 
a  specific  part  of  the  data  base.  This  helps  overcome  one  of  the  key  t 

difficulties  in  expert  systems--peducing  the  search  space  that  must  be 
considered.^  These  search  procedures  can  be  found  in  virtually  all 
expert  systems  now  in  use. 

22 


i 


The  fir-.t  vorking  expert  dViitenit;  were  dev“loped  in  the  lOd')';. 


^rojecto  :^i!ch  a.';  Stanford  nniversity'o  DENDR-Mi  eheinieal  analysis  system 
and  the  Massachusetts  Institute  rechriologv's  MYCIN  medical  diagnosis 
consultant  yirovidp'*  he  knowledge  and  working  tool:-  necessary  to  develop 
other  expert  systems,  which  now  number  in  thi--  hundreds.  Despite 
advance  :  in  expert  syste  n  tool  development,  it  is  still  a  lengthy 
process  to  build  an  expert  system.  Professionals  involved  i''<  the 
business  of  building  these  syste  ns  provide  a  number  of  cautions,  that 
prospective  buyers  cie  uli  hee-l.  point  out,  for  example,  that  a 

specific  problem  to  be  worked  uy  an  e.pert  .system  must  first  be 
identified.  If  tiie  problem  can't  be  defined  in  detailed  terms  within  a 
narrow  domain,  it  is  unlikely  that  a  successful  system  can  be  built. 
Secondly,  they  warn  that  it  will  take  Ttcre  time  to  construct  an  expert 
system  than  you  might  think.  Rule  gathering  and  knowledge  base 
construction  can  be  especially  time  consuming.  It  is  also  advisable  to 
build  a  demonstration  system  first  (rather  than  initially  trying  to 
build  a  full  scale  model).  Several  iterations  are  usually  required 
before  an  effective  expert  system  is  developed.^  The  following  list  is 
a  sample  of  some  of  the  expert  systems  now  in  use: 


SYSTEM 

FUNCTION 

MYCIN 

Medical  Diagnosis 

DENDR^lL 

Chemical  Spectral  Analysis 

PROSPECTOR 

Ceographical  Analysis 

R1  /XCON 

Computer  System  Configuration 

AIRPIAN 

Naval  Aircraft  Operations 

HARPY 

Spe^-ch  Unders.tanding 

23 


STEAMER 


Steam  Propulsion  Plant  Operation 
ROSIE  Expert  System  Construotion 

BATTLE  Battlefield  Weapons  Assi^^nment 

This  is  but  part  of  a  list  that  is  grovving  almost  daily.  Ne^v 
systems  are  being  developed  in  almost  every  field  where  an  'intelligent' 
consultant  would  be  helpful.  For  a  more  complete  listing  of  expert 
systems,  see  'William  B.  Gevarter's  An  Overview  of  Artificial 

Intelligence  and  Robotics ,  Vol  1.  One  of  the  areas  of  AI  research  and 
application  that  will  help  make  expert  systems  easier  to  use  is  that  of 
Natural  Language. 


Natural  Language 

Computers  now  perform  amazing  feats  at  incredible  speeds,  but  one 
feature  has  improved  very  little  since  they  were  first  introduced.  It 
remains  difficult  to  'talk'  to  a  computer.  They  do  not  speak  the  same 
language  that  you  and  I  use,  so  we  must  learn  their  language.  The 
burden  of  understanding  between  operator  and  computer  has  al  ways  been  on 
the  human.  Communication  with  it  must  be  very  precise,  and  only  in  the 
programming  languages  it  understands.  If  I  make  a  mistake,  even  a 
slight  one,  I  will  not  be  understood.  Instructions  cannot  be  given  in 
abstractions  or  analogies.  Sometimes  we  come  to  believe  that  it  is 
easier  just  to  go  ahead  and  work  a  problem  without  a  computer.^  AI 
researchers  are  among  those  developing  "user  friendly"  interfaces  to 
change  all  of  this , 

Natural  lang\iage  research  involves  area^  as  diverse  as  translation 
devices,  voice  recognition  systems,  synthetic  voice  production  devices , 
and  interface  systems  that  will  allow  operators  to  speak  in  their  natural 


24 


language.  Natural  language  programs  must  be  flexible  and  have  a  dynamic 
memory  in  order  for  a  system  to  understand  vvithin  a  given  context.^  It 
is  this  latter  area  that  is  gaining  the  most  attention  in  university  and 
commercial  research  labs.  While  everyone  realizes  that  computers  are 
becoming  an  ingrained  part  of  our  social  fabric,  we  also  know  there  is, 
continuing  resistance  or  unwillingness  to  learn  a  computer  language. 

Natural  Language  Inter f ace  S y s^ ems 

Researchers  trying  to  develop  computer  systems  that  can 
'understand'  natural  language  discovered  that  knowledge  was  the  key. 
'jevarter  points  out  that  for  a  computer  program  to  interpret  a 
relatively  unrestricted  natural  language  communication,  a  great  leal  of 
knowledge  is  required.  Knowledge  is  needed  of:  (1)  sentence  structure; 
(2)  word  meaning;  fS)  word  morphology;  (4)  sender  beliefs;  (5) 
conversation  rules;  and  (6)  an  extensive  shared  body  of  general 
knowledge  about  the  world. ^ 

To  date,  machines  can't  interact  in  a  very  "natural"  manner.  To 
really  speak  in  a  natural  language,  a  system  should  have  a  large 
vocabulary  so  that  the  operator  could  be  understood  without  having  to 
speak  in  a  limited  lexicon.  \n  obvious  reward  of  developing  an 
effective  natural  language  interface  system  would  be  to  expand  the  powers 
of  computing  to  larger  portions  of  our  society.  Commercial  firms, 
realizing  the  potential  profit,  have  made  this  one  of  the  most  exploited 
AI  research  areas.  Intellect  is  one  such  commercial  program.  It 
converts  English  instructions  into  machine  language  and  then  prints  the 
instructions  in  'natural  language'  on  the  monitor  so  the  user  knows  he 
or  she  ifs  understood.  The  difficulty  in  developing  a  knowledge  base  for 


25 


converting  intit  ructions  froei  one  language  (natural)  to  another 
(artificial  machine  laiiguage)  first  became  apparent  during  the 
Knglish-flussian  language  translation  proje  cts  of  the  IhiO-. 

1  ranoia n  PvyJ ec U; 

I'rarislafing  '^.u;:  .-.ian  text  into  Fu.glish  was  one  of  the  first  great 
oot>^'s  for  artificial  intelligence.  The  liefense  department’s  Advanced 
Research  Projects  Agency  (DARPA)  spefit  a  great  deal  of  money  to  make 
this  goal  a  realitv.  The  efrort  vvas  sse>'  a  failure,  however,  that  it 
not  orU  pt  hack  work  on  A I  translation  projects  hut  nearly  terminated 
aU  AI  -v  .'’K  .  ^'n  iny  bold  p^’  ^ mn'-e-  vvere  and  the  rp  .ultr  were  so 

pathetic,  that  it  tooi^  close  t:.  Id  years  for  Al  I’esearchers  to  come  out 
of  their  labova^  ries  again. 

The  first  natural  language  processing  effort  .  .  .  attempted 
trruslation  by  purelv  Syiitactic  means:  di  .'Nonary  lookup  of 
words  substitution,  and  ’pordering  of  sentence  syntax.  The 
effort  was  widely  viewed  as  a  failure:  "The  spirit  is  willing 
but  the  flesh  is  weak"  is  said  to  have  come  out  as  "The  vodka 
is  strong  but  the  meat  is  rotten"  when  translated  into  Russian 
and  back.^ 

These  early  projects  pointed  out  that  mechanical  translations  have 
trouble  with  the  fuzTiy  boundary  between  syntax  and  semantics.  The 
formal  structure  of  words  in  a  sentence  do  not  always  explain  the 
meaning  of  those  words.  Natural  language  processing  (NLP)  systems  must 
use  both  linguistic  and  domain  knowledge  to  interpret  an  input.  These 
NLP  systens  vary  in  their  complexity.  Simple  ones  store  facts  about  a 
United  domain  and  then  perform  pattern  or  key  word  matching.  More 
advanced  systems  have  enough  information  about  the  domain  to  understand 
inputs  in  terms  of  context  and  expectations.  They  might  even  contain 
information  abc.ut  the  beliefs  and  intentions  of  communicators.  Systems 


26 


tnat  go  beyond  pattern  •Tiatching  require  a  more  extensive  language 


knovvledge  to  interpret  sentences.  This  is  'isually  done  by  "parsing"  a 
given  input  into  component  parts.  AI  natural  language  researchers  have 
worked  on  the  parsing  problem  by  studying  the  areas  of  syntax  (structure 
of  phrases  and  sentences),  semantics  (meaning),  and  pragmatics  (use  of 
language  in  context).  To  date  the  orilv  practical  working  natural 
language  systems  arc  the  simple  key  v^ord  or  pattern  matching  systems 
employing  limited  lexicons. 

Voice  Recognition 

Voice  recognition  systems  comprise  another  area  of  natural  language 
research  that  has  received  a  lot  of  attention.  Progress  has  been  even 
slower  than  in  the  translation  systems.  AI  researchers  tend  to  use 
human  capabilities  as  a  model  for  their  systems.  Voice  recognition 
systems  follow  that  trend.  But  replicating  the  ability  of  humans  to 
hear  spoken  words  and  translate  them  into  meaningful  messages  is  one  of 
the  toughest  challenges  AI  workers  will  face.  "Machine  recognition  of 
spoken  words  has  been  one  of  the  problems  pursued  since  almost  the 
beginning  of  computer  science,  and  the  results  have  been  frustratingly 
poor."^l  The  Rome  Air  Development  Center  has  worked  for  over  10  years 
to  develop  an  Automatic  Speech  Recognition  (ASR)  system.  The  system  is 
to  be  able  to  remove  noise,  identify  the  language  being  spoken, 
recognize  important  keywords  in  the  conversation,  and  identify  the 
speaker.  Raj  Reddy,  an  AI  natural  language  researcher,  explains  the 
problem : 


27 


To  understand  speech,  a  human  considers  not  only  the  speoific* 
information  conveyed  to  the  ear,  but  also  the  context  in  which 
the  information  is  beinet  discussed.  For  this  reason,  people 
can  understand  spoken  language  even  when  the  speech  signal  is 
corrupted  bv  noise.  ...  It  is  difficult  to  develop  computer 
programs  that  are  sufficiently  sophisticated  to  understand 
continuo\as  speecti  bv  a  random  speaker.  Only  when  programmers 
sinplifv  the  probleTi--by  isolating  words,  limiting  the 
v.'Mjahslarv  or  number  of  speakers,  or  constraining  the  way  in 
which  centenoes  mav  be  formed- -is  speech  recognition  by 
c;  I’.puter  possible. 

Speech  research  is  conducted  in  syste  ns  having  various  degrees  of 
.  c.ihi;.  tication .  Some  systems  can  identify  only  a  fe  w  isolated  words 
:  ;)oken  by  a  specific  person.  Other  systems  are  'speaker  independent,' 
and  me.  be  dblc  to  rec  .e.rrii continuous  speech.  Obviously,  the  more 
V  .  yste  m  present  a  <‘hallenge  of  enormous  proportions.  "The 
ability  \o  recognise  unrestricted  vocabularies  of  continuous  speech  from 
any  speaker- -remains  distant  and  certainly  will  not  be  realized  until 
artificial  intelligence  progresse^.  far  beyond  its  current  stage, 

•\  related  area  of  research  is  that  of  synthetic  voice  production  or 
spcocti  synthesis.  While  it  is  an  area  of  limited  research  to  date, 
it  may  play  an  important  part  in  'talking'  expert  systems.  Some 
applications  of  speech  synthesis  have  already  been  introduced  into 
automobile  warning  systems.  Similar  warning  devices  are  being  built 
into  military  systems.  Computers  could  be  given  the  power  to  provide 
vocal  instructions,  and  electronic  mail  could  be  read  to  the  receiver. 
Now  limited,  talking  systems  seem  destined  to  appear  throughout  industry 
ar;d  the  homf’ . 

Voice  recognition  applications  offer  one  of  the  most  rewarding 
natural  langtiage  areas.  Speech  is  our  .most  natural  way  of  communicat¬ 
ing;  but  as  has  been  pointed  out,  it  is  probably  going  to  be  the 
toughest  challenge  AI  faces. 


28 


Vis n  Systc ms 

Previously  called  'scene  analysis,'  computer  vision  is  an  area  of 
pattern  recognition  which  is  concerned  with  giving  the  computer  the 

ability  to  perceive  visual  input  data.  The  goal  is  to  recogr,i/.(^  and 

understand  the  contents  of  a  si-ene  through  analysis  of  given  images  in 
much  the  same  way  that  a  human  understands  what  is  seen.  In  particular, 
rs'.earchers  in  robotics  fusion  seek  to  develop  a  visual  senscj'" 

technology  for  "industrial  robots  and  human-like  manir:>ulator  s  fer 

operation  in  an  unpredictable  environment."^'^ 

Coaiputer  vision  is  still  in  the  early  stage's  of  develonment .  Human 
sensorv  capabilities  provide  the  model  to  be  emulated  as  they  do  in 
other  \I  projects.  Computer  vision  involves  many  different  processes 
which  integrate  different  kinds  of  information.  The  Handbook  of 
Artificial  Intelligence  divides  computer  vision  into  signal  processing, 
classification,  and  image  understanding.  Before  analysis  can  be  made, 
an  image  must  be  described  for  a  sensory  input.  The  first  stage  of  the 
general  analysis  process  involves  feature  extraction.  Based  on  visual 
data,  the  main  features  of  an  image  arc  marked  or  'extracted.'  The 
second  stage  involves  segmentation.  The  third  stage  is  property 
measurement.  Measurable  properties  (e.g.,  range,  area,  texture)  of 
these  image  segments  are  used  to  obtain  a  better  description.  Finally, 
stored  models  (general  descriptions  of  predefined  objects)  arc  compared 
vvith  descriptions  inferred  from  current  processing.  Matching  results  in 
an  identification  with  the  appropriate  properties  being  associated  with 
the  original  image. 


•29 


Computer  vision  applications  are  found  in  medicine,  remote  sensing, 
and  industry.  Reading  textual  data  is  an  old  application  of  vision 
’.vhich  involves  character  recognition.  Handwritten  text  is  obviously 
more  diflicult  to  'read'  than  machine  generated  text.  Bar  codes, 
printed  on  almost  all  commercial  packaging,  are  an  example  of  a 
character  recognition  system.  The  cash  register  'reads'  the  code  to 
determine  a  price.  Cornputer  vision  is  applied  in  tissue  analysis  to 
perform  cancer  or  blood  cell  counting.  The  earth's  natural  resources 
can  be  monitored  using  images  provided  from  remote  airborne  sensors. 
4pplications  in  industry  include  robotic  vision  for  locating  and 
removing  defective  products.  Considerations  in  designing  a  robotic 
vision  system  include  cost,  real-time  ooeration,  reliability,  and 
flexibility. 

While  computer  vision  research  has  progressed  considerably  in  25 
years,  several  problems  persist.  Successful  applications  to  date 
involve  image;,  with  simple  domains  that  are  primarily  two-dimensional. 
Three-dimensional  images  are  more  complex  to  analvze  and  process. 
Rccogni/upg  non-overlapping  parts  on  a  conveyor  belt  under  good 
lighting,  for  example,  is  already  being  accomplished.  Recognizing 
overlapping  parts  in  a  shadowy  bin  pose;,  very  difficult  problems.  A 
two-dimensional  image  of  a  three-dimensional  object  does  not  provide 
enough  information.  Secondly,  the  influence  of  ambient  factors  on 
sensor  perception  is  unkn'-'wn.  Another  problem  is  that  the  vision 
process  is  not  well  understood.  How  human  vision  is  actually 
accomplished  is  unknown.  The  problem  is  that  of  trying  to  give  the 
conputer  the  same  holistic  sense  of  its  surroundings  that  humans  with 


30 


"The 


nor.nal  vision  perceive.  \n  Al  vision  researcher  stated: 
development  of  a  general-purpose  computer  vision  system  that  can 
approach  the  abilities  of  the  iiuman  eye  and  brain  is  remote  at  present, 
despite  recent  progress  in  understanding  the  nature  of  vision.  .  .  . 
Clearly  the  general  problem  of  recognizing  objects  in  a  scene  and 
desceibing  their  relations  in  three  iimensions  is  far  from  solved. 
Existing  systems  can  deal  only  'vith  restricted  types  of  scenes  and  they 
operate  slo^vly."^^  Researchers  at  the  Armv's  Topographic  and 
Engineering  Laboratory  have  been  working  since  the  196()s  on  a  system 
that  could  extract  information  fron  aerial  photography  using  pattern 
rec;;gnition .  Only  limited  progress  has  been  made.  TiARPA  has  also 
contracted  with  various  universities  to  investigate  methods  and 
techniques  to  develop  automated  machine  capabilities.  Gevarter  notes 
that  "the  amount  of  activity  and  the  many  researchers  in  the  computer 
vision  field  suggest  that  within  the  next  5  to  10  years,  we  should  see 
some  startling  advances  in  practical  computer  vision,  though  the 
availability  of  practical  general  vision  systems  still  remains  a  long 
way  off.  .  .  Computer  vision  developments  are  especially  important 

when  combined  with  advances  in  robotics. 

Robotics 

Advanced  automated  military  systems  will  depend  on  progress  in  the 
field  of  Robotics.  Systems  that  can  operate  virtually  independently 
have  tre  nendous  potential  in  the  military,  as  well  as  in  the  industrial 
sector . 

The  coupling  of  automatic  production  machinery  .  ,  .  is  a 

primary  motivation  for  increased  use  of  sophisticated, 
programmable  robots.  A  robot  that  can  sense  its  surroundings. 


inodify  its  actions,  carry  out  specified  tasks  and  be  given 
tasks  on  short  notice  in  languages  natural  for  the  task  is 
exhibiting  rudiaientary  intelligent  behavior.  Ultinnately ,  it 
is  this  exhibition  of  intelligent  behavior  that  will 
distinguish  robots  fro'n  increasingly  sophisticated 
conventional  nachinery . 

Robotics  have  already  been  used  to  explore  the  surface  of  other  planets, 
and  are  presently  used  in  a  number  of  manufacturing  areas.  Mobile 
Robots  of  Woburn,  Massachusetts,  for  example,  has  developed  robots  for 
prison  application.  Using  ultrasonic  and  infrared  sensors,  robots  will 
be  used  as  guards  to  detect  human  odors  and  participate  in  riot 
control. To  improve  industrial  robots,  researchers  are  working  to 
combine  improved  robotics  with  improved  computer  vision  systens.  The 
result  should  provide  systems  that  can  'see'  what  they  are  doing  and 
respond  more  'intelligently . ’  Military  planners  envision  using  such 
systems  as  auto  rated  reconnaissance  vehicles  or  automated  aircraft. 
Before  such  systems  can  be  successfully  deployed,  a  great  deal  of  addi¬ 
tional  research  in  both  robotics  and  computer  vision  will  be  necessary. 

Development  Problems 

Artificial  intelligence  research  promises  great  things  for  the 
future,  but  it  still  faces  a  number  of  significant  problems.  Some  of 
the  technological  difficulties,  such  as  in  speech  recognition  and 
effective  visiial  systems,  have  already  been  noted.  These  technical 
problc  ns  are  discussed  in  greater  detail  in  the  many  AI  publications  now 
available.  Dther  difficulties  range  from  misinformation  to  overzealous 
clai  ns . 

\lthough  \I  has  been  researched  for  almost  three  decades,  the 
number  >f  M  experts  remains  relatively  small.  There  are,  for  example. 


32 


fevtf  knowledge  engineers  available  to  convert  'expert  knowledge’  into 
quality  data  bases  for  expert  systems.  While  new  AI  development  tools 
are  becoming  available,  a  lot  of  knowledge  engineering  is  still  done  by 
hand.  This  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  so  into  the  foreseeable 
future. There  is  a  shortage  of  AI  researchers  in  general,  which  is 
being  exacerbated  by  the  rush  of  qualified  personnel  into  commercial 
ventures.  Difficulties  in  transporting  software  programs  from  facility 
to  facility  is  another  major  problem  AI  researchers  face  because  of 
hardware  differences. 

Artificial  intelligence  programs  are  written  in  a  special  language 
developed  specifically  for  manipulating  symbols  rather  than  numeric 
values.  This  language,  called  LISP  for  list  processing,  was  developed 
by  John  McCarthy  in  1957.  It  has  become  the  standard  programming 
language  for  most  AI  researchers,  though  the  Japanese  and  some  Europeans 
use  another  AI  language  called  PROLOG.  LISP  allows  AI  systems  to  be 
developed  in  a  more  flexible  format  than  conventional  programming 
languages.  It  is  this  programming  language  difference  that  could  pose 
problems  for  AI  application.  First  of  all,  programs  written  in  LISP  may 
not  be  portable  from  one  computer  system  to  another.  Secondly,  military 
computer  programs  are  written  in  a  rigidly  formatted  language  (such  as 
COBOL).  Complicating  the  picture  even  more  may  be  the  fact  that  the 
Department  of  Defense  (DOD)  has  adopted  Ada  (another  structured 
language)  as  the  official  program  language  for  embedded  computer  systems 
(missile  guidance,  for  example).  If  AI  systems  are  to  be  generally 
accepted  for  military  application,  computer  hardware  and  software 
compatibility  problems  will  have  to  be  resolved. 


33 


Following  the  translation  failures  of  the  1950s,  advocates 
became  more  cautious  in  their  claims  for  the  future.  For  a  period  of 
almost  15  years,  A1  endeavors  weni  virtually  unnoticed.  In  the  late 
1970s,  this  all  began  to  change.  Technological  improvements,  such  as 
VLSI  chips,  bad  given  A.I  researehe-'s  some  of  the  tools  they  needed  to 
begin  making  progress  once  more,  and  society  in  general  was  experiencing 
a  computer  revolution,  i^y  1983,  AI  had  become  a  hot  area  for  venture 
capital  once  more.  T>^’‘  turn-around  in  AI’s  fortunes  had  mixed  results. 
Many  A I  researchers  feel  that  "public  expectations  for  AI  have  gotten 
dangerran.lv  overheated,  with  the  concomitant  risk  of  disappointment  and 
backla..h  .  .  .  the  hoopla  ua.-'  left  researchers  bemused  and  concerned 
.  .  .  the  proinises  seem  to  be  outracing  the  reality. "22  Companies  are 
rushing  to  cash  in  on  AI's  new-found  popularity.  Business  Week  reported 
that 

with  nearly  40  small  companies  vying  for  a  place  in  the  AI 
market,  competition  is  intense.  And  some  companies  have 
already  gotten  into  trouble  in  their  rush  to  bring  projects  to 
the  market  .  .  .  experts  fear  an  "overselling"  of  technology 
.  .  .  Without  question,  some  of  the  AI  products  now  entering 
the  market  are  not  derived  from  AI  technology  at  all.  Some 
companies  openly  admit  that  they  have  simply  relabeled 
existing  software  to  cash  in  on  the  AI  boom. 23 

The  point  of  all  this  is  that  we  must  be  aware  not  only  of  the 
major  technical  problems  that  must  be  solved  before  effective  AI  systems 
can  be  deployed,  but  the  misinformation  we  may  hear  as  well.  Despite 
these  various  difficulties,  AI  does  appear  to  offer  tremendous  potential 
for  military  applications  in  the  future.  In  the  next  chapter,  we  will 
look  at  where  AI  research  is  headed  and  how  this  technology  might  be 
used  successfully. 


34 


NOTES 


CHAPTER  2 

1.  Edward  FiegenbauTi,  "Knowledge  Engineering  for  the  19sir)'s," 
CoTiputer  Science  Depart'fient,  Stanford  University.  l'S2,  1. 

2.  Avron  Barr  and  Edward  Fiegenbaum,  The  Handbook  of  Artificial 
Intelligence ,  Vol.  1  (Stanford,  Calif.:  Heuris  Tech  Press.  1991).  91, 

3.  Richard  O.  Duda  and  John  G.  Gaschnig.  "Knowledge  Based  Expert 
Systetn  Come  of  Age,"  BYTE  Publications  Inc.,  September  1991.  246. 

4.  William  B.  Gevarter,  An  Overview  of  Artificial  Intelligence  and 
Robotics ,  Vol.  1-Artificial  Intelligence,  Part  A-The  Core  Ingredients 
(Washington,  D.C.;  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration.  1993), 
28. 

5.  Harvey  S.  Goodman,  Head,  Software  Applications  Section,  TRW 
Systems  Group,  Seminar  on  Expert  Systems,  Orlando,  Florida,  15-16 
October  1984. 

6.  Steven  K.  Roberts,  "Artificial  Intelligence,"  BYTE  Publications 
Inc.,  September,  1991,  178. 

7.  Robert  C.  Schank  and  Peter  G.  Childers  "Experiments  in 
Artificial  Intelligence,"  Computerworld ,  12  November  1984,  ID/l-ID/28. 

9.  William  B.  Gevarter,  An  Overview  of  Artificial  Intelligence 
and  Robotics ,  Vol  1-Artificial  Intelligence,  Part  B-Applications 
(Washington,  D.C.:  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration, 

1983),  41. 

9.  David  L.  Waltz  "Helping  Computers  Understand  Natural 
Languages,"  Spectrum ,  November  1983,  82. 


35 


10.  jevartep,  An  Overview  of  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Robotics, 
Part  B.  42-52,  10. 

11.  Bertram  Raphael,  The  Thinking  Computer  (San  Francisco:  '■V.  H. 
Free  nan  Co.,  1076),  206. 

12.  Rai  Reddy  and  Victor  Zu,  "Recognizing  Continuous  Speech  Remains 
an  Kluf^ive  Goal,"  Spectrum ,  November  1983,  84. 

11.  Harold  L .  Andre  ws ,  "Speech  Processing,  "  Computer ,  October  1984, 

318. 

14.  K.  S.  Fu  and  Azriel  Roscnfield,  "Pattern  Recognition  and 
Computer  Vision,"  Computer .  October  1934,  274-282. 

1).  Azriel  Roscnfield,  "Why  Computers  Can't  See  (Yet),"  Abacus , 
Vol.  1,  1083,  17-26. 

16.  Kevin  McKean,  "Computers  That  See. "  Discover ,  September  1984, 
72-74. 

17.  Takeo  Kanade  and  Raj  Reddy,  "Computer  Vision:  The  Challenge  of 
Imperfect  Inputs,"  Spectrum,  November  1983,  88. 

18.  Gevarter,  An  Overvie of  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Robotics, 
Part  3.  39. 

19.  .lohn  S.  Jarvis,  "Robotics,"  Computer,  October  1984,  283. 

20.  Barbara  Wierzbicki,  "Mobile  Robots  Scheduled  for  Testing  as 
Prison  Guards,"  Infoworld ,  20  February  1984,  17. 

21.  Frederick  Hayes-Roth,  "Codifying  Human  Knowledge  for  Machine 
Reading,"  Spectrum ,  November  1983,  81. 

22.  M.  Mitchell  Waldrop,  "Artificial  Intelligence  (I):  Into  the 

World,"  Science.  Vol  223,  24  February  1984,  802,  804. 

23.  Business  'Week,  "Artificial  Intelligence  is  Here,"  9  July  1984, 

61. 


36 


CHAPTKK  3 


FUTURE  PROSPECTS 

Overview 

Computer  technology  has  developed  at  an  incredible  pace,  and  the 
world  is  transitioning  into  a  society  that  literally  lives  on 
information.  In  the  past,  power  has  been  measured  by  such  elements  as 
territory  controlled,  annual  production  output,  and  so  forth.  \  new 
basic  elc  nent  of  power  may  have  to  be  added  to  the  list.  In  the  future, 
nations  that  control  infoi^mation  or  knowledge  may  possess  a  major  ^;ou^ce 
of  influence  in  international  affairs.  The  systems  which  may  make  such 
control  possible  are  to  be  the  products  of  the  so-called  fifth 
generation  of  computer  technology.  These  new  systems  will  represent  a 
distinct  break  with  conventional  von  Neumann  type  computers.  Parallel 
or  concurrent  architecture  will  allow  machines  to  conduct  a  multitude  of 
operations  at  the  same  time.  Advanced  software  designs,  VLSI,  and 
artificial  intelligence  technologies  will  give  fifth  generation 
computers  expansive  capabilities. 

One  of  the  primary  requirements  of  an  effective  \I  system  is  rapid 
access  to  a  vast  memory  capability.  New  microelectronic  developments  in 
areas  such  as  VLSI  chips  are  providing  that  key  ingredient.  Another 
factor  that  will  contribute  to  ^I's  probable  expanding  role  in  future 
technologies  is  its  improving  record  of  performance.  Hundreds  of  expert 
or  knowledge  base  systems  are  being  developed.  Artificial  intelligence 
technology  is  now  commercially  profitable.  A  compelling  factor  (and 
perhaps  the  most  vital)  that  dictates  investigation  and  support  of 


37 


future  \I  ret:eareh  and  application  is  the  edge  it  may  provide  in  coping 
with  the  future.  Robert  E.  Kahn  of  the  Defense  Advanced  Research 
Project  Agency  (DARPA)  summarized  the  importance  of  the  next  generation 
of  computers. 

We  are  now  at  a  stage  where  the  confluence  of  these  two 
disciplines --microelectronics  and  artificial  intelligence — may 
indeed  produce  new  generations  of  computers  that  are  both  fast 
and  smart.  .  .  .  The  nation  that  dominates  this  information¬ 
processing  field  will  possess  the  keys  to  world  leadership  in 
the  twenty-first  century.  .  .  .  Better  planning  coupled  with 
effective  execution  of  plans  can  be  decisive  in  maintaining 
national  security.^ 

[.ending  computer  scientist  and  A1  pioneer  Edward  Fiegenbaum 
supports  this  position:  "The  world  is  entering  a  new  period.  The 

wealth  of  nations,  which  depend  upon  land,  labor,  and  capital  during 
agricultural,  and  industrial  phases--depend  upon  natural  resources,  the 
accumulation  of  money,  and  even  upon  weaponry-will  come  in  the  future 
to  depend  upon  information,  knowledge,  and  intelligence. Information 
in  the  future  will  become  a  commodity  in  and  of  itself,  and  the  nation 
that  fails  to  prepare  for  this  transformation  may  be  doomed  to  a  second 
class  status.  New  fifth  generation  computing  machines,  featuring 
artificial  intelligence  will  give  man  the  ability  to  amplify  his 
'knowledge'  power. 

Conventional  computers  featured  von  Neumann's  serial  or  step  by 
step  processing  of  programs,  but  fifth  generation  computers  will  be 
built  differently.  Nevv  programming  languages  and  the  capability  to 
handle  symbols  as  well  as  numbers  will  be  developed,  "ilachines  will  be 
designed  to  manipulate  data  'intelligently'  rather  than  performing  mere 
data  processing.^  Artificial  intelligence  will  provide  the  cornerstone 
for  building  these  new  syste:rs.  Robert  Kahn  described  how  these  systems 


38 


alight  look:  "Thr  new  generation  of  machineti  will  consist  of  oolleotiont; 
of  these  CA.I)  systems  integrated  into  a  whole.  If  a  system  needs  vision, 
it  can  be  added.  Speech  input  ean  also  be  incorporated.  .  . 

Fifth  generation  computers  are  expected  to  play  an  increasingly 
important  role  in  the  management  of  industrial  and  military  resources. 
The  obvious  advantages  and  benefits  to  be  gained  from  AI  technologies 
caused  a  number  of  countries  to  make  AI  the  centerpiece  of  new  computer 
development  programs. 


Fifth  Generation  Projects 

During  the  early  I'JSOs,  a  number  of  countries  came  to  realize  the 
potential  of  evolving  computer  technology.  Japan,  the  United  States, 
Great  Britain,  the  European  Common  Market,  and  the  Soviet  Union  all 
embarked  on  massive  new  computer  projects  to  ensure  that  they  weren't 
left  behind  in  a  computer  revolution.  Goals  of  the  individual  nations, 
as  we  shall  see,  differ  slightly,  but  their  overall  objectives  and 
approaches  are  similar.  Japan,  many  observers  believe,  was  responsible 
for  this  new  emphasis  in  computer  research.  They  shocked  the  world 
when  they  announced  their  plans  for  the  future  at  the  International 
Conference’of  Fifth-Generation  Computer  Systems  held  in  Tokyo  in  October 
of  1981. 


Japan's  Fifth  Generation  Computer  Project 
Japan's  industrial  power  was  built  on  its  ability  to  successfully 
apply  western  technology  to  Japanese  industrial  programs.  Video 
recording  technology,  for  example,  was  first  developed  in  the  United 
States;  but  virtually  all  video  recorders  now  sold  are  produced  in 


39 


Japan.  Their  sueoes;;  in  surpassing  America  in  auto  production  is  also 
ivell  documented.  The  Japanese  believe  that  the  computer  industry  holds 
the  key  to  continued  economic  success.  Japan  made  it  clear  at  the  1981 
International  Conference  that  it  would  no  longer  be  satisfied  with  just 
leveloping  other  nations'  technologies.  They  set  forth  a  national  goal 
of  becoming  number  one  in  the  computer  industry.^  Fiegenbaum  attended 
the  conference  and  was  immediately  struck  by  the  significance  of  their 


plan . 


They  aim  not  only  to  dominate  traditional  forms  of  the 
computer  industry  but  to  establish  a  "knowledge  industry"  in 
which  knowledge  itself  will  be  a  sellable  commodity  like  food 
and  oil.  The  (Japanese)  plan  documents  a  carefully  staged 
ten-year  research  and  development  program  on  Knowledge 
Information  and  Processing  Systems  .  .  .  the  Japanese 

understand  that  if  they  succeed  in  this  visionary  project, 
they  will  acquire  leverage  over  all  kinds  of  industries,  at 
home  and  abroad.  The  Fifth  Generation  (plan)  is  an  exquisite 
piece  of  economic  strategy.® 

The  Japanese  Fifth  Generation  Plan  is  designed  not  only  to  give 
them  a  worldwide  edge  in  computer  technology,  but  to  help  with  a  number 
of  domestic  goals  as  well.  They  expect  to  provide  better  social 
services  such  as  improved  (and  more  personal)  health  care  by  using 
expert  systems  as  consultants.  Manufacturing  industries  will  gain 
through  the  more  'intelligent'  use  of  scarce  energy  resources.  Fifth 
generation  technology  is  also  expected  to  improve  agriculture  output  by 
providing  more  accurate  weather  forecasts  and  an  improved  distribution 
system.  To  achieve  these  goals,  Japan  broke  with  traditional  economic 
patterns--it  formed  a  consortium  of  eight  manufacturers. 


40 


The  Institute  Tor  NevV  Generation  Computer  Technology  (ICOT)  was 
launched  in  1982.  The  eight  companies  participating  in  the  project 
provided  both  the  capital  and  the  personnel  necessary  for  the  venture. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that,  except  for  a  few  research  leaders,  the 
men  chosen  for  the  project  are  all  under  age  35.  ICOT's  director, 
Kazuhiro  Fuchi  believes  that  only  young  men  demonstrate  the  required 
zeal  and  innovative  thinking  required  of  this  unique  project.^  The 
center's  ten- year  plan  involves  three  stages:  (1)  reviewing  and 

evaluating  current  research  on  knowledge  processing;  (2)  establishing 
subsystems  for  hardware  and  software;  and  (3)  integrating  software  and 
hardware  subsystems  to  create  the  first  fifth  generation  computers. 
-Japanese  researchers,  unlike  their  US  counterparts,  chose  PROLOG 
(Programming  in  Logic)  as  their  language  for  \I  research  (rather  than 
LISP).  PROLOG  facilitates  processing  knowledge  in  parallel  as  well  as 
in  se(iuence,  and  it  computes  very  rapidly.^  The  Japanese  are  aware  that 
US  LISP  systems  will  not  be  compatible  with  their  more  advanced 
machines.  The  significance  of  Japan's  Fifth  Generation  Plan  sent 
reverberations  around  the  world.  A.fter  a  few  false  starts,  other 
nations  began  responding  to  the  challenge. 

US  Fifth  Generation  Projects 

The  United  States  enjoys  a  lead  in  computer  technology  as  a  result 
of  research  conducted  over  the  years  by  universities,  corporations,  and 
the  Department  of  Defense.  In  his  book  The  Fifth  Generation,  Edward 
Fiegenbaum  warned  that  if  the  United  States  did  not  respond  to  the 
Japanese  challenge  its  precious  technological  lead  would  rapidly  melt 
away.  "Our  business  as  usual  attitude,  our  near-term  R&D  planning 


41 


norizoriE,  oar  fratricidal  competitive  zeal  and  paranoia  over  proprietary 
rights,  and  our  planning  vacuum  at  the  national  level  are  causing  us  to 
stpiander  our  valuable  lead  (in  computer  technology)  at  the  rate  of  one 
day  per  day."^ 

It  was  not  until  the  significance  of  the  Japanese  Fifth  Generation 
Plan  was  finallv  grasped  that  coordinated  US  research  efforts  began  to 
emerge.  \nother  factor  contributing  to  this  new  willingness  to 
cooperate  in  joint  ventures  was  the  rising  cost  of  conducting  research. 
United  States  efforts  can  be  generally  divided  into  governmental 
programs  and  comaiercial  enterprises. 

Government  Projects 

DARPA's  Strategic  Computing  program  is  the  most  significant  US 
government  response  to  the  Japanese  initiative.  It  would  be  incorrect 
to  imply  that  GARPA  was  not  heavily  involved  in  computer  research  and 
developments  long  before  the  Japanese  announced  their  plans;  but 
partially  because  of  Japan’s  initiative,  GARPA  has  scheduled  $1  billion 
in  new  studies  over  the  next  decade.  Significant  sums  will  be  invested 
in  research  efforts  involving  artificial  intelligence,  software 
improvements,  and  computer  architecture.  It  is  hoped  that  a  new 
generation  of  'intelligent'  computers  will  be  available  for  various 
military  applications.  DARPA  believes  that  these  projects  will  not  only 
improve  military  systems  but  will  help  strengthen  the  US  industrial  base 
as  well.^*^  DARPA  outlined  its  plans  for  artificial  intelligence  as 
follows : 

In  artificial  intelligence  applications,  software  will  be 
developed  in  six  generic  areas  that  hold  the  key  to  military 
applications:  speech,  vision,  natural  language,  very  large 


42 


knowledge  bases,  graphics,  and  i  'vigation.  .  .  .  The  goal  is 
to  develop  real-time  processing  systems  that  can  cope  with  the 
enormous  computational  requirements  needed  for  exploiting 
these  technology  areas. 

Universities  remain  a  primary  source  for  has''  '  ■  ■  -.ch  work  on 
artificial  intelligence.  Their  research  centers  are  receiving  aid  frc.i 
a  number  of  'cooperatives.'  The  Semiconductor  Resef"  .;,  Cooperative,  for 
example,  is  helping  to  solicit  funds  to  offset  the  tremendous  expense  of 
performing  basic  semiconductor  research.  The  Microelectronics  Center  of 
North  Carolina  directs  funds  into  five  different  universities.  \lmost 
every  major  electronic  firm  engaged  in  artificial  intelligence  research 
has  a  working  arrangement  with  one  or  more  universities.  This  enables 
both  organizations  to  reduce  personnel  costs  and  to  provide  for  the 
joint  use  of  expensive  equipment.  This  industry-university  cooperative 
effort  is  not  just  occurring  at  major  universities.  "Today  more  and 
more  schools  are  integrating  industry  research  with  teaching  to  give 
students  a  more  practical  learning  experience  .  .  .  universities  are 
taking  the  lead  in  establishing  industrial  parks  to  foster  joint 
university-corporate  research. 

Artificial  intelligence  research  is  also  being  accelerated  by  a 
number  of  other  government  agencies.  The  Army  is  conducting  AI  research 
at  both  its  Signals  Warfare  Laboratory  at  Vint  Hill  Farms  Station, 
Virginia,  as  well  as  at  its  Engineering  Topographic  Laboratories  at 
Fort  Belvoir,  Virginia.  The  Navy  is  working  on  Al  decision  aids  and 
robotics  at  its  Office  of  Naval  Research  Laboratories  in  Arlington, 
Virginia.  The  P.ome  Air  Development  Center  has  been  performing  AI 
research  for  the  Air  Force  for  over  two  decades.  A  new  center  for  \I 


43 


utudiei:  being  established  at  the  Air  Force  Institute  for  Technology 


(AFIT).  In  addition  to  these  and  other  government  centers  for  AI 
re'  earch.  several  comniercial  firms  are  entering  the  AI  development 
arcMia . 


Commercial  AI  Projects 

Austin,  Texas,  edged  out  more  than  ?i0  other  cities  to  become  the 

new  home  of  the  Microelectronics  and  Computer  Technology  Corporation 

(MCC).  The  enthusiastic  campaign  that  enabled  Austin  to  bring  this 

high-teehr ologv  future  to  Texas  included  pledges  of  monetary  support  to 

build  fasuiities  and  improve  local  university  programs  in  computer 

s..Mene<  .  Retired  Admiral  Rob  R.  Inman,  former  deputy  director  of  the 

Central  Intelligence  Agency,  was  selected  to  become  the  new  firm's 

chairman.  He  unequivocally  states  that  MCC  is  a  direct  response  to  the 

Japanese  Fifth  Generation  program.  MCC  is  unique  in  the  American 

business  world  for  it  brings  together  19  different  companies  whose 

nor  rial  mode  of  operation  is  good,  old-fashioned  competition.  In  this 

venture,  each  company  will  be  a  cooperative  shareholder  in  one  or  more  of 

MCC's  four  research  and  development  programs.  An  MCC  promotional 

brochure  explains  the  operational  concept; 

The  concept  was  to  join  together  talent  and  dollars  to  conduct 
pro -competitive ,  long-range  research  aimed  at  achieving 
significant  advances  in  microelectronics  and  computer 
technology.  Each  company  would  then  use  the  technology  to 
develop  its  own  products,  and  compete  with  those  products  in 
the  marketplace.  This  concept  of  sharing  advanced  research 
has  long  been  alien  to  American  industry.  As  the  technology 
dependent  industry  matures,  however,  the  high  costs  and  risks 
associated  with  basic  R&n  on  advanced  technologies  have  made  a 
comprehensive  research  program  by  a  single  organization 
virtually  impossible . 


44 


vice  divided  its  ambitious  project  into  four  nnajor  programs  designed 
to  result  in  ’significant  progress'  in  5  to  10  years.  Programs  include 
packaging  (improving  semiconductor  packaging  and  interconnect 
technology),  software  technology  (improving  the  software  development 
process),  VLSI /computer-aided  design  (C4D)  (improving  technology),  and 
Advanced  Computer  Architecture  (the  most  ambitious  of  the  proposed 
programs).  Artificial  intelligence  relates  to  research  in  all  the 
areas,  but  it  is  a  specific  project  of  the  advanced  architecture 
program.  MCC  hopes  to  improve  the  computer's  problem-solving 
capabilities  by  developing  better  ways  to  represent  human  knowledge  and 
apply  human  expertise  to  various  problems.  The  directors  of  MCC  realize 
that  they  must  overcome  a  number  of  challenges,  and  not  all  of  them  are 
technical,  before  their  programs  become  a  reality.  There  are,  for 
example,  proprietary  difficulties.  Since  not  all  of  the  participating 
companies  are  shareholders  in  all  of  the  four  major  programs,  transfer 
of  technological  advancements  from  one  area  to  another  may  be  difficult. 
Despite  such  difficulties.  MCC  represents  corporate  America's  primary 
effort  to  preserve  its  lead  in  computer  technology.  And  it  is  not  just 
the  Japanese  that  concern  MCC  now;  other  countries  are  also  developing 
high  technology  computer  research  programs. 

Great  Britain 

The  British  team  of  government  officials  and  academicians  that 
attended  the  19S1  International  Conference  in  Tokyo  came  home  convinced 
that  the  Japanese  Fifth  Generation  Plan  could  not  go  unchallenged. 
Britain  responded  with  its  own  five-year  plan  designed  to  improve 
research  in  four  areas:  verv  large  scale  integration  (VLSI),  software 


45 


engineering,  intelligent  knowledge -based  systeus,  and  mem-machine 
interfaces.  The  program's  expected  cost  of  over  $500  million  will  be 
raised  from  both  public  and  private  sources.  Members  of  the  British 
computer  industry  are  convinced  that  this  cooperative  program  is 
necessary  to  improve  their  position  in  the  world  information-technology 
market. While  developing  their  own  national  program,  the  British  are 
also  supporting  Common  Market  attempts  to  improve  Europe's  competitive¬ 
ness  with  the  Japanese  and  the  Americans. 

Common  Market  Project 

European  companies  hoping  to  improve  their  high  tech  profit  share 
launched  the  European  Strategic  Programme  on  Research  in  Information 
Technology  (Esprit).  This  joint  plan  calls  for  over  2,000  researchers 
to  work  in  five  primary  areas  over  the  next  five  years:  advanced 
microelectronics,  software  technology,  advanced  information  processing, 
office  automation,  and  computer-integrated  flexible  manufacturing.  The 
directors  of  this  project  realize  that  if  they  are  not  successful, 
Europeans  may  have  to  abandon  the  lucrative  high  technology  market. 
Esprit's  members  believe  that  the  information  processing  industry  will 
be  an  especially  strong  growth  area.  They  will  therefore  be 
concentrating  most  of  their  funds  and  efforts  to  make  more  user-friendly 
knowledge-processing  systems.^'’ 

Soviet  Fifth  Generation  Project 

Common  Market  countries  will  find  more  than  Western  competition 
facing  them  in  the  future.  The  Soviet  Union  and  its  allies  have  also 
entered  the  fifth  generation  race.  The  Soviets,  in  cooperation  with 


46 


cix  Eastern  European  partners,  have  launched  a  five-year  computing  plan. 
The  Moscow  Academy  of  Sciences  will  coordinate  the  project,  supported  by 
over  $100  -aillion  in  state  funds.  The  Soviets  claim  that  the  program  is 
to  be  a  civilian  initiative  and  that  they  seek  cooperation  and  help  from 
other  nations.  One  Soviet  spokesman  stated  in  an  Izvestiya  article  that 
"developing  the  next  generation  of  computers  was  of  paramount  inter¬ 
national  importanee--closc  to  another  space  or  missile  race."  The 
Soviet  program  is  to  cover  five  strategic  areas:  design  and  manufacture 
of  VLSI  microprocessors,  development  of  parallel  and  multiprocessor 
architectures,  design  of  operating  systems  to  better  support  logic 
programming,  creation  of  problem-solving  software,  and  development  of 
expert  systems  and  user-responsive  applications.^^  Kremlinologist 
opinions  vary  on  how  successful  the  Soviets  might  be  in  this  project. 
Some  argue  that  their  innovative  ability  in  the  high  tech  area  is  too 
limited  and  that  the  $100  million  effort  is  too  modest.  Others  argue 
that  the  Soviets  are  already  producing  high  quality  random  access 
memory  (RAM)  chips.  The  US  embargo  on  electronic  technology,  the 
Soviets  claim,  will  not  slow  their  progress.  Soviet  leaders  state  that 
just  as  they  overcame  the  more  complex  problems  of  building  long-range 
missiles  so  shall  they  overcome  this  latest  technological  challenge. 

Potential  Applications  for  A I  Technology 
For  bO  ne  time,  hoped-for  AI  miracles  have  always  been  just  over  the 
horizon.  No  great  technological  breakthrough  has  occurred  yet,  but 
substantive  progress  is  moving  practical  AI  systems  onto  this  side  of 
the  hill.  Expectations  for  fifth  generation  AI  systems  abound  in  both 


47 


civilian  and  military  t^ectors.  Fiegenbaum  describes  the  potential 
impact  of  cysteme: 

.  .  .  the  fifth  generation  (of  computerb)  can  improve  and 

streamline  medical  and  related  information  processing  systems 
for  health  management,  help  develop  systems  for  enabling  the 
physically  handicapped  to  become  active,  contribute  computer- 
aided  instruction  systems  for  the  lifetime  education  of  the 
aged,  and  develop  distributed  processing  systems  for  enabling 
people  to  work  at  home  .  .  -  decision  support  systems  will 
provide  high-level  information  for  increasing  the  effective¬ 
ness  and  reducing  the  time  and  costs  required  for  making 
decisions.  .  .  .  With  these  achievements,  activities  in  all 
facets  of  society  will  be  affected  and  within  a  margin  of 
safety,  more  advanced,  humane  behavior  will  be  possible. 

The  home  personal  computer  boom  is  expected  to  continue.  Many 

experts  believe  that  this  trend,  in  conjunction  with  M  developments, 

will  put  'expert  consultants,’  such  as  legal  and  financial  advisors,  in 

the  home.  natural  language  systems  are  expected  to  make  computers 

easy  to  use  by  the  masses,  ’’eople  will  be  able  to  give  simple  verbal 

instructions  to  their  computer.  M  machines  will  become  even  ’smarter' 

as  they  attain  the  ability  to  ’learn’  on  their  own  from  various  sources. 

Military  planners  hope  that  \I  machines  and  technology  will  help 

them  cfipe  with  the  informational  deluge  that  is  swamping  decision 

makers.  \I  systems  are  needed  that  can  support  command  and  control 

functions,  sort  through  and  evaluate  reams  of  data,  and  suggest  possible 

actions.  \1  technology  will  be  put  to  work  on  such  difficult  problems 

as  command  and  control,  data  fusion,  intelligence  analysis,  and  various 

rcjbotics  applications.  \  Business  Week  article  stated:  "The  military, 

too,  is  hoping  that  41  will  eventually  plan  an  important  role  in  the 

future.  \  19S1  study  by  the  Defense  Science  Board  ranked  AI  in  the  top 

10  technologies  for  the  1980s.  .  .  .  Eventually  military  planners 


48 


oxpeot  nauhinet:  to  serve  .is  e  jual  partners  with  humans  in  deeision- 
naking."^^ 

Projects  such  as  these  may  sound  farfetched  to  pragmatists.  They 
want  to  see  hard  evidence  that  41  technologv  isn't  just  a  pipe  dream 
still  year:  awav  from  application.  4s  previously  mentioned,  n4RP4  and  a 
number  of  commercial  firms  are  investing  sizeable  chunks  of  money,  time, 
and  personnel  to  prove  that  41  technologies  can  be  put  to  use  in  the 
near  term.  The  following  sections  provide  examples  of  41  systems,  both 
military  and  civilian,  that  are  under  development. 

Military  4pplications 

Expert  systems  represent  the  most  mature  area  of  41  research.  4 
number  of  institutions  are  now  working  to  apply  that  experience  to 
■military  support  systems. 

TRW,  as  part  of  its  AirLand  Battle  2000  study,  is  reviewing  the 
possible  uses  of  41  technology.  Intelligent  machines  would  collect  data 
from  a  number  of  sensors  and  then  help  formulate  military  responses. 
"Such  a  system  would  operate  on  an  AI  data  base  that  would  rapidly  draw 
out  and  prioritize  relevant  intelligent  data  collected  from  several 
sources 

Stanford  Research  Institute's  (SRI)  Artificial  Intelligence  Center 
is  applying  AI  techniques  to  the  problem  of  integrating  information  from 
various  sources  to  help  evaluate  and  understand  developing  threat 
situations.  The  goal  of  their  work  is  to  compile  air  defense  order  of 
battle,  determine  the  identity  of  threats,  locate  the  threats,  and 
determine  the  status  of  the  threat. 


49 


The  rs  \rmv  Si<Tt;als  Warfare  Laboratory  ie  eonduuting  research  to 
'L' .  -i  ej  ir:  aiito  naffd.  irtificial  irfelligence  ba;;pd  tactical  situation/ 
■;  -it  1  e.-ee  nef.t  f  !  nodel  .  The  \rnv''  i'rgineering  Topographic 

La-er  it  r'/  als'  >'<•  '  ir  ’hir.g  the  apoHe^ahititv  of  AI  technology  to 

•'•o  -i:  rair  t^.a!v-  is  proce: 

'  i  ."r>  ''ation,  ■ir--'cr  th^'  r.ionei')!'-  lip  '-f  the 

vvL'rpi"',  of  '  It'vOC),  is  developir;;  a.'.  adve<‘fd  dccdeion  support 

v'  .  ■  ■  ;  O!^  s ,  a''-!  1  a  r".  r' -nor t  ratitar;  ::vste  a  ti;  ■  .uapct  the  planriro 

^ . r  ■•o\ir  t’ :  rai  r  iaps  . 

HP  ■  T ,  Ipc..  i:  /pv  ->  protijtvpe  cvpc''  /vsteti  to  ai'^ 

.•■  ■  ■  a.  "  ,'.,i  ,ei  •'ith  tact;,  ^1  command,  control,  and 

•  -.ur.  -iLiu.  coue.te  I'mea;  iH'e,-.  t  f' -^C  vl ) ,  ihe  ;.y-.  tc  n  is  tc  help  analysts 
'P-tcrmi'ic  the  best  cour.tr  r  neasures  to  use  against  critical  targets:  that 
O',  to  df  db’'’iipt  'ha^n  )  .rp  forth. 

■ft-vr  '^nparie.,  ar  i  apT'^ s  are  investigating  the  use  of  AI 
t  -cnnc  logies  to  help  fuse  intelligence  data.  We  have  become  very  good 
at  collecting  data.  What  is  needed  now  are  systems  that  can  provide 
as  istar,c<‘  in  making  effective  use  of  that  information.  Intelligence 
fusion  i:.  oKpected  to  be  one  of  the  primary  AI  application  areas, 
f’vpert  svsiem.s  will  help  sort  through  information,  evaluate  data,  and 
s’igg‘'-:i  possible  ^'spon;:es. 

Natu r jd  Language 

Natural  la  -guage  :;ystens,  designed  to  make  computers  easier  to  use, 
will  also  he  major  I'on.tributo  rs  tvo  Al  technologies  in  the  future, 
''’or ve-n tiof ml  's.’iputers  r>'puir^'  that  operators  learn  a  special  language. 


The  goal  of  researoherti  working  on  natural  language  systens  is  to  put 
the  burden  of  learning  on  the  computer.  Natural  language  input/output 
systems  can  improve  the  man-machine  interface.  Rome  \ir  Tevelopment 
Center  (RA.r)C)  is  probably  the  leading  research  center  for  automatic 
speech  recognition  (ASR) .  RADC  is  working  on  systems  that  can 
understand  and  respond  to  verbal  communications.  The  advantages  of 
being  able  to  'talk'  to  a  support  system  rather  than  punching  buttons  is 
obvious.  It  could  free  a  busy  pilot,  for  example,  to  perform  other 
cockpit  functions.  \SR  project  directors  feel  confident  that  this 
technology  is  a  near  term  reality.  RADC  developed  an  ASR  system  for 
cartographers  at  the  Defense  Mapping  Agency.  Previously,  data  about 
geographic  features  had  to  be  entered  in  a  slow  manual  process  that 
diverted  attention  from  the  maps  being  worked  on.  Now,  information  is 
given  verbally  to  a  computer  that  'understands'  a  limited  vocabulary. 
And  RADC  has  been  working  for  over  a  decade  to  develop  an  ASR  system 
that  can  listen  to  a  radio  broadcast,  remove  the  noise,  identify  the 
language  spoken,  understand  keywords,  and  identify  the  speaker. 

The  Navy  is  developing  a  system  which  will  aid  maintenance 
personnel  in  diagnosing  avionic  equipment.  Operators  will  be  able  to 
make  verbal  queries  about  maintenance  procedures  and  receive  spoken 
responses.  This  Aircraft  Speech  Interviewer  will  allow  operators  to 
focus  their  attention  on  repairing  equipment  rather  than  flipping 
through  manuals.  The  Naval  Postgraduate  School  is  attempting  to  use  ASR 
to  interact  with  the  Advanced  Research  Project  Agency  Network  by  voice 
command  rather  than  with  traditional  'keyboard'  languages. 


51 


The  Office  of  Naval  Research  is  doing  research  work  on  applying 
robotics  to  various  Naval  requirements.  Research  activity  in  the  future 
will  center  on  new  robotics  software  featuring  41  technology. 
4pplications  will  include  robotic  systems  that  can  perform  underwater 
assembly  and  maintenance  mine  sweeping,  search  and  recovery,  and 

scientific  missions. ^2 

These  are  but  a  few  of  the  41  projects  presently  envisioned  by 
military  planners.  If  the  D4RPA  strategic  computing  program  is 
successful,  a  "whole  new  generation  of  computers  with  capabilities 
including  vision,  comprehension  of  speech,  and  reasoning"  will  be 
created. 


Civilian  4pplications 

Commercial  application  of  41  technologies  is  already  well  underway. 
Hundreds  of  expert  systems  are  now  on  the  market.  Business  Week  stated 
that  "optimistic  analysts  are  predicting  that  41  will  become  a 
multibillion  dollar  annual  business  well  within  a  decade. AI  is 
being  used  to  automate  industry  and  offices.  It  is  providing  advice  on 
health  care  and  where  to  drill  the  next  oil  well.  Civilian  application 
of  41  in  the  near  term  will  be  primarily  in  the  areas  of  expert  systems 
and  natural  language.  The  following  examples  should  underscore  the  fact 
that  41  systems  are  a  proven  technology. 

OPGEN  is  a  knowledge-based  system  used  by  Hazeltine  Corporation  to 
plan  the  sequence  of  procedures  to  follow  in  the  assembly  of  printed 
circuit  boards.  It  produces,  in  90  seconds,  operational  instructions 
that  it  takes  industrial  engineers  20  hours  to  produce. 


52 


The  Frenoh  oil  company  Elf  Aq\iitaine  will  soon  begin  using  an 
expert  system,  DRILLING  ADVISOR,  to  help  them  avoid  accidents  that  might 
occur  during  drilling  operations. 

General  Electric  ^vill  soon  be  using  expert  systems  to  help  maintain 
the  locomotives  they  build.  This  troubleshooting  system  incorporates 
the  'expert  knowledge'  of  GE's  top  locomotive  field  service  engineer. 
It  will  walk  an  engineer,  even  a  novice  one,  through  required  repair 
procedures  using  drawings  and  'how  to'  instructional  demonstrations.^'’ 

Intelligenetics'  KEE  and  Xerox’s  LOOPS  tre  new  LISP  software 
'tools'  designed  to  help  others  build  expert  systems.  And  Teknowledge 
has  introduced  M.l  as  an  AI  development  tool  to  be  operated  on  an  IRM 
PC.  It  is  designed  to  allow  novices  to  create  knowledge-based  systems. 

CLOUT  is  a  natural  language  interface  that  allows  users  to  converse 
in  their  native  language.  The  system  combines  the  capabilities  of 
natural  language  technologies  with  that  of  an  expert  system's 
heuristics.  Users  will  be  able  to  generate  complex  reports  with  iust  a 
few  questions  posed  in  plain  English.^® 

The  University  of  Texas  is  experimenting  with  ISAAC,  a  natural 
laTiguage -under  standing  computer  program  capable  of  comprehending 
connected  discourse  at  5,000  words  per  minute.  The  program  is  designed 
to  help  codify  the  rules  that  humans  use  to  solve  problems.  "Isaac 
provides  both  a  model  of  the  processes  human  subjects  use  to  solve  the 
(physios)  problems  and  a  theory  of  how  physical  representations  enter 
into  these  processes . 

Infotym  is  introducing  a  new  decision  support  system,  REVEAL,  which 
will  allow  users  to  build  models  with  English-like  statements.  The 


yystenti  will  incorporate  expert  aystenn  technology  to  improve  and  simplify 
the  use  of  decision  support  systems. 

Transformational  Question-\ns  wering  (TQA)  System  is  an  experimental 
system  which  is  an  outgrowth  of  early  work  in  machine  language 
translation  projects  at  IBM.  "TQA  is  focused  on  techniques  for  querying 
relational  data  bases  in  English,  in  particular,  IBM's  SQL  (Structured 
Query  Language!  relational  data  base  system.  TQA  translates  English- 
language  questions  into  a  formal  data  base  language,  allowing  users  to 
interact  with  computers  without  being  required  to  use  a  programming 
language . 

Artificial  intelligence  technology  is  here,  and  it  is  going  to  play 
an  important  part  in  reshaping  our  technological  society.  Super  com¬ 
puters  of  the  fifth  generation  will  be  used  for  forecasting  the  weather, 
designing  aircraft  and  automobiles,  exploring  for  minerals,  and  improving 
the  health  and  welfare  of  individuals.  A  Newsweek  cover  story  stated: 

.  .  .  current  supercoinputers  are  only  at  the  threshold  of  what 
computer  designers  think  can  be  achieved;  the  next  generation 
of  advanced  supercomputers  will  make  today's  machines  look 
like  handheld  calculators.  .  .  .  The  great  danger  for  the 
losers  in  the  race  (to  build  fifth  generation  supercomputers )-- 
and  the  opportunity  for  the  winner--is  that  whoever  builds  the 
next  generation  of  computers  will  have  a  huge  technological 
and  commercial  advantage:  these  computers  will  be  used  for 
computer  and  microelectronics  design--to  build  even  smarter 
and  more  powerful  machines. 


Summary  and  Conclusions 

When  new  technologies  come  along,  there  is  always  a  tendency  to 
either  overrate  or  underrate  their  potential.  Long-range  bombers,  for 
exanple,  were  going  to  make  it  possible  to  win  wars  vvithout  fighting 
major  land  battles.  Computers  were  going  to  free  mankind  from  the 
drudgery  of  processing  information.  Fifth  generation  computers,  using 


54 


\1  techniques ,  ure  being  proaioted  as  the  new  solution  to  many  of 
soihety's  problems.  systems  should,  if  developed  properly,  prove  to 
be  valuable  tecnnolo^iea!  tools.  U  must  be  realized,  huwevor,  that  M 
is  nerelv  anofn.  r  iroble  a  sol ving  technology.  Problems  that  cannot  be 
clearly  defireil  and  or  identified  using  conventional  nethc-ds  are  not 
going  to  be  magicallv  _olved  using  \1.  Artificial  intelligence  provides 
an  alternate  or  supple  xientarv  means  to  work  coiiplicated  tasks.  It  is 
not  going  to  replace  or  do  awav  with  existent  computer  support  tvstess. 
That  Is  why  some  eo  opjtcr  scientists  view  AI  as  an  evolutionary  exten¬ 
sion  of  present  coaoutjr  capabilities  rather  than  as  a  revolutionary 
technology , 

Wliat  does  -ill  of  this  portend?  A  nuinber  of  points  should  be 
considered.  Pirct,  \i  is  not  a  chimerical  dream  to  be  explained  by 
using  smoke  and  mirrors.  It  is  in  fact  a  sound  technology  built  on 
nearly  30  year-,  of  intens'ivc  research.  But  because  Al  involves  building 
’thinking'  machines,  it  is  both  miisunderstoc-d  and  misrepresented.  Al 
systems  capable  of  performing  the  science  fiction  feats  of  a  HAL  'from 
2001)  or  a  'VBPH  ('.Var  dames)  may  never  be  constructed.  Systems  that  can 
function  'intelligently'  as  consultants  or  advisors  will,  however, 
become  commonplace  in  the  next  decade.  That  brings  us  to  the  next  point. 

The  military  mus't  not  ignore  the  tremendous  potential  offered  by  AI 
supported  systems.  Government  agencies  such  as  DARPA  and  RAHC  fully 
grasp  Al's  significance  and  are  pursuing  its  development.  For  Al  to  be 
widely  accepted  fand  implemented),  however,  senior  military  leaders  will 
reed  to  learn  more  about  it.  They  need  to  know  enough  about  AI  to 
separate  fact  from  fiction.  Only  by  becoming  more  familiar  with  this 


technology  can  commanders  effectively  apply  to  their  own  organiza¬ 
tional  requirements. 

Those  presently  working  in  AI  research  and  development  will  tell 
you  that  \I  is  not  something  you  can  buy  off  the  shelf  like  paperclips. 
Before  any  organization  invests  time  and  money  in  AI  technology,  the 
following  should  be  considered. 

•  Learn  about  41  through  a  literature  review.  4  list  of 
recommended  documents  is  at  attachment  1. 

•  Establish  an  AI  steering  group  or  focal  point  that  can  work  with 
other  organizations. 

•  Visit  governmental  and  private  41  research  centers. 

•  Review  organizational  needs  to  select  candidate  areas  for  41 
application.  The  organization's  41  steering  group  should 
c'^ersee  this  operation. 

•  Select  a  likely  demonstration  project  to  work  on  a  real,  CLE4RLY 
BEFINED  problem.  Remember  that  it  may  take  months  or  years  to 
develop  a  rule-based  expert  system. 

Throughout  this  process,  organizations  should  closely  monitor  the 
progress  of  other  41  research  endeavors.  Computer  scientists  frequently 
remind  us  that  real  progress  in  AI  is  going  to  depend  upon  a  cooperative 
effort  by  all  of  those  working  in  the  field. 

When  this  project  began,  I  was  admittedly  skeptical  about  the 
potential  of  artificial  intelligence.  Too  many  times  in  the  past, 
computer  systems  have  failed  to  perform  as  advertised.  Even  the 
Japanese  are  beginning  to  hedge  their  bets  on  their  Fifth  Generation 


56 


project.  A.t  the  Second  International  Conference  on  Fifth  Generation 
Computers,  the  Japanese  revealed  that  they  were  modifying  goals  and 
pushing  target  dates  into  the  future.  Some  Japanese  ICOT  firms, 
believing  the  Fifth  Generation  Plan  unrealistic,  are  quietly  pursuing 
AI  projects  on  their  own.  American  and  Britisu  conferees  thought 
perhaps  the  Japanese  had  tried  to  do  too  much  too  soon.^®  The  key  to 
applying  AI  technology  effectively  is  to  establish  realistic  goals  based 
on  understanding  what  it  can  and  can't  do;  what  it  is  and  what  it  is 
not.  Hopefully,  this  handbook  has  provided  a  helpful  beginning. 


57 


NOTES 


CHAPTER  3 

1.  Robert  E.  Kahn  "4  New  Generation  in  Cooiputing,"  Spectrum , 
November  1933,  36. 

3.  Edward  Fcigcnbaum  and  Pamela  McCorduck,  The  Fifth  Generation 
(Reading,  Mass.:  \ddison-Weslev  Pub.,  Co..  1983),  14. 


3. 

Ibid.,  18. 

4. 

Kahn,  "4  New  Generation  in  Computing," 

38. 

5 . 

Trudy  E.  Bell,  "Strategies,"  Spectrum, 

November  1983,  45. 

6. 

Feigenbaum,  Fifth  Generation,  2,  13. 

7. 

Tohru  Moto-oka,  "Japan,"  Spectrum,  November  1983, 

00 

8. 

Ibid . ,  50. 

9. 

Feigenbaum,  Fifth  Generation,  126. 

10. 

Mark  4.  Fischetti,  "The  United  States, 

"  Spectrum, 

November 

1983,  51. 

11.  Roberts.  Cooper  and  Robert  E  .  Kahn,  "SCS:  Toward  Supersmart 
Computers  for  the  Military."  Spectrum .  November  1983,  54. 

12.  Fischetti,  "The  United  States,"  53. 

13.  Microelectronics  and  Computer  Technology  Corporation, 
Information  Brochure.  1984. 

14.  Brian  W.  Oaklev,  "Great  Britain."  Spectrum,  November  1983,  70. 

15.  Horst  Nasko,  "European  Common  Market,"  Spectrum .  November 
1983. 

16.  Paul  Walton  and  Paul  Tate,  "Soviets  \im  for  5th  Generation," 
Hatamation ,  1  Ouly  1984,  53-64. 

17.  Feigenbaum,  Fifth  Generation.  134. 


18.  Business  Week.  "AI  the  Second  Cornputer  4ge  Begins,"  8  March 
1982,  75. 

19.  -laoies  B.  Schultz,  "Weapons  That  Think,"  Defense  Electronics, 
January  1983,  79. 

20.  Thomas  D.  Garvey  and  John  D.  Lowrance,  "^n  A I  Approach  to 
Information  Fusion,"  Journal  of  Electronic  Defense,  July  1984,  31. 

21.  J.  P.  vVoodward  and  E.  J.  Cupples,  "Selected  Military 
Applications  of  Automatic  Speech  Recognition  Technology,"  IEEE 
Communications  ’’■lagazine,  December  1983,  38. 

22.  Alan  L.  Meyrowitz,  "Artificial  Intelligence  Research: 
Directions,"  Computers  and  People,  March-April  1983,  14,  15. 

23.  Science ,  "The  Pentagon's  Ambitious  Computer  Plan,"  Vol.  222, 
16  December  1983,  1213. 

24.  Business  Week,  "Artificial  Intelligence  is  Here,"  9  July  1984, 
55  • 

25.  Charles  A.  Pratt,  "An  Artificially  Intelligent  Locomotive 
Mechanic,"  Simulation,  January  1984,  40. 

26.  Geoff ry  von  Limbach  and  Michael  B.  Taylor,  "Expert  System  Rules 
Read  Natural  Language,"  Systems  and  Software,  August  1984,  119. 

27.  Patricia  Keefe,  "Natural  Language  Program  Gaining  Attention," 
Computer  World,  28  November  1983,  77. 

28.  Tom  Murphv  "Artificial  Intelligence  Topics  at  IBM."  Simulation. 
January  1985,  33. 

29.  Newsweek ,  "The  Race  to  Build  a  Supercomputer,"  4  July  1983,  58. 

30.  Austin  American,  "Closing  the  Computer  Gap,"  17  December  1984, 

El. 


/  (rO 


ATT4CHMENT  1 


i^IBLIOGRAPHY 

A  wealth  of  available  literature  discusses  all  aspects  of 
artificial  intelligence  Most  of  it,  however,  is  written  by  computer 
specialists  for  other  technical  personnel.  The  following  recommended 
bibliography  is  intended  to  provide  a  nontechnical  introduction  to  an 
admittedly  complex  subject.  While  some  of  these  volumes  contain 
technical  chapters,  they  also  provide  good  introductory  sections. 

Dreyfus.  Hubert.  What  Computers  Can’t  Do,  New  York:  Harper  and  Row 
Publishers,  1979. 

Feigenbaum,  Edward  A,,  and  McCorduck,  Pamela.  The  Fifth  Generation, 
Reading,  Mass.:  Addison-Wesley  Publishing  Co.,  1993. 

Gevarter,  William  B.  An  Overview  of  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Robotics , 
Vol.  l-Artificial  Intelligence,  Parts  A  and  B,  Washington,  D.C.: 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  1993. 

McCorduck,  Pamela.  Machines  Who  Think.  San  Francisco:  W.  H.  Freeman 
and  Co.  ,  1979. 

Spectrum .  Vol.  20,  November  1993.  "Tomorrow's  Computers"  (Special 
Issue  on  Artificial  Intelligence). 

Walker,  Roger  S.  Understanding  Computer  Science,  Dallas:  Texas 
Instruments  Inc.,  1991. 

Winston,  Patrick  H.  Artificial  Intelligence,  Reading,  Mass.:  Addison- 
Wesley  Publishing  Co.,  1977. 


61 


AU  GAPS  .  AL  (  862234  )  200 


