MASSACHUSETTS  INSTITUTE  OF  TECHNOLOGY 
ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  LABORATORY 


A Computerized  Look  at  Cat  Locomotion 


Glen  Speckert 


Thie  paper  describes  a three  phase  project  concerning  the  Matching, 
analyzing,  and  describing  of  motions  of  a cat  in  various  gaits.  All  data 
la  based  on  tuo  16  mm  films  of  an  actual  cat  moving  on  a treadmill.  In 
phase  I,  the  lou  level  issues  of  tracking  keg  points  on  the  cat  from  frame 
to  frame  are  discussed.  Phase  II  deals  uith  building  and  using  a graphics 
tool  to  analyze  the  data  of  phase  I.  Phase  III  is  a high  level  discussion 
of  cat  locomotion  based  on  the  trajectories  and  movements  explored  by  phase 


This  report  describes  research  done  at  the  Artificial  Intelligence 
Laboratory  of  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  Support  for  the 
laboratory’s  artificial  intelligence  research  is  provided  in  part  by  the 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  Defense  under  Office 
of  Naval  Research  contract  N00014-75C-0643-0005. 


page  2 


This  paper  describes  a three  phase  project  concerning  the  vleulng, 
analyzing,  and  description  of  the  notions  of  a cat  running  on  a treadmill. 
The  first  phase  deals  uith  the  dynamic  vision  issues  of  finding  and 
tracking  the  key  points  of  the  cat  fron  a 16mm  file.  This  uas  successfully 
done  uith  a Microscope  attachnent  to  a el  on  scan  vidicon  uhich  vieued  the 
file*  directly.  The  second  phase  uas  nore  a graphics  problen  of  hou  best  to 
display  the  points  of  phase  one  in  order  to  be  most  useful  and  easily 
understood.  Graphs  of  angular  positions,  angular  velocities,  and  angular 
accelerations  of  all  joints  are  available  as  uell  as  footfall  diagrams  and 
both  static  and  dynamic  trajectories.  The  third  phase  is  more  in  the  realm 
of  kinematics  and/or  biophysics  as  it  deals  uith  the  houe  and  uhys  of 
locomotion.  For  this  reason,  the  analysis  is  not  as  deep  ae  the  data  ui  II 
allou.  A full  and  careful  analysis  can  and  should  be  undertaken,  but  that 
ie  not  the  purpose  of  this  paper,  and  hence  the  analysis  uill  not  be  as 

i 

fully  developed  as  is  possible. 


Tuo  short  16mm  films  of  a cat  running  on  a treadmill  uere  shoun  in 
the  MIT  AI  playroom  in  January,  and  afteruards,  the  question  uas  raised,  "I 
uonder  hou  long  It  uill  be  before  a machine  can  run  like  that?"  To  uhich 
the  response  uas,  "Hou  long  uill  it  be  until  It  understands  that?"  A final 
remark  uas  then  heard,  "Hou  long  until  a machine  can  uatch  that?" 

This  paper  ansuers  the  last  of  these  questions,  namely  that  nou  a 
machine  has  "sssn"  the  films,  and  has  maybs  svsn  bsgun  to  "understand”  cat 
locomotion,  by  graphically  analyzing  ths  data  from  ths  film.  Uhether  or 


UNCLASSIFIED 


security  CLASSIFICATION  of  This  PAGE  fUTicn  Dele  Entered) 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


|2.  GOVT  accession  no. 


REPORT  NUMBER 


S.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  A PERIOO  COVERED 


ITLE  (mnd  Submit) 


bj  A Computerized  Loo, 


at  Cat  Locomotion  or 


!ONTR ACT  OR  grant  numbi 


7.  AuTHORf*; 


* q\  G1  eiy  Speckert 


PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 

545  Technology  Square  S 

Cambridge,  Massachusetts  02139 

CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS  iC  ' 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  (// 

1400  Wilson  Blvd 

Arlington,  Virginia  22209 

MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  A ADDRESS/!/  dl  Heron!  tram  Controlling  Olllce) 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
Information  Systems 
Arlington,  Virginia  22217 


IS.  SECURITY  CLASS.  fat 

UNCLASSIFIED 


Sc.  declassification/ downgrading 
schedule 


IS.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  tbit 


Distribution  of  this  document  is  unlimited 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  fa/  Ms  abstract  entered  In  Block  30,  II  dlllerent  tram  * apart J 


IS.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 


IS.  KEY  WORDS  fCanllnua  an  rararaa  eld a It  nacaaaarr  end  Identity  by  blae*  numbtt) 


graphics 
locomotion 
image  analysis 


tracking 

kinematics 

motion 


JpSTRACT  (Continue  an  revered  aids  1/  nacaaaaty  and  Identity  by  blacb  nupbwj 

This  paper  describes  a three-phase  project  concerning  the  watching, 
analyzing,  and  describing  of  motions  of  a cat  in  various  gaits.  All  data  is 
based  on  two  16  mm  films  of  an  actual  cat  moving  on  a treadmill.  In  phase  l 
the  low  level  issues  of  tracking  key  points  on  the  cat  from  frame  to  frame 
are  discussed.  Phase  H— deals  with  building  and  using  a graphics  tool  to 
analyze  the  data  of  phase^?\Phase  I-N  is  a high  level  discussion  of 
cat  locomotion  based  on  the  trajectories  and  movements  explored  by  phase  ti. 


- ? UNCLASSIFIED 

U WuAlTY  CL  AAAI  F 1C  AT  ION  OF  THI*  PAGE  fWAw.  DM*  Bntermd) 


EDITION  OF  1 NOV  At  IS  OBSOLETE 
S/N  010  2-014*  6601  | 


Cat  Locomotion 


not -cat  locomotion  Mill  prove  a suitable  model  for  machine  locomotion  ie  an 
open  question. 

This  project  is  really  the  combination  of  three  distinct  projects. 
The  first  is  extracting  the  positions  of  key  points  on  the  cat.  Uhile  this 
may  seem  an  unexciting  lou  level  task,  it  is  actually  an  interesting  vision 
project,  one  uhich  employs  both  tracking  and  recognition  skills.  It  ie  by 
no  means  a simple  task,  because  the  cat's  body  at  times  obscured  the  key 
points  that  uere  being  tracked,  the  film  occasionally  became  slightly 
blurred  or  out  of  focus, some  points  uere  moving  quite  rapidly,  plus  all  the 
usual  problems  associated  uith  taking  data  from  real  uorld  pictures.  In 
epite  of  these  problems,  the  first  phass  of  this  project  is  able  to  reduce 
the  Information  In  the  hundreds  of  frames  of  thousands  of  pixels  of  256 
grey  levels  each,  to  hundreds  of  sets  of  key  point  positions,  one  set  per 
frame  of  film  vieued.  The  positions  of  these  key  points  contain  most  if 
not  all  of  the  same  information  that  the  film  contained,  but  is  much  easier 


to  use. 


The  second  phase  takes  these  sets  of  points  (eight  points  per  eet) 


and  plots  them  into  motions  and  trajectories,  as  uell  as  displaying  an 
animated  cat  that  moves  across  the  screen.  The  differences  betueen 
galloping,  trotting,  and  ualking  can  easily  be  seen  in  the  graphs  and 
trajectories.  Simple  curves  on  the  graph  contains  all  the  information  of 
the  many  sets  of  points,  and  thus  a further  reduction  of  volume  of 
Information  and  increase  in  pouer  of  the  information  is  obtained. 

The  third  phase  assimilates  all  the  motions  and  trajectories  vieued 
in  phase  II  into  a compact  theory  of  motion.  The  differences  in  the 


Cat  Locoaotion 


various  gaits  ars  understood  and  explained.  The  graphs  and  trajectories 
are  analyzed  and  the  reasons  behind  the*  are  understood.  At  this  stage  can 
"The  Coaputer"  be  said  to  have  Matched  and  understood  uhat  the  cat  uae 


doing? 


Notei  The  tera  "run"  or  "running"  will  be  loosely  used  in  this 
paper  to  aean  moving  in  a Ha  Ik,  trot,  or  gallop.  Eaduard  Muybridge  states 
that  "in  its  reference  to  quadrupedal  movements,  ’running*  can  be  applied 
only  as  it  is  to  a stream  of  uater  running  doun  a hill,  a locomotive 
running  along  a railroad,  or  an  Ivy  plant  running  up  a Mall." 


Cat  Locomotion 


Pfwu-w . ■vwmipvamm  9fp|  p 

page  5 


PHASE  I — EXTRACTING  POINTS  FROM  ACTUAL  FILM 


In  this  section,  the  basic  gray-level  methods  of  finding  the  key 
points  are  described.  The  input  to  this  section  is  the  16mm  film,  and  the 
output  is  a disk  file  of  key-point  positions. 

The  method  of  viewing  the  film  should  first  he  described.  An  old 
16mm  movie  projector  was  torn  apart  to  obtain  the  hook  and  claw  mechanism 

that  pulls  the  film  exactly  one  frame  forward.  This  mechanism  is  placed  on 

\ 

a light  table,  and  a slow  scan  vidlcon  with  a microscope  attachment  is  used 
to  view  It  from  above.  The  resolution  of  the  microscope  lens  is  changable, 
but  only  two  lenses  proved  useful,  since  the  higher  the  resolution,  the 
smaller  the  field  of  view,  and  the  cat  would  soon  drift  out  of  range'.  The 
movie  camera  must  be  manually  advanced  after  each  frame,  in  order  to  vieu 
the  next  frame.  See  figure  1.  The  vidicon  interfaces  to  a POP  11/45  which 
has  a DEC  GT40  (graphics  display  terminal)  as  its  primary  output  device. 
All  software  is  written  in  POP  11  Assembly  language. 


The  films  used  were  prepared  at  the  University  of  Arizona  by  Dr. 
Mary  C.  Uetzel,  to  whom  we  are  deeply  thankful  for  a copy  of  the  films. 
Gummed  reinforcements  (small  circular  items  usually  found  on  three  ring 
notebook  paper)  were  attached  to  the  skin  of  the  cat  directly  over  the 
front  right  shoulder,  elbow,  and  wrists  the  back  right  hip,  knee,  and 
anklet  and  two  more  near  the  tail.  Since  the  film  can  be  viewed  from 
either  side,  the  cat  is  always  viewed  so  as  to  be  traveling  to  the  right  of 
the  vidicon.  The  side  facing  the  viewer  is  termed  the  "right"  side,  and 


O 


Cat  Locoaotion 


page  6 


SLOW 

SCAN 

VIDICON 


VImicroscope  PROBE 


FIGURE  1.  Physical  set-up. 

the  eide  auay  froe  the  vieuer  shall  be  referred  to  as  the  "left"  side.  The 
points  actually  tracked  are  points  on  the  skin  which  may  move  relative  to 
the  joints  beneath  them,  but  this  relative  motion  is  believed  to  be  small. 
A treadmill  was  used  to  keep  the  cat  relatively  in  one  place  in  front  of 
the  camera.  The  points  found  represent  only  the  right  front  legs,  right 
rear  legs,  and  rear  end  positions,  and  tell  nothing  of  the  left  legs.  In 
some  of  the  later  films,  the  rear  end  markers  uere  not  even  tracked,  as 
their  positions  uere  used  little  in  the  final  analysis.  The  unmarked  left 
legs  uere  assumed  to  travel  the  same  trajectories  as  the  right  ones,  only 
uith  some  phase  lag.  See  phase  II  for  further  discussion  of  unmarked  legs. 
The  gummed  reinforcements  (hereafter  referred  to  as  markers)  uere  not 
placed  in  the  same  position  on  the  tuo  different  cats  of  the  tuo  films. 

Thus  the  problem  of  finding  the  markers  uas  one  of  finding  a target 


Cat  Locoaotlon 


page  7 


that  looks  like  w on  a basically  dark  but  splotchy  cat.  This  is  a 
vastly  simpler  task  than  finding  the  joints  uithout  special  Markers,  as  uas 
done  by  Speckert  for  the  human  figure  (MIT  Uorking  Paper  118,  January, 
1976),  and  more  general  methods  are  applicable.  The  basic  method  employed 
uas  inspired  by  a method  used  by  Kimme,  Ballard,  and  Sklansky  (1),  and  has 
no  relationship  to  pattern  matching.  The  contrast  in  the  film  uas  often 
small  betueen  the  cat,  the  target,  and  the  background,  especially  near  the 
back  of  the  cat,  and  this  did  cause  some  problems. 

The  gradient  (magnitude  and  direction)  of  the  gray  level  picture  is 
computed  at  each  cell.  The  magnitude  of  the  gradient  is  the  maximum 
difference  betueen  one  neighbor  of  a cell  and  the  'opposite”  neighbor 
(through  the  center  cell).  The  direction  is  one  of  the  eight  possible 
directions  this  can  take  (see  figure  2).  If  the  magnitude  of  the  gradient 
is  above  a threshold,  that  cell  is  considered  an  edge  point.  In  a second. 
Initially  zero  array,  an  arc  is  "struck"  about  each  edge  point  in  the 
direction  of  the  gradient  at  the  knoun  marker  radius  (the  larger  radius)  by 
incrementing  the  cells  that  lie  on  this  arc.  This  arc  is  a quarter  of  a 
circle  in  length.  (See  figure  3).  Each  cell  in  this  array  ends  up  as  a 
count  of  the  number  of  edge  points  that  are  a given  radius  auay  and  uhose 
gradient  points  touard  that  celt.  The  cell  uhose  position  is  the  same  as 
the  center  of  the  marker  should  get  incremented  by  all  the  marker  edge 
points,  and  thus  uould  be  the  maximum.  A second  array  uas  also  used,  but 
uith  the  inner  radius  of  the  target  and  reverse  gradient  directions  used  to 
strike  the  arcs  (a  gummed  reinforcement  has  an  outer  and  an  inner  radius). 
Both  of  these  arrays  are  examined  for  local  maxima,  and  a list  of  possible 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  9 


target  locations  is  prepared.  The  target  position  is  chosen  from  these 
possible  locations  based  on  other  factors,  such  as  predicted  position  (See 
belou).  In  practice,  this  method  uorked  fairly  uell  when  the  picture  uas 
reasonably  sharp  and  clear,  and  better  at  higher  resolutions  than  louer 
ones.  See  figure  4 for  an  example  of  hou  this  method  uorks  when  everything 
ie  in  order. 

Houever,  often  the  markers  uere  blurred,  obscured,  or  distorted, 
and  this  method  did  little  good.  Figure  5 shous  a poor  quality  marker  and 
its  associated  arrays. 

The  position  of  the  target  is  first  predicted  based  on  its  past 
history  and  if  it  is  a "dependent"  target,  its  position  is  also  computed 
based  on  a relative  position  to  the  target  on  uhich  it  is  dependent.  A 
dependent  target  is  one  that  is  more  or  less  rigidly  attached  to  another 
target,  for  example,  the  elbou  joint  is  dependent  on  the  shoulder  joint. 
The  shoulder/hip  joints  are  independent  as  are  the  tuo  on  the  rear  end. 
The  elbou/knee  and  urist/foot  joints  are  dependent  on  the  shoulder/hip  and 
elbou/knee  joints  respectively.  The  shoulders  uere  chosen  as  the 
independent  targets  rather  than  the  feet  due  to  their  slouer  motion.  Some 
joints  must  be  independent,  in  order  that  their  position  can  be  predicted 
based  only  on  their  past  histories,  and  not  relative  to  other  targets. 
These  independent  targets  are  found  first,  in  order  to  give  a relative 
position  to  their  dependent  targets.  If  the  position  of  a target  predicted 
from  its  past  motions  agrees  uith  the  prediction  based  on  relative  position 
to  another  target,  the  search  area  is  constricted.  If  they  vary  uidely. 


Cat  Locomotion 


the  area  searched  is  widened.  A picture  is  taken  centered  about  the  best 
guess,  and  is  handed  to  a routine  along  with  a threshold  for  edge  points, 
and  a radius  u I thin  which  to  search.  This  radius  can  be  clearly  seen  in 
figures  4 and  5.  The  area  outside  of  this  radius  is  eliminated  from 
consideration.  In  figure  5,  some  points  were  not  even  read  from  the 
vidicon,  since  even  if  they  contained  edge  points,  the  arcs  struck  uould 
not  reach  inside  this  radius  of  consideration.  A list  of  possible  target 
locations  is  prepared  based  on  the  picture.  The  "best"  choice  Is  chosen 
from  this  list  based  on  the  past  history  of  this  target  and  relative 
positions  of  other  targets.  If  the  picture  is  of  good  quality,  there  will 
be  only  one  or  two  pictures  in  this  list..  In  figure  5 above,  many  possible 
targets  were  returned.  The  information  in  the  database  which  is  used  to 
pick  the  “best"  choice  includes  target  type,  the  past  eight  positions,  the 
past  three  scores,  the  initial  search  radius,  and  if  it  is  a dependent 
target,  Also  the  past  three  angles  to  the  parent  target  and  the  distance  to 
that  target. 

After  all  markers  have  been  located,  they  are  displayed  while  the 


operator  advances  the  film.  The  operator  may  decide  to  correct  any  .target 
location,  by  specifying  the  target  number  and  scrolling  it  to  the  proper 
position.  Before  starting  the  next  frame,  all  the  positions  are  written 
out  on  disk  to  be  used  in  phase  II. 

Just  to  get  an  idea  of  what  the  film  is  like,  figure  6 shows  every 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  12 


two  to  six  strides  long.  The  time  per  frame  required  to  locate  the  targets 
varies  from  30  to  60  seconds,  depending  on  the  number  of  targets  (6  vs  8) 
and  the  amount  of  Intermediate  display  to  the  user.  Almost  half  of  the 
time  is  spent  reading  points  from  the  vidicon. 

For  ease  in  discussion,  the  front  shoulder  joint  shall  henceforth 
be  Joint  0,  the  front  elbow  Joint  is  joint  1,  the  front  wrist  is  joint  2, 
the  back  hip  is  joint  3,  the  back  elbow  is  joint  4,  the  back  foot  is  joint 
6,  the  hindmost  rear  marker  is  joint  6,  the  other  rear  marker  is  joint  8. 

Now  that  the  cat  films  have  been  reduced  to  disk  files  of  points, 
we  are  ready  to  begin  to  analyze  them.  This  is  the  task  of  phase  II. 


-3 

\ > 

r t 


--  y.'Jt  . 1 

iiKm 

CURE 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  15 


PHASE  II  Developing  a graphics  tool  to  vieu  cat  films 

Once  the  point  files  have  been  created,  one  needs  some  method  of 
viewing,  examining,  and  analyzing  them.  For  this  purpose,  a graphics 
system  was  developed.  The  inputs  to  this  system  are  the  point  files  from 
phase  I,  and  the  output  is  a variety  of  graphs,  trajectories,  and  other 
"high-level"  descriptions  of  the  cat’s  movements,  to  be  used  in  phase  III 
to  develop  a theory  of  cat  locomotion. 

The  graphic  terminal  is  a DEC  GT40  which  has  an  11/05  processor  as 
well  as  a scope  processor  built  into  it.  The  11/0S  was  used  to  communicate 
with  the  11/45,  perform  minor  computations,  do  bookkeeping,  and  modify  the 
scope  code. 

The  graphics  routine  developed  (called  CATOIS  for  CAT  01  Splay > has 
the  capability  to  plot  the  angle,  angular  velocity,  and  angular 
acceleration  at  any  joint  or  set  of  joints.  The  user  specifies  an  angle  by 
naming  three  joints.  If  only  two  different  joints  are  specified  (one  joint 
specified  tuice),  the  angle  that  the  line  through  these  two  joints  makes 
with  the  horizontal  Is  plotted.  The  angles  which  are  examined  in  phase  III 
include  0-1-2,  0-1-1,  1-2-2,  3-4-5,  3-4-4,  and  4-5-5  (See  end  of  phase  I 
description  to  review  joint  numbers).  The  angular  velocity  Is  the 
difference  in  the  last  two  positions,  i.e.  position  ( i ) -posi t ion( i -1 ) . 
However  if  this  is  too  noisy,  the  user  can  request  that  the  velocity  be 
computed  as  position(i)-position(l-2),  or  even  posltion(i)-position(i-3) , 
etc.  This  effectifely  filters  out  some  of  the  noise.  Similarly,  the 
acceleration  can  use  a filter  on  the  velocity.  The  file  name  is  always 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  16 


ehoMn  as  OFICAL.N  S:2  Tj2,  where  the  number  after  the  S tells  how  many 
times  the  data  has  been  smoothed,  and  the  number  after  the  T telle  the  time 
delay  in  points  used  to  compute  the  velocity  and  acceleration,  with  T*  1 
corresponding  to  the  velocity  shown  being  posi  t ion(  i ) -post  t ion(  i -1 ) . A 
value  of  S:2  T:2  was  used  in  phase  HI  to  minimize  noise.  Figure  7 shows  a 
plot  of  the  rear  knee  joint  angle  for  a trot. 


FIGURE  7-  Rear  Knee  Joint.  Position,  Angular  Velocity,  Angular  Accelera 
t ion  (trot) . 

An  animated  cat  (built  around  the  sets  of  points)  can  also  be  seen 
which  will  either  run  in  place,  or  move  across  the  screen  as  the  successive 
sets  of  points  arrive  from  the  11/45.  This  cat  will  disappear  at  the  flick 
of  a switch  to  allow  closer  inspection  of  the  points  themselves.  The 
trajectories  of  the  actual  points  can  be  made  to  stay  in  view  as  new  sets 
of  points  arrive,  thus  showing  a history  of  that  joint,  either  as  the  cat 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  17 


la  Moving  across  the  screen,  or  ae  it  is  running  in  place  (on  a treadmill). 


Eaduard  Muybridge  (1887)  did  most  of  hie  analysis  of  Motion  by 
Hatching  the  patterns  of  footfalls,  i.s.  studying  the  order  in  which  each 
leg  hit  and  was  lifted  from  the  ground.  He  used  a simple  diagram  that 
looked  like  /""l 


where  is  the  front  left  foot,  is  the  front  right  foot,  Q is  the 
back  left  foot,  and  is  the  back  right  foot.  If  these  symbols  are 
present  in  the  diagram,  that  foot  is  on  the  ground,  and  if  absent,  that 
foot  was  not  at  that  moment  supporting  the  body.  Thus  the  above  diagram 


depicts  an  animal  standing  on  all  four  legs,  and 

— 


1 1 >* 


represent  an  animal  with  two  feet  on  the  ground  and  one  that  momentarily 
has  no  feet  on  the  ground,  respectively.  These  Muybridge  type  footfall 
diagrams  can  be  seen  in  CATOIS,  either  dynamically  as  the  cat  moves,  or  as 
a series  of  static  diagrams,  showing  the  sequence  and  duration  of 
footfalle.  The  solid  symbols  and  ^^have  been  replaced  by  O and 
/?>  A foot  ie  considered  as  being  on  the  ground  if  it  is  below  a user 

4 

specified  Y value  ANO  if  it  is  moving  backwards  on  the  original  film  (where 
the  cat  is  on  a treadmill  that  is  moving  backwards).  The  front  and  rear 
ground  levele  can  be  set  Independently  in  the  event  that  the  markers  are  a 
different  height  above  the  ground  on  the  cat.  These  diagrams  are  very 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  18 


n**rr  rnm«  me  it  it 
amen  me  is  is 

now  iku«  m y-M 
■me*  eaojMO  MT  v»sa 

JTnrnws  rw«  nuwi  n 
■*m»  or  hsweo  is  « 


nut  of i cm.  4r  sit  t « i 


^ $A  -A  -A  ^VA  a!-  A-  - a|a  & 

■o  -|o  0-0  O-  O-  O-  oo  - o ~|o  -|o 

•'  •»  W * * •*  to  as  •> 


FIGURE  3.  One  complete  stride  of  a walk. 

useful  in  classifying  gaits.  Figure  8 shows  one  complete  stride  of  a walk. 
The  count  below  each  diagram  tells  how  many  frames  that  "phase"  lasted. 
Each  frame  is  approximately  10  milliseconds,  since  the  film  was  taken  at 
100  frames  per  second.  Figure  9 shows  a cat  galloping  with  a dynamic 
diagram  at  the  left  (as  the  cat  moves,  the  diagram  changes). 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  19 


' i 


from  CATD1S,  see  Appendix  2,  an  operational  guide  to  CATDIS. 

Thus  with  alt  of  these  high  level  descriptions  of  the  motions  of 
the  targets  available,  an  understanding  of  cat  locomotion  is  possible. 
This  is  the  purpose  of  phase  ill. 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  20 


Phase  III  Understanding  Cat  Locomotion 

The  input  to  this  section  is  the  graphs,  diagrams,  trajectories, 
and  other  high  level  information  of  phase  II  and  the  output  is  a theory  of 
cat  locomotion.  The  rotary  gallop,  trot  and  ualk  are  compared. 

These  cat  films  are  accurate  enough  and  frequent  enough  that  some 
understanding  of  the  motion  is  possible,  unlike  earlier  attempts  of 
watching  human  figures  in  motion.  (See  Uorking  Paper  118  Knouledge  Driven 
Recognition  of  the  Human  Body  by  Glen  Speckert)  The  films  Here  taken  at  a 
rate  of  100  frames  per  second,  so  each  frame  represents  about  10  msec. 

The  ualk  is  the  slouest,  most  restful  gait,  and  as  can  be  seen  by 
figure  10,  the  cat  is  supported  alternately  on  tuo  or  three  leas.  As  a 


r»OKT  WMI  lm  is  IS 
■*c*  PHmst  IM  is  l» 
r*o*T  atoukc  «t  v-s« 

•mo  ttOUMi  r-5# 

simrtiMt  rime  **szi  is  n 
MUHtrs  or  r»w*r*  is  m 


mi  ortcmi.4  si  in 


AAAAAAAAAA 

£r-&  - &■-  A--  --A  --A  A- A- - 

of  of  OfO  fo  4°  T°  o}o  of  Oj*  O - 

* ^ ■ es  m k ' r?  ar  r? 


FIGURE  10.  Walk. 

general  rule,  uhenever  the  animal  is  supported  by  tuo  legs,  if  the  moving 
legs  are  betueen  the  supporting  ones,  both  are  lateral  pairs.  If  the 
moving  legs  are  outside  the  supporting  legs,  both  pairs  are  diagonals 


rt li  or i cm. 4 nt  nt 


O 


1 

} \ 

) 

1 

[ : 

k.  'l 

( 

Complete  set  of  graphs  for  walk. 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  22 


(Muybridge).  Thus  the  ualk  sequence  consists  of  (refer  to  figure  10) 
starting  on  three  legs  and  lifting  the  front  right,  dropping  the  back 
right,  lifting  the  back  left,  dropping  the  front  right,  lifting  front  left, 
dropping  the  back  left,  lifting  the  back  right,  dropping  the  front  left  and 
recursing.  This  is  a symetric  gait  as  the  right  legs  are  180  degrees  out 
of  phase  uith  the  left  ones.  The  front  leg  seems  to  fag  the  back  leg  on 
the  same  side  by  90  degrees.  Figure  11  shous  the  graphs  of  all  the  angles 
for  a ualk.  Note  the  lou  accelerations  and  hence  lou  energy  expended  by 
this  gait. 

The  trot  is  a slightly  faster  gait,  and  consists  basically  of 
diagonal  pairs  uorking  together  (in  phase)  to  alternately  support  the  body. 
Muybridge  gained  great  fame  by  shouing  that  horses  have  a si  light  period  of 
non-support  betueen  changing  of  pairs  of  supporting  legs.  This  can  be  seen 
in  a very  short  phase  (about  10  msec)  in  figure  12.  (n  all  the  trots  (see 


MWfl  pm*t  IM  IS  1C 
•**  rmst  LM  IS  X 
raom  ctouut  st  v-i*» 

•AC*  oaouND  ST  y*  l as 

rrmrriMs  n»«  is  it 

or  raacs  is  m 


rut  oncmt.c  s i e tu 


iilW.ftif 

41« 


FIGURE  12.  Trot. 

figure  13),  the  cat  stayed  a long  time  (100-120  msec)  on  its  diagonals  and 
took  about  40  msec  to  change  to  the  other  pair.  The  four  events  of  lifting 


K : 

') 

( 

;i 

1.' 

3 

) 

/ 

i 

V ; 

i 

> 

3 

( 

i’ 

i 

i 

s 

) 

( 

, 

3 

) 

i 

\ 

■ $3  23 

\ ;■ 
\ 

) 

( , 

'l 

!■; 

¥> 

) ' 

<# 

\ f 

1 

i 

s 

) ■ 

( 

i 

> , 1 

•5 

.)  ' 

3 

( 

i. 

s' 

) 

1 

i 

■ g!  2! 

tu 

\\ 
i ■ 

. r 
■« 

i. 

I 

( 

v 

3 

\ * 

? 

\ - 
/ 

i 

i 

3 

.) 

i 

, i 

* 1 

i j 

1 

/ ■ 
\ ■> 

r 

i 

i 

i 

it 

' i.  1 

* 

( 

■> 

fc 

3 

•j 

\ ! 

< I' 

\ 'i 

i 

] • 

M 

( 

\ '>• 
) 

1 

‘j 

'■  * i 

i 

§ g?  23 

1 

1 '• 

7 

l 

li 

3 

i . 

i 

,1 

i 

% 

( 

i 

t 

i 

/ 

( 

A 1 

i 

;i 

i' 

I 

Li 

3 g3  23 

( \ 

.1 

M 

i 

'■ 

1 

1 

'l 

1 

j 

3 

i 

(l 

! 

? 

i 

l 

( ,J 
; 

I 

‘l 

( 

•'  1 

a 

I 

3 g3  23 

Cat  Locomotion 


page  24 


now  rmsr  las  i s i r 
back  fham  LAQ  is  |7 
r*o*rr  (bound  »?  r.1M 

SACK  (BOUND  *1  M 

3T*B7IN(  rww«  MUNI ci  is  II 
*j*bcb  or  rm*T‘  is 


r I LC  or  I CAL . 7 S : l T : I 


now  rmsz  las  is  i« 
BACK  rmsx  LAS  IS  \r 
rvom  (bound  at  v-C4 
BACK  (BOUND  n Y-M 


riLi  oricAL.s  t>e  1.1 


I 1 I 1U  I f 

ojo  ]g  { -j-  Oj-  Of-  ojo  -j^5  T®  °T° 

•t  i«  #4  at  n as 

it  if  £i 

• l Bl  BB  S6  M tl  •! 


FIGURE  13-  More  trots. 

the  two  supporting  feet  and  setting  the  two  new  supporting  feet  doun  happen 
close  together  in  time,  and  their  precise  order  is  not  always  the  same. 
However  the  front  leg  in  the  diagonal  pair  always  leaves  the  ground  sooner 
than  its  diagonal  partner,  and  it  also  aluays  lands  slightly  sooner. 
Figure  14  shows  a complete  set  of  graphs  for  all  joints  and  angles  of  the 
trot.  Note  that  the  accelerations  are  higher  than  in  the  walk,  but  not  as 
high  as  for  the  gallop.  The  trot  is  a symetric  gait  with  the  right  and 
left  legs  180  degrees  out  of  phase  and  also  the  front  feet  are  180  degrees 
out  of  phase  with  the  rear  ones  on  the  same  side. 

The  rotary  gallop  is  the  fastest  gait  of  the  cat.  Except  for  one 
long  period  of  unsupported  transit,  the  cat  alternates  support  on  one  or 
two  legs.  Starting  in  flight,  the  cat  first  touches  down  with  its  rear 
left  leg  followed  by  the  right  rear.  The  right  rear  then  stands  alone  as 
the  left  rear  shoves  off  and  the  cat  stretchs  out.  The  right  front  touches 
down  just  before  the  right  rear  leaves  and  it  is  soon  joined  by  the  left 
front.  The  left  front  soon  becomes  the  sole  supporting  leg  of  the  body  for 


■\ 

1*. 

) 

t , 

-'i 

( , 

*v  i 

) 1 

M 

. | 

/ ■ 
c , 

V 

i 

\ s 

*■ 

i 

) 

k.  • 

a 

1 

.1 

? 

A * i 

» 

) 

1,  | 

I 

/ 

/ 

A \ 

1 

i 

1 <i  s! 

GURE 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  26 


1 

a fairly  long  period  before  contributing  a strong  kick  uhich  sends  the  cat 
back  into  Its  long  period  of  unsupported  flight.  See  figure  15.  When  the 


rwn  PNMZ  IM  It  « 
•MX  tmu  lm  is 
nan  ckxjns  v-» 

WtCK  fttOUKfi  «T  Y-t4 


riu  oricML.i  lie  tit 


tfcHi  Uif. 

ISKMKKIIKKn 

mium 


3 


FIGURE  15-  Rotary  Gallop. 

cat  is  in  flight,  all  four  of  its  legs  are  tucked  beneath  the  body,  and 
this  phase  lasts  for  slightly  over  one  fourth  of  the  stride.  It  can  be 
easily  seen  why  this  gait  is  called  the  rotary  gallop,  as  the  footfalls 
proceed  in  a counter  clockwise  circle  around  the  cat.  If  the  roles  of  the 
right  front  and  left  front  are  reversed,  this  gait  becomes  the  transverse 
gallop.  The  graphs  of  figure  16  can  be  seen  to  contain  higher  acceleration 
peaks  than  in  either  the  walk  or  the  trot,  and  thus  the  energy  required  is 
higher.  This  is  not  a symetric  gait,  as  the  front  left  leg  lags  the  front 
right  one  by  60  degrees  and  the  back  left  leg  leads  the  back  right  one  by 
60  degrees. 

The  velocities  of  these  gaits  can  be  found  by  finding  the  minimum 
offset  needed  to  add  to  each  frame  such  that  the  feet  never  appear  to  move 
backwards.  This  is  done  to  produce  the  point  trajectories  of  the  cat  a9  if 
it  were  running  on  stationary  ground.  The  speeds  are  25,  19,  and  10  for 


’"■MM 


* » 


Cat  Locomotion 


the  gallop,  trot,  and  ualk  respectively.  By  setting  these  velocities  in 
CATDIS,  the  cat  can  be  seen  to  move  across  the  screen.  The  file  length, 
period,  phase  lags,  and  velocities  for  all  the  data  files  are  tabulated  in 
Appendix  3.  Again,  further  analysis  is  possible  from  the  data,  and  ie 
encouraged,  but  that  is  not  the  purpose  of  this  research. 

Thus  it  can  be  seen  that  a reasonable  amount  of  kinematic  analysis 
can  be  done  on  points  uhich  were  visually  located  from  an  actual  real  uorld 
film.  This  shous  the  reliability  of  the  dynamic  vision  system  uhich  the 
graphics  system  and  kinematic  analysis  are  based  upon. 

"The  Computer"  has  seen  the  cat  films,  understood  the  basic 
mechanics  of  several  types  of  motion,  and  nou  it  is  up  to  the  mechanical 
engineers  to  enable  it  to  imitate  the  cat,  and  someday  be  able  to  ualk, 
trot,  or  gallop. 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  28 


APPENOIX  1 Operational  Guide  to  Phase  I 


This  appendix  describes  hou  to  use  the  first  phase  of  this  project,  ' 
the  phase  concerned  uith  converting  16mm  film  to  disk  files  of  point 
positions.  To  run  the  program,  do  a 


iCATHI 


This  wi  1 1 ask  then  for  a target  radius  (6  for  2 Plan  scope  probe,  9 for  3 
Plan)  and  a threshold.  The  threshold  is  the  value  which  determines  whether 
a point  has  enough  spread  across  it  to  be  an  "edge”  point.  7 is  a good 
value  to  give.  At  this  point  it  will  respond  uith 


ENTER  COMMAND 

There  are  many  commands  available,  and  a ?<cr>  will  list  them.  Probably 
though,  you  will  want  to  do  an 

EP<cr>  (enter  picture  mode) 

first.  This  will  load  in  PICTB7  into  the  GT40.  This  is  a display  program 
which  will  display  one  sector  pictures.  After  loading  in  this  display 
program,  my  program  will  ask  you  what  you  want  to  see  displayed.  You  chose 
what  you  want  to  see,  and  indicate  if  it  should  uait  for  a character  before 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  29 


proceeding  (thus  allowing  you  to  examine  the  picture  at  your  leisure). 

I terns  which  you  can  view  includs  the  actual  picture  as  it  is  taken  from  the 
vidicon,  the  array  SCRBUF  which  is  the  array  with  the  large  arcs  drawn  on 
it,  the  array  SCR2BF,  the  array  that  looks  for  the  smaller  center  hole  in 
the  target,  and  a count  of  the  number  of  "edge  points". 

At  this  point  it  will  again  ask  you  for  a command.  Probably  at 
this  point,  you  will  want  to  build  a database,  or  read  one  off  dek.  RO 
will  read  one  In  from  dsk,  but  you  probably  will  want  to  do  a 

BO<cr>  (bui Id  database) 

This  will  ask  you  if  the  target  is  independent,  or  dependent  on  another 
target,  if  so,  which  one.  Targets  0, 3,6,7  are  independent,  and  1,2, A, 5 are 
dependent  on  0, 1,3,4  respectively.  It  will  also  ask  you  for  a "center 
distance  max".  This  is  the  distance  from  the  projected  position  that  is 
searched.  For  closely  spaced  targets  6 and  7,  a small  distance  like  6 
should  be  used  to  avoid  confusion  between  them.  For  the  other  targets, 
this  Is  not  a very  important  parameter,  and  anywhere  from  10-30  is  OK.  Now 
you  must  scroll  to  within  a target  radius  of  the  target.  Mhenever  It  wants 
you  to  scroll,  the  words  "Please  Scroll"  are  displayed.  Use  the  arrow  keys 
on  the  Ip  ft  of  the  keyboard,  and  hit  space  when  you  are  done  scrolling. 
Hitting  "S"  will  change  the  scroll  mode  to  single  pixel,  i.e.  each  time  you 
hit  the  key,  the  cursur  moves  one  pixel.  Hitting  "N"  returns  to  normal 
scrolling  mode.  After  you  have  scrolled,  it  will  locate  the  target,  and 
ask  you 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  30 


ANY  MORE  TARGETS? 

Reply  Y for  gee,  then  supply  the  above  inforeation  for  each  target.  Uhen 
you  have  informed  It  of  all  targets,  reply  N to  the  last  question,  and  it 
ulll  again  ask  you  for  a command.  Nou  advance  the  film  one  frame,  and  type 

B2  (step  2 in  building  database) 

This  util  ask  you  to  scroll  to  the  neu  position  of  each  target  from  the 
last  position,  as  the  targets  may  be  moving  rapidly,  and  it  has  no  idea  of 
each  target’s  velocity.  This  gives  it  the  velocities  of  all  the  targets. 
Nou  advance  the  film  and  type 

B3  (step  3 in  building  a database) 

This  uill  ask  you  to  again  scroll  to  the  targets,  thus  giving  it  an  idea  of 
the  acceleration  of  each  target.  After  you  have  built  this  database,  you 
may  uant  to  urite  it  on  disk.  It  uill  only  be  useful  if  you  are  at  the 
current  frame  In  the  film  again.  UO  urites  database  on  disk. 

The  normal  sequence  is  to  advance  the  film  and  type 


NE 


(process  next  frame) 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  31 


This  Mill  scan  for  all  ths  targets,  showing  you  what  you  specified  you 
wanted  to  see  on  the  GT40  screen,  find  all  the  points,  display  them  and  ask 
for  your  next  command.  Be  sure  to  advance  the  film  after  each  NE  command. 
After  8 frames  (including  the  first  3 used  to  build  the  database)  you  can 
do  an 

00  (open  disk) 

This  opens  a disk  file,  and  each  NE  command  then  writes  Its  points  to  disk 
before  processing  the  next  frame.  Uhen  you  are  done  you  uill  want  to  do  a 

CO  (close  disk) 

This  closes  this  point  fits. 

Sometimes  the  routine  will  incorectly  find  a target.  Uhen  this 
happens,  it  becomes  necessary  for  the  operator  to  scroll  to  the  proper 
position.  For  this  rsaeon,  aftsr  each  NE  command,  all  the  points  that  are 
found  are  displayed.  If  one  Is  incorrect,  you  should  do  a 

CO  (correct  one) 

This  will  ask  for  the  target  number  and  allow  you  to  scroll  to  the  proper 
position  of  that  target.  Since  the  positions  are  written  out  at  the 
beginning  of  the  NE  command,  it  Is  this  corseted  position  that  is  written 
out,  when  you  do  the  next  NE  command. 


V 


■■I 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  32 


Other  commands  which  are  useful  include 


OT 

display  current  set  of  targets 

DH 

displays  last  8 positions  of  a target  (it  asks  for 

target  U) 

OA 

displays  last  4 positions  of  all  targets 

AO 

add  more  targets  to  database 

EP 

enter  picture  mode 

LP 

leave  picture  mode 

00 

specify  display  options  (what  arrays  to  display  on 

GT40) 

RL 

re-open  long  point  file  at  end 

PA 

change  parameters  of  radius  and  threshold 

TI 

time  of  day 

EX 

emit 

? 

display  all  commands 

_ A-Vx.  . . . 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  33 


APPENOIX  2 Operational  Guide  to  Phase  II 

Thie  appendix  describes  the  use  of  the  graphics  routines  uhleh 
display  the  points  found  in  phase  I.  To  start  the  program,  type 

tCATOIS 

This  uill  load  the  display  routine  into  the  GT40,  and  uhen  It  ie 
done  loading,  there  should  be  a sketch  of  a cat  and  the  uords 

ENTER  FILE  NAME 

tt 

to  uhich  you  should  give  the  name  of  a file  uhich  is  a data  file  from  phase 
I.  The  data  files  uhich  I have  collected  are  on  my  disk  and  are  named 
OFICAL.N  uhere  N is  a decimal  number.  SinceNn  general  there  is  a phase 
di f ference  betueen  the  first  and  last  set  of  points  in  the  file,  there  uill 
be  a discontinuous  jump  in  motion  at  the  "urap-around"  point,  uhere  the 
first  set  of  positions  follous  the  last  set.  Houever,  the  files  are  in 
ASCII,  and  thus  can  be  edited  to  minimize  this  phase  difference.  I have 
done  this  for  most  of  the  files,  and  the  modified  files  (usually  shorter) 


are  called  0FICAL.1I1,  OF  1 CAL. 211,  uith  the  ’ll  meaning  that  it  is  a modified 
or  matched  file.  After  receiving  a file  name,  phase  II  reads  this  file 
Into  core,  and  displays  the  following  message: 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  34 


BIT  15  HALVES  CAT 
BIT  14  CLEARS  POINTS 


BIT  11  TURNS  OFF  CAT 
BIT  10  TURNS  OFF  TEXT 


BIT  13  UIPES  OLDEST  POINT  BIT  9 TO  VIEU  HIDDEN  FEET 

BIT  12  ADOS  NEWEST  POINT  BIT  8 CHANGES  SCALE  OF  GRAPHS 

BITS  0-7  01 SABLE  JOINT  DISPLAYS 
? TO  DISPLAY  11/45  C0M1AN0S 


There  are  three  modee  to  CATOIS.  These  are  normal,  graph,  and  footfall 
dlagraa  Mode.  The  user  starts  out  In  normal  mode.  The  above  message  tells 
what  the  GT40  bit  sultches  do.  The  sets  of  points  are  sent  from  the  11/45 
to  the  GT40  to  be  displayed.  Some  of  the  bit  su itches  only  have  meaning 
when  updating  with  the  next  set  of  points.  The  switches  effective  at  this 
time  are  bits  15,  13,  and  12.  If  bit  12  is  up,  a point  ui  1 1 be  displayed 
(in  addition  to  any  other  points  or  pictures)  at  each  joint  position  just 
received.  If  bit  13  Is  up,  the  oldest  sudh  set  of  joint  position  points 
ui  1 1 be  flushed.  Thus  having  bits  12  and  13  up  uill  cause  the  number  of 
points  displayed  to  be  constant,  i.e.  the  last  n positions  uill  aluays  be 
vieible.  If  bit  15  is  up,  the  cat  uill  become  half  size  (unless  it  already 

i 

is,  in  which  case  it  uill  stay  small).  Uhen  changing  size,  all  points  on 
the  screen  are  flushed.  Uith  all  these  points  on  the  screen,  it  often 
becomes  confusing  as  to  which  points  are  in  uhich  joint  trajectory.  Thue 
by  flapping  bits  0-7  (anytime),  the  set  corresponding  to  that  joint  nbt  be 
displayed  (it  is  not  lost,  and  putting  the  bit  down  redisplaye  them).  Bit 
14  uill  flush  all  points  currently  on  the  screen.  Bit  11  turns  off  the 


Cat  Locomotion 


■ketch  of  the  cat  (in  order  to  view  the  points  better),  and  bit  10  turne 
off  the  text.  Bit  9 causes  the  left  front  ant)  back  feet  to  be  viewed.  The 
left  feet  are  the  sane  as  the  right  ones,  only  delayed  by  a phase  lag  (see 
P command  below).  Bit  8 changes  the  scale  of  the  next  graph’s  angular 
velocity  and  angular  acceleration.  Scale  goes  in  a cyclic  1-2-4-6-1  order, 
with  change  of  etate  of  bit  8 advancing  the  scale  one  position.  Thus  in 
this  mode,  the  user  can  uatch  the  point  trajectories  and  locomotion.  To 
get  a set  of  points,  the  GT40  must  interact  with  the  11/45.  there  are  many 
other  ways  to  interact  with  the  11/45.  The  following  is  a list  of  11/45 
commands  available. 


SPACE  This  sends  over  one  set  of  points.  Thus  hitting  the  space 
bar  will  look  like  viewing  succesive  frames  of  the  film. 


"A"  This  will  send  a set  of  points  over  every  time  the  clock 

ticks  the  n times.  N is  initially  6 and  can  be  set  with  the  F command. 
This  auto-mode  will  shou  the  cat  in  motion. 


"F"  This  sets  the  frame  rate  for  the  A command,  i.e. 

determines  how  long  to  wait  between  succesive  frmaes.  One  clock  tick  is 
1/60  of  a second. 


"M"  This  sets  the  hove  distance,  or  the  offset  to  be  added 

to  each  frame.  A nonzero  value  here  will  cause  the  cat  to  move  across  the 
ecreen.  A good  value  to  use  is  the  smallest  one  that  doesn’t  allow  any 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  36 


point  to  Move  backwards.  See  appendix  3 for  this  speed  for  each  file. 


"R"  Asks  for  new  file  name.  Used  to  read  another  file. 

NP"  Set  phase  lag  (in  points)  between  the  right  feet  and  the 

left  feet.  The  left  feet  are  simply  the  right  positions  delayed  n points. 

P sets  n.  Bit  9 Must  be  up  to  see  left  legs. 

"G"  Graph  mode.  This  asks  for  three  joint  numbers,  and 

computes  the  angle,  angular  velocity,  and  angular  acceleration  at  each 
frame  and  plots  this  angle  for  all  frames  in  the  disk  file.  The  same  joint 
can  be  specified  as  two  of  the  three  joints,  thus  resulting  in  the  angle 
from  the  horizontal.  Catdis  then  goes  into  graph  mode  in  which  it  displays 
a graph  showing  the  angle,  angular  velocity,  and  angular  acceleration  of 
that  Joint  for  entire  point  file.  A dotted  line  shows  where  on  the  graph 
the  current  position  of  the  cat  Is.  The  user  must  also  specify  a time 
constant  for  computing  the  velocity  and  acceleration.  If  T-l,  the  velocity 
ie  the  difference  in  the  last  two  positions.  If  T-2,  the  veloc  ity 
displayed  is  the  difference  of  position  I and  i-2,  etc.  Only  the  A,L,S, 
and  SPACE  commands  can  be  executed  without  returning  to  normal  mode. 

Toggle  bit  8 and  do  an  "L"  command  to  change  scale. 


Review  last  graph  viewed.  Useful  in  returning  to  graph 


mode. 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  37 


"S"  Smooths  data.  The  number  of  times  data  has  been 

smoothed  is  given  in  Sin  imediately  after  file  name. 

"C"  Change  scale  of  points.  It  asks  for  numerator  and 

denominator.  Needed  because  some  of  point  files  were  obtained  using  the  3 
plan  microscope  probe,  and  some  were  obtained  using  the  2 plan  piece.  Use 
1/1  for  the  3 plan  files,  and  3/2  for  the  2 plan  files,  (see  appendix  3 
for  list  of  which  is  which). 

"T"  Displays  date,  time,  and  current  version  number. 


"I”  Displays  the  bit  suitch  information  above. 

”?"  Displays  a list  of  these  commands  and  a brief 

description. 

"D"  Diagram  mode.  This  command  first  asks  if  the  dynamic 

Muybridge  footfall  diagram  should  be  turned  on.  If  so,  it  asks  for  a Y 
value  for  the  front  foot.  Points  which  are  below  this  value  AND  uhich  are 
moving  backuards  in  the  original  film  are  considered  as  touching  the 
ground.  By  having  bit  12  up,  typing  "A"  to  let  the  cat  run  for  a stride  or 
tuo,  and  then  doing  a "0",  the  user  can  more  accurately  place  the  ground 
line.  The  front  and  back  are  independently  settable  in  the  event  that  the 
front  and  rear  markers  are  a different  height  above  the  ground.  After 
having  done  this,  the  user  is  returned  to  normal  mode,  but  a Muybridge 


Cat  Locoaotlon 


page  38 


diagram  Is  visible  on  the  left  of  the  screen.  As  the  cat  Moves  (either 
wjJJb jpnother  "A",  or  successive  "SPACE"  commands),  this  diagram  will  show 
which  feet  are  on  the  ground.  To  turn  off  this  diagram,  type  another  ”0" 
and  answer  "N"  to  the  first  question. 

"0"  Other  Diagrams.  0 doesn’t  seem  to  stand  for  multiple 

footfall  diagram  mode,  but  most  of  the  good  letters  were  taken  when  this 
feature  was  implemented.  This  command  asks  for  a start  frame  and  a count. 
If  there  is  a phase  lag  of  17,  use  a starting  frame  of  at  least  18  to  avoid 
points  from  the  end  of  the  point  file  messing  up  the  diagram.  It  displays 
the  Muybridge  footfall  diagram  for  the  whole  series,  and  under  each  diagram 
gives  a count  of  the  number  of  frames  in  a row  that  that  diagram  was  valid. 
28  diagrams  are  the  most  It  can  show  (different  from  20  frames). 


0 


I 


Cat  Locomotion 


»•!»» 


page 


’SS" 


Just  to  get  one  started,  try  using  the  file  GALLOP.  Uhen  the  bit 
switch  information  is  displayed,  type  an  A.  The  cat  will  appear  to  be 
running  on  a treadmill.  Uatch  for  a while,  the  put  up  bit  12.  This  will 
cause  the  points  to  remain  In  vieu.  Flip  bit  14  up  and  down  to  clear  the 
points,  and  then  put  bit  13  up  (the  cat  is  running  this  whole  time).  Now 
it  should  appear  as  If  there  is  almost  a string  attached  to  the  joints  of 
constant  length.  Playing  with  bits  0-7  will  cause  points  streaming  from 
each  joint  to  not  be  displayed.  Now  turn  on  bit  15.  The  cat  is  half  size, 
and  there  is  just  one  point  on  each  joint.  By  turning  bit  13  down  for  a 
second,  then  up,  a history  of  arbitrary  length  can  be  created.  Set  the 
frame  rate  to  4 ticks,  the  move  distance  to  24  units,  and  the  phase  lag  to 
G points.  Put  up  bit  9 and  15,  type  A,  and  watch  the  cat  run  across  the 
screen.  Type  P to  set  the  phase  to  G and  -G  respectively. 


( ) 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  40 


APPENOIX  3 Some  useful  information 


The  follouing  chart  tells  some  useful  information  to  anyone  using 
or  playing  with  CATOIS. 

FILE  DESCRIPTION  LENGTH  PERIOD  PHASE  LAG  SIZE  SPEEO 


NAME 

(FRAMES) 

(FR.BACK) 

OF I CAL . 1 

ROTARY 

GALLOP 

192 

35 

B,  -B 

3 plan 

24 

OF  I CAL. 2 

BAD  TROT 

82 

42 

20,21 

3 plan 

12 

OF I CAL . 4 

UALK 

123 

38 

19,19 

3 plan 

10 

OF I CAL. 6 

TROT 

213 

32 

16,16 

2 plan 

20 

OF I CAL. 7 

TROT 

144 

35 

17,18 

2 plan 

18 

0FICAL.8 

TROT  * 

100 

33 

16,17 

2 plan 

18 

OF I CAL . 9 

TROT 

84 

33 

17,16 

2 plan 

19 

OFICAL. 10 

ROTARY 

GALLOP 

SB 

3B 

6,-6 

2 plan 

26 

OFICAL.il 

UALK 

145 

43 

22,21 

2 plan 

11 

* Cat’s  rear  legs  stop  when  tail  hit  back  ua  1 1 of  treadmill,  (about  frame 
70)  but  front  ones  keep  going  until  cat  uas  against  back  of  treadmill  uall. 


a 


Cat  Locomotion 


page  41 


REFERENCES 

Kimmo,  Ballard,  and  Sklansky,  "Finding  Circles  bg  an  Array  of 
Accumulators,"  February  1975,  Communications  of  the  ACM,  Volume  18  Num  2,  p 
128. 


1 

f 

\ 


% 


* ) 


Eaduard  Muybridge,  Animals  In  Motion,  Lewis  Brown,  editor,  1959, 
Dover  Publications,  Inc.  New  York. 

Eadward  Muybridge,  The  Human  Figure  in  Motion,  1955,  Dover 
Publications,  Inc.  New  York. 

Glen  Speckert,  "Knowledge  Driven  Recognition  of  the  Human  Body," 
January,  1976  MIT  Working  Paper  118. 

Dr.  Mary  C.  Uetzel,  Department  of  Psychology,  College  of  Liberal 
Arte,  University  of  Arizona  (Produced  the  16mm  films). 


C 


7 


