AD-A219  929 


FILE.  COPY 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


ftooran?  ouratn  tor  tnn  collection  at  information  .*  «timat*d  to  averse  i  *our  otf  ncigamg  w*  tim*  tor  rtv*wrmg  inwvctiom,  naming  ttmtn*  data  tourcw. 


infermawn.induoing  womtion  tor  raOucmg  tm»  ourdtn.  to  ^vawmgton  Httoouantn  Sarvtcw.  Directorate  for  wfjjw?"  OoeratJont  and  ffeocm.  I2U  Jetfencn 
OavnHhqtmey.  Sv*Kfi2W.  Art in^tortTvA  22202-4302.  and  to  the Office  ot  Management  and  Budgn.  Paoen»Qf<  deduction  Proitct tO 70^01  S3),  Washington,  PC  30503. 


URGENCY  USE  ONLY  (Lw*  bUnk)  J  2.  REPORT  OATE 

|  March  8,  1990 


4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

INTELLIGENT,  REAL-TIME  PROBLEM  SOLVING 


U  AUTHORS) 

Paul  Cohen 
David  M.  Hart 


3.  REPORT  TYPE  AND  DATE*  COVERED 

Final  Report,  15  Sep  89  to  14  Dec  89 


3.  FUNDING  NUMBERS 

F49620-89-C-0121 
62702F  5531/00 _ _ 


"PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  AOORESS(ES) 

University  of  Massachusetts 

Computer  and  Information  Sciences  Dept. 

Amherst,  MA  01003 


APOSR  - 


».  SPONSORING  /MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADQRESS<E5) 


AFOSR/NM 
Building  410 

Bolling  AFB,  DC  20332-6443 


11.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 


12A.  DISTRIBUTION  /  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 


90-0324 


10.  SPONSORING/ MONITORING 
AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 


F49620-89-C-0121 


12b.  DISTRIBUTION  CODI 


Approved  for  public  release  ; 
distribution  unlimited... 


13.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  worth) 


a 


A  testbed  for  intelligent,  real-time  problem  solving  systems  has  been 
enhanced  for  use  by  the  broader  research  community.  The  testbed,  part 
of  the  Phoenix  system,  simulates  forest  fires  and  autonomous  agents 
who  try  to  control  them.  Under  this  contract,  the  testbed  has  been 
modularized  for  portability  to  other  researchers  using  Explorers  or 
MicroExplorersl .  Instrumentation  has  been  added  for  experimentation 
and  baseline  scenarios  developed  for  typical  real-time  problems  found 
in  this  domain.  A  reference  manual  for  the  testbed  has  been  written. 


17.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  REPORT 

UNCLASSIFIED 


NSN  7540-01 -280-5S00 


IS.  NUMBER  OP  PAGES 


16.  PRICE  CODE 


18.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  20.  LIMITATION  OF  ABSTRACT 
OF  THIS  PAGE  OF  ABSTRACT  I 

.UNCLASSIFIED  UNCLASSIFIED _ {  SAR 


Standard  Form  29®  {R«v.  2*89) 

*  Pr*n<rtbed  by  ANS4  Std. 


Intelligent,  Real-time  Problem  Solving 


A  testbed  for  intelligent,  real-time  problem  solving  systems  has  been  enhanced 
for  use  by  the  broader  research  community.  The  testbed,  part  of  the  Phoenix 
system,  simulates  forest  fires  and  autonomous  agents  who  try  to  control  them. 
Under  this  contract,  the  testbed  has  been  modularized  for  portability  to  other 
researchers  using  Explorers  or  MicroExplorers1.  Instrumentation  has  been 
added  for  experimentation  and  baseline  scenarios  developed  for  typical  real¬ 
time  problems  found  in  this  domain.  A  reference  manual  for  the  testbed  has 
been  written. 


1  Explorer  and  MicroExplorer  are  trademarks  of  Texas  Instruments  Corporation 


IRTPS  Phase  I  Final  Report 


AFOSR  Contract  No.  F49620-89-C-0121 


1.0  Statement  of  Work  and  Status  of  Research  Effort 

Four  tasks  comprised  our  Phase  I  effort  to  make  the  Phoenix  environment 
accessible  to  all  IRTPS  participants.  Our  fulfillment  of  these  tasks  is  summa¬ 
rized  by  section  below.  A  more  complete  description  of  our  research  effort  can 
be  found  in  Appendix  A,  which  is  our  report  to  the  IRTPS  workshop  in  Santa 
Cruz,  and  Appendix  B,  a  reference  manual  for  the  Phoenix  testbed. 

1.1  Make  the  Phoenix  System  Portable 

We  have  made  Phoenix  portable  to  any  TI  Explorer  (color  or  B&W)  and  to  the 
MicroExplorer.  It  is  packaged  into  one  system  that  includes  all  non-standard 
(non-proprietary)  support  code  we  use  to  run  it.  The  complete  system  can  be 
provided  to  other  laboratories  and  research  groups  on  tape  as  a  TI  Load  Band. 
We  have  provided  supporting  documentation  for  the  testbed  (see  Appendix  B), 
enhanced  the  on-line  help  facilities,  and  annotated  the  code. 

1.2  Instrument  the  System 

Phoenix  is  now  instrumented  at  the  three  levels  discussed  in  our  contract  pro¬ 
posal.  Using  tools  provided  by  the  Explorer,  we  meter  the  system  performance 
(implementation  level).  We  measure  performance  of  problem  solving  in  the 
domain  by  assessing  such  factors  as  the  amount  of  forest  burned  and  re¬ 
sources  consumed  by  agents  (time,  fuel,  etc.).  At  the  solution  level,  we  provide 
measurement  tools  that  are  suited  to  our  own  problem  solver  and  hooks  for  the 
-~lutions  developed  by  other  researchers.  The  instrumentation  is  built  into  a 
•m  user  interface  that  allows  enabling  and  disabling  of  measurement  at 
ea.(.  ,vel  independently,  providing  flexible  control  over  the  duration  and  level. 
For  more  information,  see  Section  3.3  of  Appendix  A. 

1.3  Provide  Baselines 


We  have  developed  baseline  scenarios  for  several  situations  that  are  both  char¬ 
acteristic  of  this  domain  and  require  timely  response  to  environmental 
changes.  One  of  these  scenarios,  described  in  detail  in  Section  3.4  of  Appendix 
A,  involves  a  single  fire  whose  profile  changes  dramatically  due  to  shifting 
environmental  conditions,  so  that  the  nature  of  the  threat  changes  from  the 
potential  loss  of  forest  to  loss  of  populated  areas.  A  problem  solver  fighting  this 

way  to  its  unpredictable  change  to  avoid  losing  a 


rvni  c 


ilX  ^  JUiubW  JL  OSpOUvL  XXX  U 


A  ir>  n  fiTW  nltr  ■ 

. VJUUVAj 


highly-valued  area.  Another  scenario  we  have  developed  presents  the  problem 
solver  with  multiple  fires  and  limited  fire-fighting  resources  which  must  be 
managed  efficiently  to  prevent  one  or  more  of  the  fires  from  spreading  out  of 
control.  By  limiting  the  number  of  fire-fighting  agents  available,  and  limiting 
the  amount  of  fuel  each  can  carry  (requiring  them  to  refuel  periodically),  this 


2 


IRTPS  Phase  I  Final  Report 


AFOSR  Contract  No.  F49620-89-C-0121 


scenario  forces  the  problem  solver  to  allocate  its  resources  wisely  in  order  to 
control  the  fires. 

A  scripting  capability  allows  the  user  to  create  and  store  such  scenarios  for 
establishing  new  baselines,  developing  new  real-time  problem  solving  solu¬ 
tions,  and  testing  the  effectiveness  of  those  solutions.  Scripts  give  control  over 
environmental  factors  such  as  when  and  where  fires  start  and  wind  charac¬ 
teristics,  and  the  resources  available  for  fire-fighting  (how  many  agents  of 
each  type,  what  are  their  speeds,  fuel  capacities,  fields  of  view).  The  timing  of 
environmental  changes  is  specified  in  scripts,  allowing  the  user  to  control 
when  events  occur  in  the  simulation  for  testing  purposes.  Instrumentation 
functions  can  be  run  within  scripts  to  gather  data  useful  for  development  and 
testing. 

1.4  Modularize  System  Components 

We  have  modularized  Phoenix  so  that  other  researchers  can  work  with  all  or 
part  of  it.  The  five  levels  of  the  system  are  described  in  Section  1  of  Appendix 
A.  Code  for  each  of  these  levels  has  been  separated  into  self-contained  building 
blocks.  The  first  two  levels  are  the  fire  simulation  testbed,  and  are  comprised 
of  the  system  kernal  (graphic  user  interface),  the  task  scheduler,  maps  of  the 
environment,  and  the  fire  simulation  task.  Researchers  interested  in  design¬ 
ing  and  implementing  agent  architectures  for  real-time  problem  solving  could 
test  them  in  this  simulated,  instrumented  testbed  environment  (see  Appendix 
B).  The  next  level  is  a  generic  agent  architecture  shell  -  a  set  of  functional 
components  common  to  all  agents.  Code  to  interface  these  components  with 
the  testbed  is  included  with  this  level,  so  that  researchers  interested  in  work¬ 
ing  with  our  functional  decomposition  of  agent  capabilities  need  only  instanti¬ 
ate  these  components  —  sensors,  effectors,  reflexes,  and  cognitive  capabilities  — 
with  their  own  versions.  The  fourth  level  includes  our  versions  of  these  com¬ 
ponents.  This  provides  a  specific  agent  architecture  that  is  distinctive  primar¬ 
ily  for  the  planning  style  used  in  the  cognitive  component  (skeletal  planning 
with  delayed  commitment  to  specific  actions^).  Researchers  interested  in 
using  our  planning  style  as  well  as  agent  architecture  could  work  with  the 
first  four  levels,  creating  their  own  agent  types  and  organizing  them  according 
to  their  research  interests.  The  fifth  level  is  the  organization  of  fire  fighting 
agents;  we  use  a  hierarchical  organization  in  which  a  single  fireboss  agent 
with  a  global  view  directs  the  activities  of  semi-autonomous  field  agents  with 
local  views.  Researchers  interested  in  working  with  our  solution  to  real-time 
problem  solving  in  this  domain  would  use  all  five  levels  to  replicate  and/or 
extend  our  work.  Appendix  A  of  “The  Phoenix  Testbed”  (Appendix  B  of  this 


2  For  more  on  the  our  cognitive  architecture,  see  “Trial  by  Fire:  Understanding  the 
Design  Requirements  for  Agents  in  Complex  Environments”,  Cohen,  et  al.,  AI  Magazine, 
Vol.  10,  No.  3,  pgs.  32-48. 


3 


IRTPS  Phase  I  Final  Report 


AFOSR  Contract  No.  F49620-89-C-0121 


document)  shows  the  division  of  functionality  into  different  code  modules  that 
can  be  used  to  build  the  various  levels  of  the  system  described  above. 


2.0  Workshop  and  Technical.  Report  } 

Paul  R.  Cohen,  A.E.  Howe,  and  David  M.  Hart.  Intelligent  Real-Time 
Problem  Solving:  Issues  and  Examples.  Intelligent  Real-Time  Problem 
Solving:  Workshop  Report,  edited  by  Lee  D.  Erman,  Santa  Cruz,  CA, 
November  8-9, 1989,  pages  IX-1  —  EX-34. 

Michael  Greenberg  and  David  L.  Westbrook.  The  Phoenix  Testbed.  Technical 
Report  #90-19,  Experimental  Knowledge  Systems  Laboratory,  Dept,  of 
Computer  and  Information  Science,  Univ.  of  Massachusetts. 

These  reports  are  included  as  appendices  in  this  document. 


3.0  List  of  Professional  Personnel 

Paul  R.  Cohen,  principle  investigator,  co-authored  the  workshop  report  on  the 
Phoenix  system  (Appendix  A)  and  presented  it  at  the  Santa  Cruz  workshop. 

David  M.  Hart,  lab  manager,  co-authored  the  workshop  report  and  supervised 
the  research  activities  reported  here. 

Adele  E.  Howe,  graduate  research  assistant,  co-authored  the  workshop  report 
and  participated  in  the  Santa  Cruz  workshop. 

Michael  Greenberg,  staff  programmer,  worked  extensively  to  modularize  the 
system  and  make  it  portable  to  other  research  groups,  and  co-authored  the 
testbed  documentation  (Appendix  B). 

David  L.  Westbrook,  staff  programmer,  developed  instrumentation  and  facili¬ 
ties  to  support  baseline  scenarios  and  experimentation  and  co-authored  the 
testbed  documentation. 


4.0  Interactions 

Paul  Cohen  presented  “Intelligent  Real-Time  Problem  Solving:  Issues  and 
Examples”  at  the  Intelligent  Real-Time  Problem  Solving  Workshop  in  Santa 
Cruz,  November  8-9, 1989. 

Gerald  M.  Powell  is  a  visiting  faculty  member  who  is  here  under  the  Secretary 
of  ihe  Army  Research  and  Study  Fellowship  Program.  Dr.  Powell,  who  works 


4 


IRTPS  Phase  I  Final  Report 


AFOSR  Contract  No.  F49620-89-C-0121 


for  the  Center  for  Command,  Control,  and  Communications  Systems, 

CECOM,  Ft.  Monmouth,  New  Jersey,  has  been  investigating  computational 
approaches  to  various  problems  in  battlefield  planning  for  the  past  five  years, 
and  is  very  interested  in  the  present  capabilities  and  further  design  and  devel¬ 
opment  of  Phoenix. 

We  had  five  meetings  in  September  and  October,  1989,  with  members  of  Victor 
Lesser’s  research  group  at  Umass  (Robert  Whitehair  and  Keith  Decker)  who 
are  exploring  techniques  for  sophisticated  real-time  control  in  the  Distributed 
Vehicle  Monitoring  Testbed,  and  are  interested  in  experimenting  with  them  in 
the  Phoenix  testbed. 


5 


A  f>j>enAi\  A 


Intelligent  Real-time  Problem  Solving: 
Issues  and  Examples1 


Paul  R.  Cohen,  Adele  E.  Howe,  David  M.  Hart 
Experimental  Knowledge  Systems  Laboratory 
Department  of  Computer  and  Information  Science 
University  of  Massachusetts,  Amherst 

cohen@cs.umass.edu 

4135453638 


^This  research  is  supported  by  AFOSR  Contract  Number  49620-89-C-0121 
and  by  funding  from  DARPA,  ONR,  and  Digital  Equipment  Corporation. 

We  thank  Michael  Greenberg,  Dorothy  Mammen,  Paul  Silvey  and  David  Westbrook  for 
their  contributions  to  this  work. 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


1.  Introduction 

This  report  presents  our  work  on  real  time  problem  solving  (IRTPS).  The  topic  is 
fundamentally  challenging  in  the  sense  that  it  probably  cannot  be  completely 
addressed  within  the  established  knowledge-based  and  logicist  paradigms,  but 
wr  squire  methodological,  theoretical,  and  technical  developments. 

Accordingly,  this  report  looks  at  IRTPS  from  all  these  perspectives.  Because 
readers  will  have  different  interests,  each  section  of  the  report  is  independent  of  all 
sections  except  this  Introduction.  Section  2  offers  a  definition  of  IRTPS.  Section  3 
describes  our  real-time  testbed,  including  its  current  status  and  portability,  and 
our  timetable  for  making  it  generally  available.  Section  4  discusses  the 
architecture  we  have  developed  for  real-time  agents  and  our  near-term  research 
goals.  Section  5  is  devoted  to  methodological  issues,  specifically,  how 
characteristics  of  environments  constrain  the  design  of  agents  (including  an 
assessment  of  the  pros  and  cons  of  simulated  environments),  how  to  evaluate 
IRTPS  systems,  and  the  need  for  analytic  models  of  agent  architectures. 

The  task  environment  for  much  of  our  research  is  a  simulation  of  forest  fires.  The 
task  is  to  control  simulated  fires  by  deploying  simulated  agents,  including  “smart” 
bulldozers,  fuel  carriers,  and  airplanes.  (Smart  agents  have  the  simulated 
physical  abilities  of,  say,  bulldozers,  and  some  of  the  simulated  mental  abilities  of 
their  human  operators.)  This  is  a  realtime  problem  in  the  basic  sense  that  the 
environment  changes  while  agents  think  and  act  If  agents  think  too  long,  the 
fires  get  too  big  to  control.  If  they  don’t  think  long  enough,  their  plans  may  be 
flawed  and  their  actions  may  be  less  effective.  (Section  2  refines  this  basic 
definition  of  the  real-time  problem.) 

The  Phoenix  system  comprises  five  levels  of  software: 

DES  -  the  discrete  event  simulator  kernel.  This  handles  the  low-level 
scheduling  of  agent  and  environment  processes.  Agent  processes 
include  sensors,  effectors,  reflexes,  and  a  variety  of  cognitive  actions. 
Environment  processes  include  fire,  wind,  and  weather.  The  DES 
provides  an  illusion  of  simultaneity  for  multiple  agents  and  multiple 
fires. 

Map  --  this  level  contains  the  data  structures  that  represent  the  current 
state  of  the  world  as  perceived  by  agents,  as  well  as  “the  world  as  it 
really  is.”  Color  graphics  representations  of  the  world  are  generated 
from  these  data  structures. 

Basic  agent  architecture  —  a  “skeleton”  architecture  from  which  agents, 
such  as  bulldozers,  airplanes,  and  firebosses  are  created.  The  agent 


2 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


architecture  provides  for  sensors,  effectors,  reflexes,  and  a  variety  of 
styles  of  planning. 

Phoenix  agents  —  the  agents  we  have  designed  (and  are  designing)  for 
our  own  RTPS  experiments. 

Phoenix  organization  --  currently  we  have  a  hierarchical  organization 
of  Phoenix  agents,  in  which  one  fireboss  directs  (but  does  not  control) 
multiple  agents  such  as  bulldozers.  Each  Phoenix  agent  is 
autonomous  and  interprets  the  fireboss’s  directions  in  its  local 
context,  while  the  fireboss  maintains  a  global  view.  A  related  project  is 
looking  at  multiple  firebosses  ^.nd  distributed  control. 


The  Phoenix  environment  (the  DES  and  map  level),  the  basic  agent  architecture, 
and  Phoenix  agents  are  independent  software  packages  that  we  offer  to  other 
researchers  (see  Section  3.3).  We  will  offer  instrumentation  for  these  components 
of  the  Phoenix  system  by  the  end  of  Phase  I  of  the  IRTPS  initiative. 

Our  research  on  IRTPS  is  part  of  a  larger  project  whose  goal  is  to  develop  a  sound 
basis  for  the  design  of  AI  agents.  We  are  analyzing  agents  in  terms  of  the 
behavioral  ecology  view  shown  in  Figure  1.  This  view  encourages  us  to  ask  how 
the  characteristics  of  environments  (including  time)  constrain  the  design  and 
behavior  of  agents.  (We  compare  this  view  with  the  S/E  model  of  Rosenschein, 
Hayes-Roth  and  Erman,  in  Section  5).  When  we  speak  of  a  sound  basis  for  design, 
we  mean  the  ability  to  predict  how  modifying  the  architecture  of  an  agent  will 
change  its  behavior  in  a  given  environment.  Currently,  we  do  this  by  building 
models  that  relate  the  architecture  of  an  agent  to  behaviors.  The  methodological 
implications  of  the  behavioral  ecology  view  and  of  modelling  are  discussed  in 
Section  5. 


3 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


2.  Definitions. 


We  begin  this  section  with  definitions  of  real-time  problem  solving  and  “the  real 
time  problem.”  Next  we  examine  some  terms  that  are  common  in  the  IRTPS 
literature,  such  as  deadline,  predictability,  and  time  scale.  These  terms  are  vague, 
and  it  is  often  difficult  to  tell  whether  they  are  intended  as  descriptions  of  an 
agent’s  environment  or  its  behavior.  We  propose  six  classes  of  terms  that  should, 
we  hope,  reduce  the  vagueness  and  ambiguity  of  previous  discussions  of  IRTPS. 
Lastly,  we  show  how  the  behavioral  ecology  view  helps  us  compare  and  organize 
different  approaches  to  IRTPS. 

2.1  IRTPS  and  the  Real-time  Problem 

A  crude  definition  of  IRTPS  was  mentioned  in  the  introduction: 

The  environment  changes  while  agents  think  and  act. 

But  this  doesn’t  adequately  convey  the  impact  of  changes  in  the  environment  upon 
the  agents.  For  example,  while  a  bulldozer  thinks  about  how  to  avoid  a  fire,  the 
position  of  the  fire  changes,  and  in  some  cases  the  bulldozer  can  be  overrun.  A 
better  definition  makes  explicit  the  value  of  problem  solving  and  how  it  is  affected 
by  changes  in  the  environment: 

The  value  of  problem  solving  is  a  function  of  what  the  problem 
solver  does  —  its  thinking  and  acting  —  and  one  or  more 
parameters  in  the  environment,  at  least  one  of  which  changes 
during  problem  solving. 

Note  that  this  definition  makes  no  direct  reference  to  time.  This  is  because  time  is 
itself  an  indirect  way  of  talking  about  changes  in  the  environment  during  problem 
solving,  and  it  is  these  changes,  not  the  passage  of  time,  that  affect  the  value  of 
problem  solving.  When  we  say,  “The  fire  is  currently  consuming  10  acres  per 
hour,”  we  do  not  mean  that  an  hour  is  worth  ten  acres.  Time  itself  has  no  inherent 
value.  Time  provides  us  a  scale  on  which  to  measure  events  that  do  have  value. 
Consider  an  analogy  to  distance.  We  might  say,  “As  we  drive  down  this  street, 
property  values  increase  by  $10,000  a  block,”  but  we  would  not  say  that  a  block  (e.g., 
200  yards)  is  worth  $10,000.  Throughout  this  document  we  will  try  to  avoid  giving 
the  impression  that  time  has  any  value.  We  will  try  to  foster  the  view  that  time 
(like  distance)  is  just  a  scale  on  which  to  plot  changes  in  value. 

Of  course,  we  can  define  value  to  be  a  function  of  time,  as  in  real-time  operating 
systems,  but  typically  we  measure  value  in  terms  of  money,  acreage,  real  estate, 
lives  saved  or  lost,  and  so  on.  Unlike  time,  these  value  functions  may  be  nonlinear, 
even  discontinuous.  This  leads  to  the  following  definition  of  the  “real  time 
problem”: 


4 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


The  value  of  problem  solving  does  not  always  increase,  nor 
does  it  always  decrease,  during  problem  solving;  thus  simple 
strategies  such  as  "work  for  as  long  as  possible,”  or  "solve  the 
problem  as  quickly  as  possible,”  will  generally  not  maximize 
value. 

Example:  Measuring  value  in  terms  of  the  area  of  burned  forest,  we  might  collect 
statistics  on  the  relationship  between  area  burned  and  the  amount  of  time  that 
elapses  while  the  fireboss  selects  a  plan.  (For  simplicity,  we  will  plot  elapsed  time 
against  area  saved  instead  of  the  area  burned,  so  value  increases  on  the  y  axis:) 


Apparently,  a  little  time  devoted  to  plan  selection  is  worthwhile.  After  a  point, 
however,  thinking  longer  doesn’t  save  more  forest.  While  this  “inverted  U”  could 
have  many  causes,  the  important  point  is  that  it  seems  to  be  characteristic  of  real 
time  tasks. 

The  inverted  U  function  seems  more  representative  of  soft  deadlines  than  hard 
ones.  Value  decreases  slowly  when  a  soft  deadline  is  missed,  precipitously  when  a 
hard  deadline  is  missed.  In  Section  2.2  we  formalize  and  illustrate  a  hard 
deadline  in  the  Phoenix  environment. 

It  follows  from  this  definition  of  the  real  time  problem  that  an  agent  must  have 
control  of  the  amount  of  time  it  devotes  to  problem  solving.  In  terms  of  the  previous 
example,  an  agent  should  spend  “just  enough”  time  on  plan  selection — the 
amount  of  time  that  corresponds  to  the  highest  point  on  the  curve.  Although  this 
picture  is  an  oversimplification  (we  will  discuss  some  of  the  complexities  later)  it 
does  illustrate  that  if  an  agent  cannot  control  the  amount  of  time  it  spends  on 
problem  solving,  it  cannot  affect  the  value  of  its  problem  solving. 

What  does  it  mean  for  an  agent  to  control  the  amount  of  time  it  spends  on  problem 
solving.  First,  it  does  not  mean  that  the  agent  controls  the  rate  at  which  time 
passes.  We  assume  this  is  beyond  every  agent’s  control.  Instead  we  mean  that  an 
agent  can  with  “one  eye  on  the  clock”  decide  whether  to  run  a  process  or  continue 
running  an  interrupted  process. 


5 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


Example:  The  Phoenix  agent  architecture  provides  for  multiple  execution  methods 
to  achieve  any  goal.  For  example,  Fhoenix  has  several  path  planning  methods. 
Execution  methods  for  a  given  task  require  different  amounts  of  time.  More 
precisely,  they  differ  in  the  amounts  of  time  that  are  expected  to  elapse  before  each 
terminates.  One  way  that  Phoenix  agents  control  the  amount  of  time  they  spend  on 
problem  solving  is  to  base  the  selection  of  execution  methods  on  their  estimated 
time  requirements. 

Estimates  figure  heavily  in  this  example,  and  in  IRTPS  in  general.  What  remains 
to  be  seen,  in  the  course  of  this  research,  is  what  characteristics  of  the 
environment  affect  the  quality  of  estimates,  and  what  characteristics  of  IRTPS 
architectures  affect  their  dependence  on  the  quality  of  estimates. 

2.2  Describing  the  Environment  and  Agents 

Although  our  approach  is  to  design  agents  for  specific  environments,  we  have 
been  content  to  describe  environments  at  two  levels  of  abstraction,  both  inadequate 
for  design.  We  believe  this  is  common  in  the  IRTPS  literature. 

The  levels,  with  examples,  are: 

Implementation-specific:  When  a  cell  ignites,  the  simulator  figures  out 
when  its  knights-tour-neighbors  are  going  to  ignite.  It  calculates  the 
rate  of  spread  of  the  newly-ignited  celi  to  its  neighbors,  accounting  for 
weather,  slope,  fuel  type,  etc. 

Apple-pie  general:  The  Phoenix  environment  is  characterized  by 
unpredictable  events,  real-time  constraints,  and  hard  and  soft 
deadlines. 

Neither  level  of  description  of  the  environment  is  appropriate  for  design.  From  the 
first  kind  of  description  you  can  model  the  structure  and  dynamics  of  the 
environment,  so  it  is  genuinely  useful.  But  the  second  kind  of  description  is 
actually  misleading  without  a  lot  of  clarification,  as  the  following  examples  show. 

At  the  IRTPS  Workshop2,  the  Working  Group  on  Architectures  made  a  list  of 
characteristics  of  environments: 

lots  of  data 

low  signal  to  noise  ratio 

unpredictable  rates  at  which  data  arrive  (varying  quantity  of  data) 
hard  and  soft  deadlines 
time-dependent  value 
spectrum  of  predictability 


2Pasatiempo,  Santa  Cruz,  California.  November  6  &  7,  1989. 


6 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


incompleteness  in  data 
multiple  time  scales 

combinatoric  proliferation  of  things  to  attend  to 

Most  of  these  seem  self-explanatory.  However,  most  could  be  interpreted  as 
descriptions  of  the  agent  as  well  as  descriptions  of  the  environment.  Take 
“multiple  time  scales.”  Our  definition  of  time  scale  is  the  average  time  between 
causal  event  cycles  that  have  value  for  the  agent.  Some  cycles  are  very  short  (e.g., 
the  time  between  moving  into  a  fire  and  getting  burned)  and  some  are  much 
longer  (e.g.,  the  time  between  a  wind  shift  and  the  recognition  of  failure  of  a  fire¬ 
fighting  plan).  But  it  doesn’t  make  sense  to  talk  about  time  scales  independent  of 
an  agent;  specifically,  independent  of  the  value  of  events  to  the  agent.  Without  the 
concept  of  value,  there’s  no  way  to  classify  the  limitless  number  of  causal  event 
cycles,  and  so  the  distribution  of  time  scales  is  uniform.  The  concept  of  value 
enables  us  to  select  classes  of  events — those  that  have  value  to  the  agent — and 
compute  the  average  length  of  their  causal  event  cycles.  Scale  depends  on  the 
agent  design.  It  is  not  an  inherent  property  of  environments3. 

Which  of  the  other  characteristics  listed  above  is  inherent  to  environments,  and 
which  depend  on  the  agent  design?  For  some,  both  interpretations  make  sense. 
When  we  say  “lots  of  data,”  we  could  mean  two  things:  First  unlike  environments 
like  the  blocks  world,  a  lot  is  happening  in  the  Phoenix  environment — there’s  a  lot 
for  the  agent  to  attend  to.  This  seems  to  be  a  description  of  an  inherent 
characteristic  of  the  environment.  But  we  might  also  mean  that  in  this 
environment,  the  agent’s  sensors  can  take  in  more  stuff  than  it  can  process.  So 
“lots  of  data”  can  be  interpreted  as  a  characteristic  of  the  environment  or  as  a 
potential  problem  for  the  agent. 

Next,  consider  the  “predictability”  characteristic.  When  we  say  events  are 
unpredictable,  we  are  usually  mean  “unpredictable  for  this  agent.”  But,  again,  we 
might  mean  “unpredictable  for  any  agent.”  Once  again,  we  must  take  care  to 
separate  the  inherent  characteristic  of  the  environment — the  one  that  would 
constrain  any  agent — from  the  potential  problem  that  the  environment  poses  the 
agent. 

The  resolution  of  this  ambiguity  should  provide  us  with  the  appropriate  level  of 
description  of  environments  for  doing  design. 

There  is  a  predicate  called,  Ue,  that  takes  environmental  events  as 
arguments.  IJe(e)  means  til.-5*-  no  agent  can  predict  event  e. 

There  is  a  predicate  Ua  that  takes  environmental  events  and  agents  as 
arguments.  If  Ua(e,a)  then  agent  a  cannot  predict  event  e. 


3We  are  grateful  to  Les  Gasser  for  pointing  this  out. 


7 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


By  definition,  Ue(e)  implies  Ua(e,a)  for  all  a.  But  it  is  not  the  case  that  Us,(e.a) 
implies  Ue(e).  This  means,  at  the  very  least,  that  we  have  to  be  careful  when  we 
say  an  environment  is  characterized  by  unpredictability.  More  importantly,  it 
points  to  a  gap  in  our  understanding  of  the  agent-environment  interaction:  If 
Ua(e,a)  and  not  Ue(e),  there  must  be  something  about  event  e  that  makes  it 
unpredictable  to  agent  a,  and  if  we  want  to  design  an  agent  a’  for  which  Ua(e,a’)  is 
false,  we  have  to  know  why  Ua(e,a)  is  true.  To  designers,  it  helps  to  know  Ue(e), 
but  knowing  Ua(e,a)  doesn’t  help  us  fix  the  problem.  We  need  to  know  something 
else.  For  example,  if  changes  in  the  position  of  the  fire  are  unpredictable  to  an 
agent,  and  we  view  this  as  a  problem,  then  we  need  to  know  why  the  changes  are 
unpredictable.  Two  contributing  factors  may  be  the  limited  field  of  view  of  agents 
and  the  statistical  distribution  of  changes  in  wind  speed  and  direction.  One  is  an 
architectural  characteristic,  the  other  an  environmental  characteristic,  and 
together  they  produce  Ua(fire-position, agent). 

Terms  like  “unpredictable”  are  just  shorthand  for  problems  faced  by  particular 
agents,  not  characteristics  of  the  environment,  except  when  they  are  universally 
quantified  over  agents.  From  the  standpoint  of  design,  they  don’t  help  us  much. 
Instead  we  will  develop  a  vocabulary  to  describe  environments  in  problem- 
independent  terms.  When  we  say  that  an  event  has  a  statistical  distribution  we  do 
not  imply  anything  about  the  architecture  of  an  agent,  or  anything  about  the 
problem  that  may  arise  for  an  agent  as  a  result  of  the  event  having  a  statistical 
distribution.  We  suggest  six  classes  of  terms: 

Environment  characteristics  (ECs).  These  are  problem-independent, 
architecture  independent  descriptors  of  the  environment.  For 
example,  a  parameter  (say,  windspeed)  changes  aperiodically.  A 
counterexample:  Windspeed  is  unpredictable. 

Architecture  characteristics  (ACs).  These  are  problem-independent, 
environment-independent  descriptors  of  the  architecture.  For 
example,  the  architecture  has  a  random  access  memory  of  limitless 
capacity;  or,  the  plan  selection  mechanism  is  bounded  in  computation 
time.  A  counterexample:  the  error  recovery  mechanism  exhibits 
graceful  degradation.  This  is  a  counterexample  because  graceful 
degradation  implies  something  about  the  problem  you  are  trying  to 
solve. 

Problems.  A  problem  is  a  shorthand  for  an  undesirable  behavior,  that 
is,  an  undesirable  interaction  between  a  particular  agent  and  a 
particular  environment.  For  example,  unpredictability  is  a  shorthand 
for  interactions  in  which,  because  an  agent  did  not  anticipate  an 
environmental  event,  some  negative  consequence  occured. 

Inherent  problems.  An  inherent  problem  is  a  problem  that  we  believe 
all  agents  face,  that  is,  an  undesirable  interaction  between  any  agent 
and  a  particular  environment. 

Solutions.  A  solution  is  a  shorthand  for  a  desirable  behavior  that  we,  as 
designers,  want  to  see  instead  of  some  undesirable  behavior — the 


8 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


problem.  For  example,  a  fast  sense-act  loop  is  sometimes  a  solution  to 
the  unpredictability  problem. 

Solution  realizations.  A  solution  realization  is  one  or  more  architecture 
characteristics  or  modifications  to  architecture  characteristics;  in 
short,  what  we  intend  to  do  to  the  architecture  to  ensure  that  the 
solution  (which  is  a  behavior,  remember)  will  occur  when  we  want  it 
to. 

In  Section  5.1,  we  illustrate  how  design  of  a  real-time  mechanism  proceeds  from 
an  informal  description  of  a  problem,  through  a  formal  description  in  terms  of 
ECs,  ACs  and  Problems,  to  solutions  and  solution  realizations. 

2.3  The  Behavioral  Ecology  Triangle  Organizes  and  Justifies  IRTPS 
Approaches 

We  can  characterize  the  dozens  of  approaches  to  IRTPS  in  terms  of  the  behavioral 
ecology  triangle  in  Figure  1.  First,  what  behaviors  do  we  want  from  IRTPS 
systems?  Second,  what  characteristics  of  the  environment  make  particular 
behaviors  necessary  or  desirable?  Third,  what  architectural  decisions  can 
designers  make  to  achieve  the  desired  behaviors  in  the  given  environment? 

Example:  A  desired  behavior  is  for  Phoenix  agents  to  meet  their  deadlines.  Two 
characteristics  of  the  Phoenix  environment  make  this  desirable:  First,  most  fires 
must  be  contained  by  the  coordinated  efforts  of  several  agents.  Second,  fires  spread 
in  such  a  way  that  if  one  agent  is  very  late,  the  work  of  others  is  jeopardized. 
Another  characteristic  of  the  environment  conspires  against  coordinated  effort: 
unpredictable  changes  in  parameters  such  as  wind  speed  and  direction 
differentially  affect  the  progress  of  agents.  The  architectural  decisions  that  allow 
Phoenix  agents  to  meet  deadlines  despite  unexpected  events  are  discussed  in 
Section  4.2. 

The  behavioral  ecology  view  provides  a  framework  for  organizing  the  real  time 
literature.  For  example,  we  can  ask  what  characteristics  of  the  environment  make 
anytime  or  approximate  processing  behaviors  necessary  or  desirable,  and  what 
architectural  choices  are  needed  to  implement  anytime  or  approximate  behaviors 
in  particular  environments.  But  we  have  found  that  the  principal  advantage  of  the 
behavioral  ecology  view  is  that  it  forces  us  to  justify  our  design  decisions  in  terms 
of  agents’  environments. 

Example:  It  is  not  uncommon  to  claim  that  IRTPS  requires  a  behavior  called 
“graceful  degradation.”  (Other  candidates  are  anytime  or  approximate  behavior). 
Too  often,  the  next  step  is  to  build  an  architecture  that  implements  this  behavior  in 
some  environment.  This  is  backwards.  The  first  step  must  always  be  to  ask 
whether  the  environment  makes  graceful  degradation  (or  anytime,  or 
approximate  behavior)  necessary  or  desirable. 


9 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


3.  A  Real  Time  Testbed. 

This  section  describes  describes  the  Phoenix  testbed  from  several  perspectives. 
Section  3.1  describes  how  the  testbed  appears  to  a  user.  Section  3.2  focuses  on  how 
the  discrete  event  simulator  manages  simulation  time  and  cpu  time  for  multiple 
pseudo-parallel  processes.  Section  3.3  describes  three  levels  of  instrumentation  for 
the  testbed.  Section  3.4  presents  a  “baseline  scenario,”  that  can  be  run  again  and 
again  under  different  conditions  to  test  real-time  architectures.  Section  3.5 
addresses  portability  issues.  The  structure  and  implementation  of  the  testbed  is 
independent  of  the  architecture  of  Phoenix  agents;  indeed,  we  hope  that  other 
researchers  will  use  the  testbed  as  an  environment  in  which  to  test  their  own 
agent  architectures.  For  this  reason,  we  will  postpone  discussing  the  Phoenix 
basic  agent  architecture  until  Section  4. 

3.1  The  Appearance  and  Behavior  of  the  Testbed. 

If  you  watch  the  Phoenix  system  run,  this  is  what  you  will  see:  A  color 
representation  of  Yellowstone  National  Park,  in  which  fires  are  spreading  and 
several  bulldozers,  fuel-carriers,  and  other  agents  are  travelling  and  cutting 
fireline.  You  will  see  different  kinds  of  vegetation  coded  by  color.  You  will  also  see 
roads  and  rivers  of  different  sizes,  elevation  lines,  lakes,  houses,  and 
watchtowers.  Status  windows  present  elapsed  time,  wind  speed,  and  wind 
direction.  You  have  full  control  over  the  resolution  of  your  view;  for  example,  you 
can  see  the  entire  map  at  low  resolution  or  just  a  few  acres  at  high  resolution.  You 
can  see  the  environment  as  it  really  is,  and  as  it  is  perceived  by  one  or  more  of  the 
agents  (which  have  limited  fields  of  view).  Figure  2  shows  a  view  of  an  area  of  the 
park,  unfortunately  not  in  color  (but  see  [Cohen,  1989]  for  color  pictures).  The  grey 
region  at  the  bottom  of  the  screen  is  the  northern  tip  of  Yellowstone  Lake.  The 
thick  grey  line  that  ends  in  the  lake  is  the  Yellowstone  River.  The  Grand  Loop 
Road  follows  the  river  to  the  lake,  where  it  splits.  The  Smokey  the  Bear  symbol  in 
the  bottom  left  corner  marks  the  location  of  the  fireboss,  the  agent  that  directs  and 
coordinates  all  others.  Two  bulldozers  are  shown  cutting  fireline  around  a  fire  in 
this  figure.  Two  other  bulldozers  are  parked  near  the  fireboss,  along  with  a  plane 
and  a  fuel  carrier. 

The  Map  level  of  the  Phoenix  environment,  from  which  the  graphics 
representations  of  the  environment  are  generated,  is  constructed  from  Defense 
Mapping  Agency  data.  Because  it  includes  ground  cover,  elevation,  moisture 
content,  wind  speed  and  direction,  and  natural  boundaries,  we  have  been  able  to 
construct  a  moderately  realistic  simulation  of  forest  fires  (but  see  Section  5  for  a 
distinction  between  realism  and  accuracy).  For  example,  real  fires  and  our 
simulated  fires  spread  more  quickly  in  brush  than  in  mature  forest,  are  pushed  in 
the  direction  of  the  wind  and  uphill,  burn  dry  fuel  more  readily,  and  so  on.  These 
conditions  also  determine  the  probability  that  the  fire  will  jump  fireline  and 


10 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


r.  itural  boundaries;  and  the  intensity  of  the  fire  (which  is  coded  by  color  in  the 
simulation)  The  physical  abilities  of  fire-fighting  agents  are  also  simulated 
accurately;  for  example,  bulldozers  move  at  a  maximum  speed  of  40  kph  in  transit 
(on  the  back  of  a  truck),  5  kph  traveling  cross-country,  and  0.5  kph  when  cutting 
fireline. 

Recently,  we  have  implemented  some  realistic  weather  factors,  specifically, 
lightning  strikes  which  start  fires  with  some  frequency,  and  rain,  which  affects 
the  moisture  and  thus  the  friability  of  fuels. 

Fires  are  fought  by  removing  one  or  more  of  the  things  that  keep  them  burning: 
fuel,  heat,  and  air.  Cutting  fireline  removes  fuel.  Dropping  water  and  flame 
retardant  removes  heat  and  air,  respectively.  In  major  forest  fires,  controlled 
backfires  are  set  to  burn  areas  in  the  path  of  wildfires  and  thus  deny  them  fuel. 

In  the  past,  fire-fighting  agents  were  inexhaustible,  but  recently  we  have  started  to 
model  their  consumption  of  resources.  The  following  example  of  monitoring  fuel 
levels  and  refueling  conveys  the  flavor  of  problem  solving  within  and  among 
Phoenix  agents. 

Example:  Bulldozers  monitor  their  own  fuel  levels  and  notify  the  fireboss  when 
their  tank  drops  below  a  preset  level.  Upon  reciept  of  the  "I'm  low  on  fuel" 
message,  the  fireboss  marks  the  bulldozer  with  a  status  of  "needs-refueling"  and 
when  the  bulldozer  becomes  idle  (i.e.  completes  the  segment  of  fireline  it  is 
working  on),  the  fireboss  selects  a  refueling  plan  for  that  bulldozer.  This  involves 
allocating  an  available  fuel-carrier,  calculating  a  rendezvous  point  on  a  road  near 
the  bulldozer,  telling  the  bulldozer  where  to  go  and  who  to  look  for,  telling  the  fuel- 
carrier  where  to  go,  and  waiting  for  an  acknowledgement  from  the  bulldozer  that 
it  has  received  fuel.  The  bulldozer  and  fuel-carrier  then  interact  through  the 
following  process:  the  bulldozer  notices  the  rendezvous,  requests  service,  and 
waits  for  a  service-complete  acknowledgement  from  the  fuel-carrier.  The  fuel- 
carrier  arrives  at  the  destination,  waits  for  service  requests,  queues  them  up  if 
necessary  (not  currently  utilized),  transfers  fuel  via  a  pump-effector,  terminating 
when  either  the  bulldozer  is  not  present  or  leaves,  the  refueling  tank  goes  dry,  the 
bulldozer's  tank  is  full,  or  the  requested  amount  is  pumped.  The  fuel-carrier  then 
tells  the  bulldozer  it  has  finished  and  the  bulldozer  in  turn  tells  the  fireboss  that 
the  refuleing  task  has  been  completed. 

3.2  The  Implementation  of  the  Testbed 

Underlying  the  Phoenix  testbed  is  a  discrete  event  simulator  (DES)  that  creates  the 
illusion  of  a  continuous  world,  where  natural  processes  and  agents  are  acting  in 
parallel,  on  serial  hardware  (currently  a  Texas  Instruments  Explorer  II  Color 
Lisp  Machine,  but  see  Section  3.5).  In  the  simulation,  fires  burn  continuously  over 
time  and  agents  act  in  concert  to  control  it.  Some  of  these  actions  are  physical,  as 


11 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


in  digging  fireline  and  cutting  trees.  In  parallel  to  these  physical  actions,  agents 
perceive,  move,  react  to  perceived  stimuli,  and  think  about  what  action(s)  to 
execute  next. 

The  DES  manages  two  types  of  time:  cpu  time  and  simulation  time.  CPU  time 
refers  to  the  length  of  time  that  processes  run  on  a  processor.  Simulation  time 
refers  to  the  "time  of  day"  in  the  simulated  environment.  The  illusion  of 
continuous,  parallel  activity  on  a  serial  machine  is  maintained  by  segregating 
each  process  and  agent  activity  into  a  separate  task  and  executing  them  in  small, 
discrete  time  quanta,  ensuring  that  no  task  ever  gets  too  far  ahead  or  behind  the 
others.  The  default  setting  of  the  synchronization  quantum  is  five  simulation-time 
minutes,  so  all  tasks  are  kept  synchronized  to  within  five  simulated  minutes  of 
one  another. 


The  quantum  can  be  increased,  which  improves  the  cpu  utilization  of  tasks  and 
makes  the  simulator  run  faster,  but  this  increases  the  simulation-time  disparity 
between  tasks,  magnifying  coordination  problems  such  as  communication  and 
knowing  the  exact  state  of  the  world  at  a  particular  time.  Conversely,  decreasing 
the  quantum  reduces  how  "out  of  synch"  processes  can  be,  but  increases  the 
running  time  of  the  simulation. 

Within  the  predefined  time  quantum,  all  simulated  parallel  processes  begin  or 
end  at  roughly  the  same  simulation  time.  Types  of  tasks  differ  in  how  they  are 
"charged  for"  cpu  time  and  simulation  time.  Sensory  tasks  run  for  very  short 
intervals  of  simulation  time,  after  which  they  are  rescheduled;  this  gives  them  a 
high  sampling  rate  compared  to  the  rate  at  which  the  world  is  changing.  Effector 
tasks  may  use  very  little  simulation  time,  or  the  full  synchronization  quantum. 
Fire  tasks  always  run  for  the  full  synchronization  quantum. 


All  these  tasks  are  allotted  as  much  cpu  time  as  they  need  by  the  DES;  there  is  no 
constant  proportionality  between  the  simulation  time  and  the  cpu  time  they 
require.  To  see  why,  note  that  fires  are  implemented  as  cellular  automata,  so  that 
the  cpu  time  required  to  calculate  the  spread  of  the  fire  depends  on  the  size  of  the 
fire.  It  may  take  only  a  fraction  of  a  second  of  cpu  time  to  calculate  five  simulation¬ 
time  minutes  of  burning  for  a  small  fire,  but  several  cpu  seconds  to  calculate  the 
five  simulation-time  minutes  for  several  large  fires.  Similarly,  the  amount  of  cpu 
time  required  to  calculate  a  few  simulation-time  seconds  of  sensor  processing 
depends  on  the  type  of  sensor  being  simulated,  so  there  is  no  constant 
proportionality  between  simulated  sensor  time  and  cpu  time. 


In  contrast,  there  is  a  constant  proportionality  between  the  cpu  time  allocated  to 
cognitive  tasks  and  simulation  time.  This  is  because  we  want  to  “charge”  agents  at 
a  fixed  rate  for  thinking.  Because  cognition  and  other  processes,  such  as  the  fire, 
are  simulated  parallel  processes,  they  are  always  allocated  the  same  amount  of 


12 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


simulation  time.  So  when  both  have  run  for  their  allocated  times 

elapsed-simulation-time(cognition)  =  elapsed-simulation-time(fire) 

as  measured  by  the  simulation  time  clock.  Although  these  processes  could  take 
arbitrary  amounts  of  cpu  time,  it  is  advantageous  to  impose  a  strict  relationship 
between  cpu  time  and  the  simulation  time  of  the  planner  and  the  fire.  Thus, 

elapsed-simulation-time(cognition)  =  k  *  cpu-time(  cognition) 

and,  from  the  previous  expression, 

elapsed-simulation-time(fire)  =  k  *  cpu-time(cognition) 

The  advantage  of  this  proportionality  is  that  we  now  have  a  way  to  exert  time 
pressure  on  cognition.  The  real-time  knob  is  the  device  that  exerts  pressure, 
simply  by  increasing  k.  Clearly,  we  can  change  k  without  changing  the  amount  of 
cpu  time  allocated  to  cognition,  and  when  this  happens,  the  net  effect  is  to  increase 
the  amount  of  simulation  time  allocated  to  the  fire.  Because  of  the  strict 
proportionality  between  simulation  time  and  cpu  time  for  cognition,  the  indirect 
effect  of  increasing  k  is  to  reduce  the  amount  of  simulation  time  allocated  to 
cognition,  relative  to  the  simulation  time  allocated  to  the  fire.  That  is,  to  increase 
time  pressure  on  cognition.  Currently  k  =  300,  which  means  that  one  second  of  cpu 
time  for  cognition  is  matched  by  five  minutes  of  simulation  time  for  the  fire.  If  we 
increase  k  to  600,  then  the  fire  is  allowed  to  burn  for  10  minutes  for  every  cpu 
second  of  cognition  time. 

Cognitive  tasks  are  allotted  a  full  synchronization  quantum  each  time  they  run.  At 
times  there  are  not  enough  cognitive  activities  to  fill  a  quantum,  in  which  case  the 
task  ends  and  waits  to  be  rescheduled.  Some  cognitive  activities  take  longer  than  a 
full  quantum,  in  which  case  their  internal  state  is  saved  between  quantum  steps. 


Example:  Imagine  it  is  now  12:00:00  in  the  simulated  world,  and  an  agent  is  about 
to  begin  planning.  After  one  cpu  second,  simulation  time  for  the  agent  is  12:05:00. 
The  fire  is  thus  “owed”  five  minutes  of  simulation  time.  But  before  it  runs,  the  DES 
runs  all  sensor,  effector,  and  reflex  tasks.  After  that,  it  may  take  7  cpu  seconds  to 
calculate  the  effects  of  five  minutes  of  fire.  Moreover,  simulation  time  is  still 
12:05:00,  because  the  agent  and  the  fire  are  simulated  parallel  processes.  So  after 
roughly  eight  cpu  seconds  (one  for  the  planner,  negligible  time  for  sensors, 
effectors,  and  reflexes,  and  seven  for  the  fire),  we  have  simulated  five  minutes  of 


13 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


3.3  Instrumentation  of  the  Testbed 

The  Phoenix  testbed  is  designed  to  support  experiments  with  a  variety  of  IRTPS 
architectures— not  only  our  Phoenix  agent  architecture.  Currently  it  has  been 
instrumented  to  some  extent,  and  much  more  instrumentation  is  planned.  In  this 
subsection  we  describe  three  levels  of  instrumentation  suggested  by  Nort  Fowler. 
Low  level  metrics  are  largely  hardware-dependent  estimates  of  how  the  software 
system  is  utilizing  the  hardware.  Middle  level  metrics  give  us  a  fine-grained 
picture  of  how  a  specific  architecture  behaves  over  time;  for  example,  we  can 
measure  the  communication  overhead  among  agents,  the  time  required  to 
respond  to  significant  changes  in  the  environment,  the  amount  of  time  spent  in 
error  recovery,  the  ability  of  scheduling  algorithms  to  meet  deadlines,  and  so 
on.are  specific  to  the  agent  architecture.  High  level  metrics  are  domain  specific. 
They  record  features  of  the  environment  that  are  affected  by  the  agents,  such  as 
acreage  burned  by  fires,  and  consumption  of  resources. 

Any  researcher  who  implements  a  new  agent  architecture  in  the  Phoenix 
environment  will  have  to  define  middle-level  metrics,  because  these  are 
architecture  specific,  but  probably  won’t  have  to  define  high  and  low  level  metrics. 
For  example,  Phoenix  agents  maintain  a  timeline  of  pending  actions,  and  we  need 
to  know  the  average  latency  between  posting  and  executing  an  action.  An  agent 
architecture  implemented  as  a  blackboard  system  may  instead  look  at  the 
scheduling  of  tasks  on  an  agenda.  Most  of  our  middle  level  metrics  are  for  the 
Phoenix  agent  architecture,  not  for  unanticipated  other  architectures. 

Currently,  the  following  instrumentation  is  complete  or  nearly  so: 


Low  Level  Instrumentation 

Run  time  ,  Cpu  time  ,  Disk  wait  time,  Time  since  last  run  ,  Idle  time, 
Utilization,  Overall.  Each  of  these  is  graphed  against  time. 

We  also  provide  an  interface  to  the  Explorer  performance  metering  tools 
which  work  at  the  function  call  level  and  provide  for  each  function  the: 
Number  of  calls  ,  Average  run  time,  Total  run  time,  Real  time, 
Memory  allocation,  Page  faults 

Middle  Level  Instrumentation 

Statistics  on  cpu  utilization  by  the  cognitive  component  of  each  agent  to 
see  the  actual  profile  of  real-time  response,  graphed  against  time 

The  latency  between  when  actions  on  the  timeline  become  available  for 
execution  and  when  they  are  executed. 

Metrics  on  sensor  and  effector  usage 

Metrics  on  reflexes 


14 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


The  goal  of  these  metrics  is  to  compare  the  utilization  of  cognitive  and  other 
resources  in  different  scenarios  (see  Section  3.4).  Each  scenario  will  contain 
important  events  (e.g.,  a  fire  is  detected).  We  will  graph  these  metrics  against  time 
and  annotate  the  graphs  at  the  points  that  the  significant  events  occured,  so  we 
can  see  how  the  agent  architecture  responded. 

High  Level  Instrumentation. 

Fire  destruction  is  currently  measured  by  amount  and  type  of  forest, 
houses,  and  agents  burned. 

Resource  allocation  is  currently  measured  by  amount  and  type  of  agents 
employed  to  fight  the  fire,  gasoline  consumed,  fireline  cut,  distance 
traveled,  and  time  required  to  contain  the  fire. 

3.4  Baseline  Scenarios 

One  advantage  of  studying  IRPTS  in  a  simulated  environment  is  the  ability  to  run 
the  same  environmental  scenario  again  and  again  while  modifying  aspects  of  the 
agent  architecture  (see  Section  5).  We  have  recently  implemented  the  ability  to 
define  scripts,  which  include  the  type  and  number  of  available  agents,  and  guide 
the  environment  through  a  series  of  changes  in  conditions  such  as  windspeed  and 
other  weather  conditions.  We  also  have  the  ability  to  introduce  stochastic  factors 
into  scripts,  such  as  lightning  strikes.  Besides  scripts,  we  will  soon  be  able  to 
provide  baseline  statistics  on  events  such  as  rates  of  spread  of  fires  in  different 
conditions. 

Scripts  play  an  important  role  in  evaluating  IRTPS  systems,  and  comparing 
IRTPS  architectures.  By  design,  scripts  can  force  an  agent  to  confront  virtually 
any  IRTPS  issue.  Here  is  a  simple  script  that  raises  the  six  IRTPS  issues  that 
were  discussed  in  the  original  IRTPS  Initiative: 

Materiel: 

One  fireboss  to  coordinate  the  activities  of  three  bulldozers 

Bulldozers  can  move  6.5  kph  in  softwood,  56  kph  on  road,  .5  kph  while 
building  line 

One  watchtower  at  location  approx  42500x37500 
Environment: 

A  fire  of  radius  700  km  starting  at  coordinates  approx  45000x46250, 

Starting  wind  speed  and  direction  3  kph  from  the  south 
Environmental  Changes: 

At  time  2  hr,  wind  changes  to  10  kph  from  the  NW,  threatening 
buildings — the  base  and  lodge 

Since  it  involves  a  burning  fire,  the  script  requires  agents  to  produce  relevant 
output  in  a  timely  fashion.  The  particular  scenario  includes  an  environmental 


15 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


change  (asynchronous  with  the  reasoning  system)  that  invalidates  previous 
input,  necessitating  the  detection  of  a  new  threat  to  higher  priority  areas  and  a 
redirection  of  ongoing  reasoning  in  order  to  protect  them.  To  handle  this  scenario, 
a  system  must  reason  efficiently  and  effectively  about  temporal  processes,  namely 
the  expected  progress  of  a  fire  under  particular  environmental  conditions  and  the 
abilities  of  a  limited  number  of  agents  to  take  steps,  over  time,  toward  putting  out 
the  fire. 

We  must  add  that  this  script  confounds  the  current  implementation  of  Phoenix 
agents.  They  are  currently  incapable  of  redirecting  their  efforts  to  save  the  base 
and  lodge. 


3.5  Portability. 

The  Phoenix  system  runs  on  color  and  monochrome  Texas  Instruments  Explorers 
and  MicroExplorers.  We  can  package  everything  together  (including  support-code 
for  the  frame  system,  grapher,  EKSL  utilities,  etc.)  as  needed.  We  are  making 
progress  on  the  documentation. 

The  entire  Phoenix  system  is  designed  to  be  modular,  so  fellow  researchers  can 
use  the  components  they  want.  The  smallest  self-contained  module,  and  the  most 
basic,  is  the  Phoenix  environment.  This  includes  the  DES,  the  Map  layer,  and  the 
user  interface.  We  are  confident  that  a  researcher  could  take  this  code  and  build 
his  or  her  own  agents  to  interact  with  it.  However,  we  have  not  done  this  in  our 
own  lab,  so  we  cannot  be  sure. 

Above  the  environment  are  three  additional  levels  of  software — the  Phoenix  basic 
agent  architecture,  our  own  Phoenix  agents,  and  the  organizational  structure  that 
holds  among  our  Phoenix  agents.  The  basic  agent  architecture  is  a  skeleton  with 
hooks  for  sensors  and  effectors,  reflexes,  and  a  cognitive  component  (see  Section 
4).  Some  weeks  ago  the  entire  lab  went  through  the  exercise  of  defining  a  new  type 
of  Phoenix  agent  (an  airplane)  given  only  the  basic  agent  architecture,  and  we  are 
confident  other  researchers  can  do  the  same.  There  are  really  two  aspects  to 
defining  a  new  agent.  One  is  mostly  bookkeeping:  We  define  frames  for  the  agent 
that  describe  its  physical  abilities,  so  that  the  DES  knows  how  it  behaves  over  time. 
We  also  define  frames  that  add  instances  of  the  new  agent  to  a  script.  This  is  the 
easy  part.  The  hard  part  is  defining  the  cognitive  abilities  of  the  agent.  In  terms  of 
the  basic  Phoenix  agent  architecture,  this  means  defining  plans,  execution 
methods,  a  cognitive  scheduler,  and  other  architectural  components  discussed  in 
Section  5. 

Of  course,  the  Phoenix  environment  does  not  and  should  not  care  about  the 
cognitive  component  of  a  new  agent,  other  than  to  schedule  its  processes  to 
guarantee  the  illusion  of  simultaneity  with  other  agents  and  environmental 


16 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


processes.  Thus,  it  is  relatively  easy  to  tell  the  Phoenix  environment  about  the 
physical  abilities  of  new  agents,  as  in  the  examples  above,  and  unnecessary  to  tell 
the  environment  how  the  cognitive  components  of  the  agents  work.  We  hope  this 
will  make  it  easy  for  researchers  to  use  the  Phoenix  environment,  or  the 
environment  and  the  basic  agent  architecture,  to  design  and  test  their  own  agents. 


4.  Toward  a  Solution:  The  Phoenix  Aaent  Architecture 

A  uniform  agent  architecture  is  shared  by  all  agents.  This  architecture  is  the 
structure  of  the  agent,  the  “hardware”  that  dictates  the  fundamental  faculties  and 
limitations  of  the  agent.  The  structure  endows  and  bounds  acuity,  speed  of 
response,  and  breadth  of  action.  The  structure  constrains  what  an  agent  can  do, 
but  not  what  it  does.  Specific  methods  control  what  the  agent  does.  Control 
methods  determine  what  to  do  and  how  to  do  it.  This  dichotomy  between  structure 
and  control  is  reflected  in  this  subsection  and  the  one  following  it.  Section  4.1 
describes  the  agent  architecture  and  Section  4.2  focuses  on  techniques  for  real¬ 
time  problem  solving.  For  a  more  detailed  description  of  these  components,  see 
[Cohen,  1989  ] ) 


4.1  Phoenix  Agent  Architecture 

The  agent  architecture  has  four  components.  Sensors  perceive  the  world.  Each 
agent  has  a  set  of  sensors,  such  as  fire-location  (are  any  cells  within  my  radius-of- 
view  on  fire?)  and  road-edge  (in  what  direction  does  the  road  continue?).  Effectors 
perform  physical  acts  such  as  moving  or  digging  fireline.  Reflexes  are  simple 
stimulus-response  actions,  triggered  when  the  agent  is  required  to  act  faster  than 
the  time-scale  for  the  cognitive  component.  An  example  is  the  reflex  of  a  bulldozer 
to  stop  if  it  is  moving  into  the  fire.  The  cognitive  component  performs  mental  tasks 
such  as  planning,  monitoring  actions,  evaluating  perceptions,  and 
communicating  with  other  agents.  Although  every  agent  has  these  components, 
each  component  can  be  endowed  with  a  range  of  capabilities. 


Sensors  get  input  from  the  world  (fire  simulation  and  map  structures).  Their 
output  goes  to  state  memory  in  the  cognitive  component,  and  also  to  the  reflexive 
component  (triggering  instant  responses  in  the  form  of  short  programs  to  the 
effectors).  For  example,  a  bulldozer  sensor  that  detects  fire  within  its  radius-of- 
view  updates  state  memory  automatically.  If  the  detected  fire  is  in  the  path  of  the 
bulldozer,  the  emergency-stop  reflex  is  also  triggered.  Effectors  are  programmed 

Kvr  fUn  r*r»rrw if ivm  /lomnonanf  or>rl  Kxr  voflnvoa  T’V) oi r*  rmf  T>nf  norfnrma  onfinna  ir*  fVto 

WJ  VAiV  VVgAAAVA  T  V  VV>UA|/ VAAV/UV  UlAVi  Wjf  A  A  V/  VJ>/  ^  V 

world.  In  the  preceding  example,  the  emergency-stop  reflex  would  program  the 
movement-effector  of  the  bulldozer  to  stop.  If  the  fire  were  not  too  close,  the 
cognitive  component  might  then  step  in  and  program  the  movement  effector  to 
start  moving  parallel  to  the  fire.  If  the  cognitive  component  also  programmed  the 
blade  effector  to  put  the  blade  in  the  down  position,  the  bulldozer  would  not  only 


17 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Ha.t.  November  1989. 


maintain  a  safe  distance  from  the  fire,  but  it  would  also  build  fireline  as  it  moved. 
Sensors  and  effectors  are  first-class  objects  whose  interactions  with  other 
components  and  the  world  are  implemented  in  Lisp  code.  Reflexes,  as  mentioned, 
are  triggered  by  sensory  input,  which  causes  them  to  program  effectors  to  react  to 
the  triggering  sensation.  They  are  implemented  in  production-rule  fashion,  with 
triggering  sensations  as  their  antecedent  clauses  and  effector  programs  as  their 
consequents.  Because  they  respond  directly  to  the  environment  and  so  must  keep 
up  with  it,  sensors,  effectors,  and  reflexes  operate  at  the  same  time  scale  as  the 
simulation  environment  and  are  synchronized  as  closely  as  possible  within  the 
discrete  event  simulator. 


The  cognitive  component  receives  input  from  sensors  and  sends  programs  to  the 
effectors  to  interact  with  the  world.  It  is  responsible  for  data  integration,  agent 
coordination,  and  resource  management,  in  other  words,  most  problem  solving 
activity.  This  component  operates  in  larger  time  slices  than  the  others,  thus 
reducing  the  overhead  of  context  switching,  but  increasing  the  possibility  of 
reasoning  with  outdated  information. 

The  Phoenix  cognitive  component  directs  its  own  actions  by  adding  prospective 
actions  onto  the  timeline,  a  structure  for  reasoning  about  the  computational 
demands  on  the  agent,  then  selecting  and  executing  these  actions  one  at  a  time. 
Actions  may  be  added  in  response  to  a  change  in  environmental  conditions  (e.g.,  a 
new  fire)  or  as  part  of  the  computation  of  other  actions  (e.g.,  through  plan 
expansion).  Every  action  that  the  cognitive  component  accomplishes  is 
represented  on  the  timeline  with  its  temporal  relations  to  other  actions  and 
resource  requirements  (e.g.,  processing  time  and  necessary  data).  The  cognitive 
scheduler  decides  which  action  to  execute  next  from  the  timeline  and  how  much 
time  is  available  for  its  execution. 


Actions  may  perform  calculations,  search  for  plans  to  address  particular 
environmental  conditions,  expand  plans  into  action  sequences,  assign  variable 
values,  process  sensory  information,  initiate  communication  with  other  agents,  or 
issue  commands  to  sensors  and  effectors.  These  actions  are  represented  in 
skeletal  form  in  the  plan  library.  Actions  are  described  by  what  environmental 
conditions  they  are  appropriate  for,  what  they  do,  how  they  do  it  (the  Lisp  code  for 
their  execution,  called  the  execution  methods),  and  what  resources  and  data, 
environmental  and  computational,  they  require.  A  plan  is  a  special  type  of  an 
action.  It  includes  a  network  of  actions  related  by  their  data  references  and 
temporal  constraints. 


Planning  is  accompiisnea  Dy  aaaing  an  action  to  tne  timeline  to  searcn  for  a  pi  an 
to  address  some  conditions.  When  the  search  action  is  executed,  it  selects  an 
action  or  plan  appropriate  for  the  conditions  and  places  it  on  the  timeline.  If  this 
new  action  is  a  plan,  then  when  it  is  executed  it  expands  into  a  plan  by  putting  its 
sub-actions  onto  the  timeline  with  their  temporal  inter-relationships.  If  it  is  an 
action,  it  instantiates  the  requisite  variables,  selects  an  execution  method  (there 


18 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


may  be  several  with  differing  resource  requirements  and  expected  quality  of 
solution),  and  executes  that  method.  We  call  this  style  nf  planning  ske.1p.tal 
refinement  with  lazy  expansion.  Plans  are  represented  as  shells  that  describe 
what  types  of  actions  should  be  executed  to  achieve  the  plan  but  do  not  include  the 
exact  action  or  its  variable  values  until  it  is  executed.  Delaying  expansion  allows 
the  expanded  plan  to  address  more  closely  the  actual  state  of  the  environment 
during  execution. 

This  planning  style  is  common  to  all  agents  in  the  Phoenix  planner,  though  it  is 
flexible  enough  so  that  agents  with  a  variety  of  cognitive  capabilities  are  possible. 
For  example,  the  fireboss  has  far  more  sophisticated  methods  for  gathering  and 
integrating  information  than  the  bulldozer  does.  It  can  direct  the  actions  of  the 
bulldozers,  while  the  bulldozers  can  only  make  requests  of  the  fireboss.  However, 
the  fireboss,  unlike  the  bulldozers,  does  know  how  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  the  fire 
because  it  does  not  work  close  to  the  fire. 

Creating  a  different  type  of  agent  requires  defining  a  cognitive  component.  One 
can  optionally  define  a  set  of  programmable  sensors  and  effectors  (of  arbitrary 
complexity)  and  add  a  set  of  reflexes  to  handle  situations  that  require  instant 
response  by  the  agent.  To  create  sensors  and  effectors,  the  simulator  mu3t  be  told 
rates  of  action  under  varying  environmental  conditions,  range  of  perceptions,  and 
other  physical  capabilities.  Creating  reflexes  involves  describing  the  triggers,  the 
expected  output  from  sensors,  and  the  response,  the  programming  for  the 
effectors.  The  default  cognitive  component  consists  of  plans,  which  are  networks  of 
actions  available  to  the  agent  and  tailored  to  situations  in  the  environment,  and 
methods  which  describe  how  to  execute  the  actions.  Creating  a  new  cognitive 
component  with  the  same  structure  as  that  described  here  involves  defining  a  new 
plan  library. 


Several  design  decisions  in  the  Phoenix  agent  architecture  have  been  made 
specifically  to  facilitate  real-time  control.  One  important  decision  is  to  incorporate 
both  reflexive  and  cognitive  abilities  in  agents,  enabling  agents  to  respond 
reflexively  to  events  that  occur  quickly,  while  responding  more  deliberately  to 
resource  management  and  coordination  problems  on  a  longer  time  scale.  The 
combination  of  a  reflexive  and  cognitive  component  accounts  for  time  scale 
mismatches  inherent  in  an  environment  that  requires  micro  actions  and 
contemplative  processing.  Micro  actions,  such  as  following  a  road  and  keeping  out 
of  the  immediate  range  of  the  fire,  involve  quick  reflexes  and  little  integration  of 
data.  Contemplative  processing,  such  as  route  planning,  involves  long  search 
times  and  integration  of  disparate  data  such  as  available  roads,  terrain 
conditions,  and  fire  reports.  This  horizontal  decomposition  ensures  that  the  agent 
can  perform  reflex  actions  to  keep  it  from  danger  and  maintain  the  status  quo, 
while  also  performing  more  contemplative  actions.  This  strategy  for  responding  to 
disparate  demands  of  the  environment  is  advocated  by  Brooks,  and  Kaelbling; 
although  in  both  cases,  they  chose  more  levels  of  decomposition  for  their  domains. 
Our  agent  architecture,  in  effect,  combines  two  different  planning  components: 


19 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


one  highly  reactive,  triggered  by  specific  environmental  stimuli  and  operating  at 
very  small  time  scale,  and  the  other  slower  and  more  contemplative,  integrating 
large  amounts  of  data  and  concerned  with  resource  management  and 
coordination. 

Another  design  feature  that  facilitates  real-time  control  is  the  timeline  and  its 
single  representation  for  all  actions.  Because  prospective  actions  share  a  uniform 
representation  on  the  timeline,  all  problem  solving  actions  have  access  to  the  same 
memory  structures  and  can  be  monitored  and  allocated  resources  using  the  same 
mechanisms.  All  problem  solving  tasks  are  subject  to  the  same  constraints  with 
respect  to  resource  allocation:  how  much  time  is  required,  what  information 
gathering  resources  are  required,  and  what  data  is  necessary.  This  framework 
allows  new  cognitive  capabilities  to  be  integrated  easily  by  defining  their 
requirements  within  the  action  description  language  and  relying  on  the  timeline 
and  its  supportive  scheduling  mechanisms  to  temporally  arbitrate  their 
allocation. 

Lazy  skeletal  expansion  also  facilitates  real-time  control.  Plans  are  only  partially 
elaborated  before  the  agent  acts.  This  deferred  commitment  exploits  recent 
information  about  the  state  of  the  world  to  guide  action  selection  and  instantiation. 
Completely  deferred  commitment,  such  as  in  reactive  planning,  is  probably  not 
tenable  when  agents  or  actions  must  be  coordinated  or  scarce  resources  managed. 
The  integration  of  planning  and  acting  in  Phoenix  is  designed  to  be  responsive  to  a 
complex  dynamic  world  by  postponing  decisions  on  exactly  what  action  to  take, 
while  also  grounding  potential  actions  in  a  framework  (skeletal  plans  coordinated 
on  the  timeline)  that  accounts  for  data,  temporal  and  resource  interactions. 

4.2  Real-Time  Control  in  the  Agent  Architecture 

How  does  a  Phoenix  agent  respond  to  real-time  pressure?  One  approach  is  to 
control  processing  requirements.  This  enhances  the  flexibility  of  actions  and  the 
sophistication  of  control  decisions.  Providing  alternative  execution  methods  for 
timeline  entries  ensures  a  range  of  choices  that  vary  in  their  timeliness.  Different 
scheduling  strategies  for  managing  the  actions  on  the  timeline  provide  greater 
responsiveness  to  real-time  constraints.  Another  approach  is  an  expectation-based 
monitoring  technique  that  reduces  the  overhead  of  monitoring  while  providing 
early  warning  of  plan  failure.  Earlier  warning  of  plan  failure  affords  the  planner 
more  time  to  adjust  and  more  flexibility  in  possible  responses.  These  approaches 
are  discussed  below. 

4.2.1  Control  of  Processing  Requirements 

Processing  requirements  can  be  controlled  in  two  ways:  by  controlling  how  much 
time  is  used  by  individual  actions  and  by  controlling  the  overall  distribution  of  time 
across  all  actions.  Approximate  processing  and  anytime  algorithms  are  methods 


20 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


for  controlling  how  much  time  is  used  by  individual  actions.  In  these  methods, 
processing  time  is  traded  against  quality  or  correctness  of  solution  to  satisfy  time 
constraints  that  could  not  be  managed  under  rigid  processing  demands.  In 
Phoenix,  these  methods  are  alternative  execution  methods.  Execution  methods,  as 
introduced  in  Section  4.1  are  lisp  code  that  performs  the  cognitive  actions.  Each 
cognitive  action  may  may  be  executed  by  one  of  several  execution  methods,  with 
differing  time  requirements  and  so  differing  solution  expectations.  The  Phoenix 
planner  delays  the  choice  of  an  action's  execution  method  until  the  cognitive 
scheduler  selects  the  action  for  execution,  thereby  allowing  the  scheduler  to  select 
a  method  suited  to  existing  time  constraints.  By  postponing  the  ultimate 
commitment  oe  cognitive  resources  until  a  choice  must  be  made,  those  resources 
can  be  allocated  judiciously. 


Alternative  execution  methods  are  particularly  useful  in  actions  that  incur 
potentially  high  computation  costs  with  predictable  results,  such  as  path 
planning.  Phoenix  uses  an  A*  algorithm  to  calculate  paths  for  bulldozers.  It 
searches  the  two-dimensional  map  representation  of  the  world  for  the  shortest 
travel  time  path  between  two  points.  It  expands  the  current  best  path 
incrementally,  searching  each  unobstructed  neighboring  cell  for  the  best  next 
step.  The  algorithm  is  parameterized  to  work  at  multiple  levels  of  resolution,  so 
that  search  steps  could  range  from  128  meters  up  to  8  kilometers.  A  small  search 
step,  128  meters,  yields  the  shortest  path,  requiring  the  least  travel  time  for  the 
bulldozer.  However,  this  resolution  requires  the  most  computation  (i.e.,  cognitive 
resources).  The  largest  search  step,  8  kilometers,  typically  yields  a  longer  path, 
which  requires  more  travel  time,  but  can  be  calculated  quickly,  consuming  less 
computation  time.  At  times  it  even  fails  to  find  a  solution,  since  there  are 
bottlenecks  in  the  map  that  don't  appear  at  large  search  steps.  Each  of  these 
resolutions  constitutes  a  different  execution  method  for  calculating  a  path, 
alternative  methods  which  trade-off  cognitive-time  for  quality  of  solution. 


The  cognitive  scheduler  controls  the  overall  distribution  of  cognitive  processing 
time  across  all  actions.  At  each  time  step,  it  selects  the  next  action  from  the 
timeline  to  execute,  chooses  an  execution  method  for  the  action,  and  executes  it. 
Thus,  the  scheduler  is  key  to  controlling  the  responsiveness  of  the  cognitive 
component  to  real-time  constraints.  The  current  version  of  the  scheduler  for 
Phoenix  is  rudimentary  and  considers  only  a  short  horizon  for  scheduling 
decisions.  It  selects  the  next  action  for  execution  based  on  timeline  ordering, 
action  priority  and  the  amount  of  time  an  action  has  been  waiting  for  execution.  A 
more  sophisticated  scheduler  is  being  designed  now. 


4.2.2  Sophisticated  Monitoring’  Through  Envelopes 


Just  as  we  can  explicitly  represent  the  movements  of  an  agent  through  its  physical 
environment,  so  can  we  represent  its  movement  through  spaces  bounded  by 
failure  or  other  important  events.  These  spaces  are  called  envelopes.  Typically, 
one  dimension  of  an  envelope  is  time,  and  the  others  are  measures  of  progress. 


21 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


For  example,  imagine  you  have  one  hour  to  reach  a  point  five  miles  away,  and 
your  maximum  speed  is  5  mph.  If  your  speed  drops  below  its  maximum,  for  even 
a  moment,  you  fail.  As  long  as  you  maintain  your  maximum  speed,  you  ar ewithin 
your  envelope.  The  instant  your  speed  drops  below  5  mph,  you  lose  oxviolate  your 
envelope.  This  envelope  is  narrow,  because  it  will  not  accomodate  a  range  of 
behavior:  any  deviation  from  5  mph  is  intolerable.  Most  problems  have  wider 
envelopes.  Indeed,  real  time  systems  should  be  designed  to  ensure  that  narrow 
envelopes  are  the  exception,  not  the  rule. 

The  following  problem  illustrates  a  wider  envelope.  A  bulldozer  has  one  hour  to 
travel  five  miles,  as  before,  but  its  maximum  speed  is  10  mph.  It  starts  slowly 
(perhaps  the  terrain  is  worse  than  expected).  After  40  minutes  it  has  travelled  just 
two  miles.  It  can  still  achieve  its  goal,  but  only  by  travelling  at  nearly  maximum 
speed. 


Clearly,  if  the  agent  waits  40  minutes  to  assess  its  progress,  it  has  waited  too  long, 
because  an  heroic  effort  will  be  required  to  achieve  its  goal.  In  Phoenix,  agents 
check  their  envelopes  at  regular  intervals,  hoping  to  catch  problems  before  they  get 
out  of  hand.  One  near-term  research  goal  is  to  develop  a  theory  of  envelopes  that 
will  tell  us  when  and  how  often  they  should  be  checked. 

Agents  check  failure  envelopes,  which  tell  them  whether  they  will  absolutely  fail 
to  achieve  their  goals,  andwarning  envelopes,  which  tell  them  that  they  are  in 
jeopardy  of  failure.  Typically,  there  is  just  one  failure  envelope  but  many  possible 
warning  envelopes.  To  continue  the  previous  example,  the  bulldozer  would  violate 
a  warning  envelope  if  its  average  speed  drops  below  5  mph,  because  this  is  the 
speed  it  must  maintain  to  achieve  its  goal.  Violating  this  envelope  says,  "You  can 
still  achieve  your  goal,  but  only  by  doing  better  than  you  have  up  to  this  point.” 
These  concepts  are  illustrated  in  Figure  3  .  The  failure  envelope  is  a  line  from  “30 
minutes”  to  “five  miles,”  since  the  bulldozer  can  achieve  its  goal  as  long  as  it  has  at 
least  30  minutes  to  travel  five  miles.  The  average  speed  warning  envelope  is  a  line 
from  the  origin  to  the  goal,  but  the  bulldozer  violated  that  envelope  immediately  by 
travelling  at  an  average  speed  of  3  mph.  In  fact,  it  moved  perilously  close  to  its 
failure  envelope.  The  box  in  the  upper  right  of  Figure  3  illustrates  that  the  agent 
can  construct  another  envelope  from  any  point  in  its  progress.  In  this  example, 
the  new  envelope  is  extremely  narrow. 


22 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


Figure  3 .  Depicting  actual  and  projected  progress  with  respect  to  envelopes 


Agent  Envelopes  and  Pian  Envelopes.  vVe  distinguish  between  the  envelopes  of 
individual  agents  and  those  of  multi-agent  plans.  In  Phoenix,  plan  envelopes  are 
maintained  by  the  fireboss  agent,  who  coordinates  several  subordinate  bulldozers. 
Because  the  environment  changes,  global  plans  may  be  put  in  jeopardy  even  if 
agents  are  making  progress  that,  from  their  local  perspective,  is  well  within  their 
envelopes.  Figure  4  illustrates  plan  envelopes  as  they  are  currently  implemented 
in  Phoenix:  The  leftmost  illustration  represents  the  current  state  of  the  fire,  its 
projected  boundaries  after  one  and  two  hours,  and  the  firelines  that  three 
bulldozers  are  expected  to  cut.  By  projecting  where  the  fire  will  be,  then  adding 
some  slack  time,  the  fireboss  anticipates  that  the  last  of  these  lines  will  be  cut  an 
hour  before  the  fire  reaches  it.  On  the  right  of  Figure  4,  we  see  the  actual  progress 
of  the  fire:  After  one  hour,  it  has  grown  less  than  expected,  so  the  amount  of  slack 
time  grows  (bottom  of  Figure  4)  and  the  plan  stays  well  within  its  one  hour  slack 
time  envelope.  But  during  the  next  hour,  the  fire  grows  more  rapidly  than 
expected;  so  rapidly,  in  fact,  that  the  slack  time  envelope  is  violated.  Sometime 
during  this  interval,  the  fireboss  will  check  the  plan  envelope  and  discover  that  it 
is  violated.  It  then  replans  and  typically  sends  one  or  more  additional  bulldozers  to 
help  out. 


23 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


Figure  4.  A  plan  envelope  for  maintaining  slack  time. 


The  Utility  of  Envelopes.  A  planner  can  represent  the  progress  of  its  plan  by 
transitions  within  the  plan’s  envelopes.  Progress,  failures  and  potential  failures 
are  clearly  seen  from  one’s  position  with  respect  to  envelopes,  whereas  this 
information  is  not  always  apparent  from  one's  position  in  the  environment. 

Envelopes  function  as  early  warning  devices  in  two  ways.  First,  explicit  warning 
envelopes  alert  the  planner  to  developing  problems.  Second,  failure  envelopes  can 
tell  an  agent  it  has  failed  long  before  its  allocated  time  has  elapsed.  In  Figure  3,  for 
example,  the  agent  knows  it  has  failed  as  soon  as  it  crosses  the  envelope.  A  third 
kind  of  early  warning  has  yet  to  be  implemented:  Just  as  a  planner  can  project  the 
course  of  events  in  its  environment,  so  it  can  project  its  progress  within  its 
envelope  and,  particularly,  when  an  envelope  might  be  violated.  A  simple 
projection  method  is  extrapolation.  For  example,  if  we  checked  the  envelope  in 
Figure  4  after  75  minutes  we  would  see  a  “downward”  trend.  By  linear 
extrapolation  we  could  estimate  when  the  envelope  would  be  violated.  Of  course, 
the  downward  trend  may  reverse,  or  level  out.  But  sometimes  it  will  be  worthwhile 
to  have  the  projected  time  of  envelope  violation  despite  its  uncertainty. 

Envelopes  integrate  agents  at  different  levels  of  a  command  hierarchy:  A  fireboss 
agent  formulates  a  goal  and  a  corresponding  envelope,  and  gives  them  to  a 
subordinate  bulldozer  agent  with  the  following  instructions:  “Here  is  the  goal  I 
want  you  to  achieve.  I  don't  care  how  you  do  it,  and  I  don't  want  to  hear  from  you 
unless  you  achieve  the  goal  or  violate  the  envelope.”  The  bulldozer  then  works 
independently,  not  monitored  by  the  fireboss.  It  figures  out  where  to  go,  how  to 
avoid  obstacles,  and  how  to  keep  clear  of  the  fire,  until  its  goal  is  achieved  or  its 
envelope  violated.  Meanwhile,  the  fireboss  is  free  to  think  about  other  agents,  other 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


goals,  or  to  replan  if  necessary.  Envelopes  grant  subordinate  agents  a  kind  of 
autonomy,  and  grant  superordinate  agents  the  opportunity  tn  ignore  their 
subordinates  until  envelopes  are  violated. 

We  have  yet  to  develop  cognitive  scheduling  mechanisms  to  take  full  advantage  of 
envelopes.  The  design  of  these  mechanisms  is  motivated  by  the  following 
questions:  How  often  should  envelopes  be  checked?  Should  we  adopt  a  fixed 
interval  or  a  dynamic  one,  and  if  the  latter,  what  execution  methods  will 
determine  when  to  check  next?  When  should  agents  project  envelope  violations 
and  how  should  they  use  the  projections?  Given  that  checking  a  plan  envelope,  or 
projecting  progress  with  respect  to  it,  may  involve  collecting  and  integrating 
information  from  the  environment  and  all  the  participating  agents,  the  cognitive 
overhead  of  of  these  activities  can  be  considerable  and  must  be  carefully  scheduled. 


5.  Methodological  Issues. 

Our  overriding  research  goal  is  to  develop  a  sound  basis  for  the  design  of  AI 
agents.  AI  is  a  kind  of  design.  We  don’t  design  graphics,  or  VLSI  circuits,  or 
mechanical  devices:  we  design  intelligent  agents.  The  agents  are  evaluated  by  how 
they  behave.  Their  behavior  is  determined  by  their  environments  and  their 
architectures.  Once  we  adopt  this  view,  we  see  immediately  that  we  do  not  know 
enough  about  the  relationships  between  agent  architectures,  behaviors,  and 
environments  (the  corners  of  the  behavioral  ecology  triangle  in  Fig.  1)  to  design 
intelligent  agents  in  a  principled  way.  For  example,  we  cannot  even  precisely 
define  the  characteristics  of  environments  (Sec.  2.2),  much  less  behaviors.  And  we 
cannot  answer  the  question,  “How  would  the  behavior  of  this  AI  program,  in  this 
environment,  change  if  you  change  its  architecture  this  way:  ...  ?”  But  until  we 
can  answer  this  question,  AI  system  design  will  remain  ad  hoc. 

In  fact,  design  is  one  of  six  research  activities  implied  by  the  behavioral  ecology 
model.  Here  is  the  complete  list: 


Prediction:  How  will  behavior  be  affected  by  changing  the  architecture  of  the 
agent  or  its  environment?  For  example,  how  will  behavior  be  affected  by 
changing  the  size  of  short-term  memory,  or  by  changing  the  mechanism  by 
which  long  term  memory  is  accessed?  How  will  behavior  be  affected  if  the 
environment  "speeds  up,"  so  that  events  that  took  N  seconds  now  take  N/2 
seconds? 

Explanation:  Why  does  a  particular  behavior  (presumably  unexpected)  emerge 
from  the  interaction  between  an  agent  and  its  environment?  For  example, 
why  does  an  agent  that  combines  long-term,  goal-directed  behavior  with 
short-term  reactive  behavior  sometimes  exhibit  something  like  an  approach- 
avoidance  conflict — dashing  first  toward  a  goal,  then  away  from  it,  but 
getting  nowhere  in  the  long  run? 


25 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


Design.  What  architectures  will  produce  a  particular  set  of  behaviors  in 
particular  environments?  For  example,  what  architectures  will  enable  an 
agent  to  respond  to  events  in  the  environment  that  occur  at  very  different  time 
scales? 

Environment  analysis:  What  aspects  of  the  environment  most  constrain  agent 
design?  What  is  our  model  of  the  environment? 

Generalization:  Whenever  we  predict  the  behavior  of  one  agent  in  one 
environment,  we  should  ideally  be  predicting  similar  behaviors  for 
agents  with  related  architectures  in  related  environments.  In  other 
words,  our  theories  should  generalize  over  architectures, 
environmental  conditions,  tasks,  and  behaviors. 

Functional  relationships:  What  knowledge  do  we  need  to  answer 
questions  in  these  classes?  What  are  the  functional  relationships 
between  the  architecture  of  an  agent  and  its  behavior? 


Both  the  behavioral  ecology  model  and  the  S/E  model  of  Rosenschein,  Hayes-Roth, 
and  Erman  (see  their  paper  in  this  volume)  explicitly  acknowledge  the 
relationships  between  architecture  the  environment,  and  behavior.  Rosenschein  et 
al.  denote  the  architecture  and  environment  S  and  E,  respectively;  and 
characterize  behavior  as  a  sequence  of  state  changes  called  a  run.  Furthermore, 
Rosenschein  et  al.  seem  to  implicitly  subsume,  in  what  they  call  measurement 
and  evaluation,  some  of  the  research  activities  above.  But  because  neither  the  S/E 
model  nor  the  behavioral  ecology  model  make  predictions,  it  is  premature  to 
compare  them  except  to  note  some  apparent  differences  in  emphasis. 

Rosenschein  et  al.  view  the  “S/E  boundary”  as  flexible,  so  that  sometimes  the 
environment  can  be  made  responsible  for  an  activity  that,  in  other  circumstances, 
we  might  require  of  the  agent.  For  example,  with  the  general  vision  problem 
currently  unsolved,  we  might  construct  an  environment  that  “preprocesses” 
sensory  data  for  the  agent,  thus  moving  the  S/E  boundary  inward,  toward  the 
agent,  bypassing  the  need  for  sophisticated  sensors.  This  example  suggests  a 
small  apparent  difference  between  the  S/E  model  and  the  behavioral  ecology 
model:  whereas  the  S/E  model  seems  to  assume  a  simulated  environment,  the 
behavioral  ecology  model  does  not.  Although  the  Phoenix  project  uses  a  simulated 
environment,  our  principal  research  tasks  (prediction,  design,  explanation,  etc.) 
do  not  presume  a  simulated  environment.  It  isn’t  clear  yet  whether  the  principal 
research  tasks  of  Rosenschein  et  al.  presume  a  simulated  environment. 


This  raises  the  methodological  question  of  whether  one  should  use  simulations  at 
all.  Some  researchers  insist  that  the  subtleties  of  real  environments  are  “lost  in 


translation”  to  simulated  environments.  This  is  to  some  extent  a  straw  man, 
because  we  don’t  view  simulations  as  accurate  representations  of  the  real  world. 
(In  fact,  we  recently  got  into  trouble  by  claiming  that  the  Phoenix  environment  is 
an  accurate  simulation  of  forest  fires.4)  But  it  is  important  to  distinguish  realism 


4See  Letters  to  the  Editor,  Al  Magazine,  Vol.  10  No.  4. 


26 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


and  accuracy.  Realism  is  necessary  for  our  research;  accuracy  is  not.  Here  are 
some  examples  of  the  distinction:  In  a  realistic  simulation,  processes  become 
uncontrollable  after  a  period  of  time;  in  an  accurate  simulation,  the  period  of  time 
is  the  same  as  it  is  in  the  real  world.  In  a  realistic  simulation,  agents  have  limited 
fields  of  view;  in  an  accurate  simulation,  agents’  fields  of  view  are  the  same  as 
they  are  in  the  real  world.  In  a  realistic  simulation,  the  probabilities  of 
environmental  events  such  as  wind  shifts  are  summarized  by  statistical 
distributions;  in  an  accurate  simulation,  the  distributions  are  compiled  from  real- 
world  data.  When  possible,  we  use  accurate  data;  for  example,  in  Phoenix  we  use 
Defense  Mapping  Agency  data  of  elevation,  ground  cover,  and  so  on,  and  the  fire 
dynamics  are  derived  from  U.S.  Forest  Service  manuals  (NWCG  Fireline 
Handbook,  1985).  But  the  goal  of  our  research  is  not  to  accurately  simulate  forest 
fires  in  Yellowstone  National  Park.  It  is  to  understand  the  design  requirements  of 
agents  in  realistic  environments — en  'ironments  in  which  processes  get  out  of 
hand,  resources  are  limited,  time  passes,  and  information  is  sometimes  noisy  and 
limited. 

With  this  in  mind,  we  see  that  simulations  have  several  advantages: 

Control.  Simulators  are  highly  parameterized,  so  we  can  experiment  with 
many  environments.  For  example,  we  can  change  the  rate  at  which  wind 
direction  shifts,  or  speed  up  the  rate  at  which  fire  burns,  to  test  the 
robustness  of  real-time  planning  mechanisms.  Most  important,  from  the 
standpoint  of  our  work  on  real-time  planning,  is  the  fact  that  we  can 
manipulate  the  amount  of  time  an  agent  is  allowed  to  think,  relative  to  the 
rate  at  which  the  environment  changes,  thus  exerting  (or  decreasing)  the 
time  pressure  on  the  agent. 

Repeatability.  We  can  guarantee  identical  initial  conditions  from  one  "run"  to 
the  next;  we  can  "play  back"  some  histories  of  environmental  conditions 
exactly,  while  selectively  changing  others. 

Replication.  Simulators  are  portable,  and  so  enable  replications  and  extensions 
of  experiments  at  different  laboratories.  They  enable  direct  comparisons  of 
results,  which  would  otherwise  depend  on  uncertain  parallels  between  the 
environments  in  which  the  results  were  collected. 

Variety.  Simulators  allow  us  to  create  environments  that  don't  occur 
naturally,  or  that  aren’t  accessible  or  observable. 

Interfaces.  We  can  construct  interfaces  to  the  simulator  that  allow  us  to  defer 
questions  we'd  have  to  address  if  our  agents  interacted  with  the  physical 
world.,  such  as  the  vision  problem.  We  can  also  construct  interfaces  to  show 
things  that  aren’t  easily  observed  in  the  physical  world;  for  example,  we  can 
show  the  different  views  that  agents  have  of  the  fire,  their  radius  of  view, 
their  destinations,  the  paths  they  are  trying  to  follow,  and  so  on.  The  Phoenix 
environment  graphics  make  it  e,  *y  to  see  what  agents  are  doing  and  why. 


Let  us  return  now  to  the  comparison  of  the  S/E  and  behavioral  ecology  models.  We 
noted  that  the  former  model  represents  behavior  as  “runs,”  sequences  of  state 
transitions  (or  as  measures  over  runs),  whereas  the  behavioral  ecology  model  is 


27 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


inspecific  about  how  to  represent  behavior.  On  the  other  hand,  the  behavioral 
ecology  model  is  quite  specific  about  the  causal  relationships  that  hold  among  the 
environment,  the  agent  architecture,  and  the  agent’s  behavior.  The  behavioral 
ecology  model  comes  from  biology;  it  regards  the  architecture  as  analogous  to  the 
genotype  and  the  behavior  as  analogous  to  the  phenotype.  And  it  assumes  that 
selection  operates  on  the  phenotype.  Thus,  there  is  no  direct  causal  link  between 
an  agent’s  environment  and  its  architecture;  rather,  the  environment  ensures 
that  behaviors  are  differentially  rewarded,  so  the  architecture  must  be  modified  to 
produce  “good”  behaviors.  This,  then,  is  what  we  mean  by  a  good  architecture — 
one  that  produces  behaviors  that  are  good  in  a  particular  environment. 

It’s  important  to  know  whether  such  behaviors  can  be  generated  by  design,  that  is, 
by  intentional  modifications  to  the  architecture,  or  whether  they  must  evolve  by 
search.  Advocates  of  emergent  behavior  often  take  the  latter  view.  They  say  that 
one  cannot  generate  the  phenotype  from  the  genotype;  one  cannot  predict  how  a 
moderately  complex  architecture  will  behave.  This  has  important  practical  and 
methodological  implications  for  IRTPS.  Do  we  build  IRTPS  systems  "top  down,”  by 
assembling  components  that  are  predicted  to  behave  in  particular  ways,  and 
damn  the  emergent  behaviors?  Or  do  we  build  them  “bottom  up,”  by  assembling 
components  incrementally  and  empirically,  waiting  for  desired  (and  undesirable) 
behaviors  to  emerge?  In  fact,  we  mix  the  approaches  in  proportions  determined  by 
the  degree  to  which  behaviors  can  be  predicted  from  architectures  (or  components 
of  architectures).  Moreover,  this  degree  of  predictability  is  determined  in  part  by 
the  desired  precision  or  scale  of  the  predictions.  If  you  want  to  know  the  precise 
number  of  cpu  seconds  that  a  process  will  run,  you  are  probably  out  of  luck.  But  if 
you  want  to  know  the  upper  bound  runtime,  it  may  be  possible.  You  probably  can’t 
know  the  exact  location  of  a  fire  ten  minutes  from  now,  but  you  can  certainly  draw 
a  circle  that  has  a  high  probability  of  circumscribing  the  fire.  Thus,  the  question  of 
whether  behaviors  can  be  generated  by  design  depends  intimately  on  how  precisely 
we  want  to  specify  and  predict  the  behaviors. 


This  brings  us  to  a  final  methodological  issue:  evaluation.  Let  us  first  ask,  What  is 
being  evaluated?  Whether  an  architecture  exhibits  “timely”  behavior?  or  exhibits  a 
good  tradeoff  among  several  desired  behaviors?  Whether  the  behaviors  are 
exhibited  in  a  sufficiently  wide  range  of  environments?  Whether  we  can  predict 
when  the  behaviors  will  and  will  not  occur?  Whether  we  understand  the 


functional  relationships  between  architecture  and  behavior  well  enough  to  design 
an  agent  that  will  exhibit  desired  behaviors  in  a  new  environment?  All  of  these 
should  be  evaluated.  More  pointedly,  evaluation  cannot  stop  with  the 
demonstration  that  a  system  “works,”  however  sophisticated  the  demonstration! 
"We  must  lake  at  leaBl  two  more  steps.  We  must  attempt  to  show  why  the  solution 
works  (or  doesn’t  work).  This  is  uncommon,  but  essential  if  we  are  to  make 
progress  as  an  engineering  field.  The  third  step  is  to  show  why  any  solution  with 
such-and-such  abstract  characteristics  must  work  (or  not  work).  This  requires 
models  of  the  behaviors  and  environments  under  study. 


28 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


5.1  An  Example  of  Design  for  IRTPS 

We  will  briefly  illustrate  the  previous  points,  and  the  terminology  in  Section  2.2, 
with  the  example  of  the  design  of  Phoenix’s  cognitive  scheduler.  It’s  current 
cognitive  scheduler  is  very  weak.  We  are  designing  another  one  that  achieves 
many  of  the  behavioral  goals  of  IRTPS.  In  the  terms  of  Section  2.2,  this  seems  to 
imply  that  we  should  list  the  problems  and  inherent  problems,  describe  the 
relevent  ECs  and  ACs,  and  after  analyzing  how  the  problems  arise  out  of  the 
interactions  between  ECs  and  ACs,  we  propose  solutions  and  solution  realizations. 
In  fact,  this  seems  to  be  an  idealization.  Instead  we  start  with  an  informal 
description  of  some  problems,  and  then  hunt  around  for  ECs  and  ACs  that  we 
believe  account  for  the  problems.  The  result  is  a  formal  description  of  the  problems 
in  terms  of  ECs  and  ACs.  Then  we  generate  solutions  and  solution  realizations. 

Here  is  an  example  of  the  first  steps. 

Informal  description:  The  plan  selection  mechanism  may  take  too  long  to  find  a 
plan.  As  a  result,  the  fire  may  burn  too  much  area,  or  may  become  uncontrollable. 
(Note  that  this  is  intentionally  vague,  to  show  how  we  formalize  the  problem 
description  in  terms  of  ECs  and  ACs.) 

Environment  characteristics:  What  is  going  on  in  the  environment  that  could 
contribute  to  the  problem,  as  informally  described  above?  Let’s  concentrate  on  one 
thing,  the  spread  of  the  fire.  We  want  to  model  this  in  a  way  that  allows  us  to  firm 
up  the  informal  problem  description.  Suppose  we  model  the  spread  of  the  fire  as 
an  exponential  process  analogous  to  compound  interest  and  population  growth. 
Then,  the  perimeter  of  a  fire  after  t  time  units  is: 

p  =  pi(l  +  r)fc 

Here,  p  is  the  perimeter  of  the  fire,  pi  is  the  initial  perimeter  of  the  fire,  r  is  the 
percentage  increase  in  the  fire  perimeter  every  time  unit,  and  t  is  the  number  of 
time  units  that  have  elapsed. 

Architecture  characteristics.  For  now,  we  will  list  just  two  characteristics:  It 
takes  a  period  of  time,  d,  to  generate  a  plan  and  get  the  bulldozers  to  the  fire  to 
begin  implementing  the  plan.  And  once  at  the  fireline,  bulldozers  dig  at  a  constant 
rate.These  are  both  oversimplifications,  but  useful,  as  we  shall  see. 

Now  we  can  say  more  formally  what  the  problem  is: 


29 


Figure  5 


The  curved  line  represents  p,  the  length  of  the  perimeter,  as  a  function  of  time.  It 
begins  not  at  the  origin,  but  at  a  point  that  represents  the  initial  perimeter  of  the 
fire  (e.g.,  its  size  when  detected).  We  assume  for  simplicity  that  the  steepness  of 
the  curve  is  described  by  one  parameter,  r,  which  captures  factors  such  as  wind 
speed  and  fuel  type.  Obviously,  a  more  complex  model  could  be  generated  if 
needed.  After  some  delay,  d,  a  plan  is  detected  and  some  bulldozers  are  dispatched 
and  then  arrive  at  the  fire.  They  begin  cutting  fireline  at  a  constant  rate,  so  the 
length  of  the  controlled  perimeter  increases  at  a  linear  rate  determined  by  the 
number  of  bulldozers.  We  show  two  possibilities,  case  A  and  case  B..  In  case  A 
(solid  line)  the  bulldozers  arrive  at  the  fire  sooner,  and  in  greater  numbers  than  in 
case  B  (dashed  fine).  In  fact,  in  case  A  the  fire  is  controlled,  whereas  in  case  B  it  is 
not.  We  know  this  because  the  line  for  case  A  intersects  the  line  for  the  perimeter, 
which  means  that  at  some  point,  the  length  of  the  controlled  perimeter  equals  the 
length  of  the  fire  perimeter;  or,  all  the  fire  perimeter  is  controlled.  In  case  B,  this 
doesn’t  happen. 

Before  we  can  rephrase  the  informal  problem  description  more  precisely,  we  need 
to  know  what  affects  the  parameters  represented  in  the  diagram  above.  This  will 
tell  us  what  we  control  as  designers,  what  the  system  itself  controls  as  an 
autonomous  agent,  and  what  the  environment  alone  controls. 


30 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


p’  —  This  could  be  reduced  if  the  fire  was  sighted  earlier.  The  lower 
limit  on  the  speed  with  which  the  fire  is  sighted  is  an  AC  that  we 
control.  It  depends  on  things  like  how  big  a  fire  must  be  before  it  is 
noticed,  how  often  the  watchtowers  look,  how  long  it  takes  them  to 
report  their  findings,  how  long  it  takes  the  fireboss  to  notice,  etc.  Most 
of  these  ACs  have  lower  limits  that  we  control,  and  actual  values  that 
the  agent  controls. 

r  —  This  parameter,  which  determines  the  steepness  with  which  the 
perimeter  increases,  is  an  EC. 

d  —  as  with  p’,we  control  the  lower  limit  on  d,  and  the  actual  value  is 
controlled  by  the  agent. 

slopes  of  “controlled  perimeter"  lines  —  this  has  an  upper  limit  that  we 
control  (by  controlling  the  number  of  available  bulldozers)  and  an 
actual  value  that  the  agent  controls,  by  controlling  the  number  of 
bulldozers  committed  to  the  fire.  . 


At  this  point,  we  can  begin  to  give  formal  descriptions  to  problems.  For  example, 
what  is  a  deadline ?  In  general,  a  deadline  is  a  point  at  which  the  value  of  problem 
solving  changes,  usually  downward.  Consider  a  hard  deadline  for  the  plan 
selection  process.  In  the  previous  diagram,  this  is  represented  as  an  upper  limit 
on  d.  Consider  three  cases,  denoted  c,  d,  and  e  in  the  following  diagram: 


In  case  c,  the  slope  of  the  “controlled  perimeter”  line  is  shallow  because,  say,  it 
corresponds  to  a  plan  that  involves  only  two  bulldozers.  Moreover,  the  deadline  for 
the  institution  of  the  plan  has  already  passed.  You  can  see  this  by  shifting  the  line 
for  case  c  to  be  tangent  to  the  “perimeter”  line.  By  the  same  operation  you  can  see 
that,  for  case  d  to  succeed,  the  bulldozers  (more  of  them  than  in  case  c,  hence  the 
steeper  slope)  must  be  at  work  before  tl;  and  for  case  e  to  work,  they  must  be  busy 
by  t2.  Any  delay  longer  than  tl  or  t2  shifts  the  respective  lines  to  the  right, 
ensuring  that  they  will  never  intersect  the  perimeter  line  and  the  fire  will  never  be 
controlled. 


31 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


Now  we  can  be  more  precise  about  the  problem:  For  given  values  of  r  and  p’ 
(assuming  the  fire  has  just  been  sighted),  find  a  plan  that  is  expected  to  contain 
the  fire  and  that  can  be  instituted  before  its  deadline. 

Note  that  the  original  problem,  a  failure  to  get  plans  ready  in  time,  has  been 
formalized  in  the  context  of  an  agent  model  and  an  environment  model.  Moreover, 
a  common  IRTPS  term  has  been  defined  in  these  contexts.  One  might  argue  that, 
in  the  process,  we  have  taken  a  nice,  general  term  like  “deadline”  and  replaced  it 
with  something  that  is  so  specific  to  Phoenix  as  to  be  unusable.  We  believe  we  have 
done  exactly  the  opposite.  Not  only  have  we  made  a  vague  term  precise,  but  we 
have  also  identified  a  very  general  functional  relationship  or  “rule”  associated 
with  the  term:  Imagine  that  the  perimeter  of  the  fire  grows  linearly,  not 
exponentially.  Then  the  notion  of  deadline  illustrated  in  Figure  5  would  not  exist. 

If  a  process  F  grows  linearly,  and  another  linearly-growing  process  B  is  trying  to 
control  it,  then  a  comparison  of  the  growth  rates  of  F  and  B  will  tell  us  whether  B 
will  succeed,  and  when  it  will  succeed  (assuming  the  growth  rates  don’t  change). 
If  B  grows  faster  than  F,  then  it  will  control  F  eventually.  The  only  effect  of 
delaying  the  onset  of  B  is  to  delay  the  control  of  F.  On  the  other  hand,  if  F  grows 
superlinearly,  as  in  Figure  5,  and  B  grows  linearly,  then  a  delay  does  not  merely 
delay  the  event  in  which  B  controls  F,  it  may  make  that  event  impossible  (as  shown 
by  the  dashed  line  in  Figure  5).  we  believe  this  is  a  very  general  phenomenon,  and 
thus  a  very  general  interpretation  of  “deadline”:  A  deadline  is  the  point  at  which  a 
linear  process  becomes  incapable  of  catching — at  any  time  in  the  future — a 
superlinear  one.  Obviously  this  can  be  generalized  to  functions  of  other  orders — a 
sublinear  process  trying  to  catch  a  linear  one,  and  so  on. 

As  we  evaluate  the  Phoenix  project,  we  will  certainly  ask  whether  it  plans  in  a 
timely  way,  whether  it  meets  deadlines,  balances  cognitive  load,  exhibits  graceful 
degradation,  and  so  on.  But  the  most  telling  evaluation  will  be  whether  we  have 
been  able  to  engage  in  the  specialization-generalization  process  illustrated  above: 
Whether  we  gave  terms  such  as  “deadline”  precise  interpretations  in  terms  of 
Phoenix  ECs  and  ACs  and  then  generalized  them  again,  as  we  did  when  we  said  a 
deadline  is  a  point  at  which  one  process  becomes  incapable  of  catching  another. 


32 


Phoenix.  Cohen,  Howe  and  Hart.  November  1989. 


References: 


Cohen,  P.  R.,  Greenberg,  M.  L.,  Hart,  D.M.,  Howe,  A.  E.  1989.Trial  by 
Fire:  Understanding  the  Design  Requirements  for  Agents  in  Complex 
Environments.  AI  Magazine,  Vol.  10,  No.  3.  pp.  32-48.  Fall,  1989. 

Cohen,  P.R.  and  Howe,  A.  E.  1988.  How  Evaluation  Guides  AI 
Research.  AI  Magazine  9(4)  35 — 43. 

NWCG  Fireline  Handbook  410-1,  National  Wildfire  Coordinating  Group, 
Boise,  Idaho,  Nov  1985. 

Rosenschein,  S.  J.,  Hayes-Roth,  B.,  and  Erman,  L.  D.  Notes  on 
Methodologies  for  Evaluating  IRTPS  Systems.  In  this  volume. 


33 


A f>p£rt<^/x  B 


The  Phoenix  Testbed 

(Draft  Version] 

Michael  Greenberg  David  L.  Westbrook 

February  21,  1990 


*We  wish  to  thank  Dave  Ilart  and  Scott  Anderson  for  heir  skillfull  proofreading  and  helpful  stylistic 
contributions. 


Contents 


1  Introduction  1 

1.1  Simulation  and  Time .  1 

1.2  The  Fire-system  .  2 

2  Tasks  3 

2.1  Tasks  and  the  Scheduler .  3 

2.2  Defining  and  Using  Tasks .  *1 

2.2.1  Defining  CPU-time  Tasks .  5 

2.2.2  Defining  Periodic  Tasks .  5 

2.2.3  Defining  Explicit-time  Tasks  .  5 

2.2.4  The  Task  Life  Cycle .  6 

2.2.5  Managing  Time .  7 

2.3  A  Real  Example  . S 

2.4  Input/Output .  10 

2.4.1  I/O  in  Periodic  and  Explicit-time  Tasks .  11 

2.4.2  I/O  fro*-  CPU-time  Tasks .  11 

2.5  Debugging .  11 

3  Task  Reference  Manual  13 

4  Phoenix  Task  Scheduler  IT 

4.1  Scheduler  Implementation . 17 

4.2  Top  Level  Scheduler  Loop .  18 

4.3  When  Processes  Swap  Out .  18 

4.4  Portability  Issues .  19 

4.5  Errors  and  Debugging .  20 

4.6  Programming  Interface . 20 

5  Scheduler  Reference  Manual  21 

0  Map  23 

6.1  Map  Basics .  23 

6.1.1  Units  and  Positions  .  23 

6.1.2  Grid  Arrays .  23 

6.2  The  Map  Representation .  24 

6.2.1  Ground  Cover .  24 

6.2.2  Elevation .  24 

6.2.3  Roads,  Rivers  and  Buildings .  25 

6.2.4  Static  Features .  26 

6.2.5  Dynamic  Features .  27 

i 


ii  CONTENTS 

6.3  Fire  .  27 

6.4  Creating  and  Editing  Firemaps .  28 

6.5  The  Real  World  Fireinap  .  29 

6.6  Geometry . 29 

7  Map  Reference  Manual  31 

7.1  Firemap  Flavor .  31 

7.2  Map  Definitions .  32 

7.2.1  Elevation .  32 

7.2.2  Fire  States  .  32 

7.2.3  Fire  Info .  32 

7.2.4  Features .  33 

7.2.5  Ground  Cover .  34 

7.3  Map  Access  Functions  and  Methods .  34 

7.3.1  Elevation .  35 

7.3.2  Features . 35 

7.3.3  Ground  Cover .  36 

7.3.4  Fire .  36 

7.4  Other  Firemap  Variables  and  Routines .  37 

7.5  Grids .  38 

7.6  Vertices  and  Feature  Edges .  38 

7.7  Conversion  Functions .  39 

7.8  Geometry  Functions .  39 

7.9  Iteration  Constructs .  45 

8  Interface  47 

8.1  Adding  New  Commands .  47 

8.2  I/O  and  Fireinaps  .  47 

8.3  Icons .  47 

8.4  Defining  New  Desktop  Windows  .  48 

9  Interface  Reference  Manual  49 

10  Fire  Simulation  57 

11  Fire  Simulation  Reference  Manual  59 

12  Miscellaneous  Functions  Reference  Manual  01 

A  File  Organization  05 

B  System  Loading  and  Maintenance  Reference  Manual  07 

Glossary  09 


Index 


72 


Chapter  1 


Introduction 


The  Phoenix  testbed1  contains  four  components:  A  task  model,  a  map  representation,  a  user  interface 
and  afire  simulation,  in  this  document,  each  component  is  described  conceptually,  what  is  it  and  how 
does  it  work,  and  functionally,  how  is  the  component  used. 

The  appendices  contain  a  description  of  the  file  organization,  and  installation  and  maintenance  in¬ 
structions. 

In  a  view,  the  testbed  is  an  environment  for  simulating  processes  that  need  to  be  synchronized  in  time . 
Each  process  is  called  a  task.  In  addition  to  tasks,  the  testbed  provides  a  topological  representation 
of  the  world.  This  map  contains  information  about  vegetation,  roads,  rivers  and  buildings.  A  user 
interface  and  a  forest  fire  simulation  are  also  provided. 


1.1  Simulation  and  Time 

Phoenix  provides  for  the  simulation  of  the  world  by  allowing  the  user  to  define  tasks  which  “run  the 
world.”  By  maintaining  a  global  (between  all  tasks)  notion  of  time,  the  system  is  able  to  control  each 
task  to  make  sure  that  the  tasks  stay  synchronized.  Thus,  each  task  can  implement  a  part  of  the 
world,  and  Phoenix  makes  sure  all  the  parts  are  kept  up  to  date.  Tasks  communicate  via  shared  data 
structures  and  system  defined  synchronization  methods. 

A  simple  example  will  make  this  clear.  Suppose  we  want  to  simulate  a  world  that  has  forest  fires 
and  firefighters.  We  can  define  a  task  which  burns  the  fire  (the  simulator),  and  one  task  for  each 
firefighter.  The  tasks  must  be  synchronized  by  some  global  notion  of  time.  In  a  five  minute  period, 
for  instance,  the  fire  can  burn  only  so  far  and  a  firefighter  can  only  do  a  certain  amount  of  problem 
solving.  The  tasks  interact  by  modifying  a  global  data  structure,  in  this  case  the  map  of  the  world. 
The  simulator  burns  things,  and  the  firefighters  try  to  contain  the  fires. 

The  Phoemz  Scheduler  is  responsible  for  keeping  tasks  synchronized.  The  global  clock  is  called 
simulation- lime.  Each  task  must  provide  a  method  which  specifies  how  simulation* time  passes  as 
it  (the  task)  executes.  There  are  three  distinct  types  of  time  in  the  system: 

Simulation  Time  This  is  the  global  shared  clock  to  which  each  task  is  synchronized. 

Task  Time  This  is  the  time  that  each  task  thinks  it  is.  Imagine  that  each  task  has  a  watch. 

CPU  time  This  refers  to  epu  time  for  a  single  task. 

!The  testbed  is  implemented  in  Common  Lisp  on  the  Explorer  II,  a  high-performance  standalone  Lisp  workstation. 


1 


2 


CHAPTER  1.  INTRODUCTION 


Unless  otherwise  specified,  all  time  units  are  measured  in  internal  time  units.  Functions  are  provided  to 
convert  between  time  units  (for  example,  minutes-^internal-time  and  internal~time->seconds). 


1.2  The  Fire-system 

While  Phoenix  is  running,  one  object  handles  all  requests  by  tasks,  namely,  the  current  instance  of 
the  fire-system  flavor.  The  fire-system  flavor  contains  the  user  interface,  task  scheduler,  sets  of 
tasks  and  the  real  world  representation.  It  also  provides  numerous  methods  for  manipulating  those 
objects.  The  function  fire-system  returns  the  current  instance  of  the  fire-system  flavor,  which  we 
will  call  that  the  current  fire  system. 


Chapter  2 


Tasks 


Tasks  are  the  organizing  component  of  the  Phoenix  testbed.  A  task  is  a  process  plus  a  time-keeping 
mechanism.  Each  task  must  specify  how  simulation-time  passes  as  the  task’s  process  executes.  For 
example,  a  task  may  say  “One  second  of  cpu  time  corresponds  to  five  minutes  of  simulation  time.” 
Three  types  of  tasks  exist;  they  differ  by  the  time-keeping  mechanisms  they  use. 

CPU-time  tasks*  In  a  cpu-time  task,  simulation-time  is  a  function  of  cpu  time.  When  you  define 
such  a  task,  you  specify  the  ratio  of  simulation  time  to  cpu  time.  As  the  task  runs,  the  Phoenix 
Scheduler  keeps  track  of  time  appropriately.  For  example,  the  firefighting  agents  “think”  via 
lisp  code,  and  their  “thinking  speed”  is  set  by  some  ratio  of  simulation  time  to  cpu  time,  so  that 
N  cpu  seconds  of  lisp  execution  is  taken  to  be  C  •  N  seconds  of  simulated  real  time. 

Explicit- time  tasks.  An  explicit-time  task  is  responsible  for  explicitly  telling  the  scheduler  how 
much  time  passed  while  it  ran.  For  example,  if  there  is  a  task  to  move  an  agent  in  the  world, 
that  task  computes  time  as  a  function  of  speed  and  distance. 

Periodic  tasks.  A  periodic  task  runs  at  a  fixed  time  interval.  This  interval  is  the  task’s  period. 


2.1  Tasks  and  the  Scheduler 

The  tasks  are  interleaved  on  the  cpu  to  simulate  parallelism.  The  Phoenix  Scheduler  is  responsible  for 
allocating  each  task  the  appropriate  amount  of  cpu  time.  The  basic  control  structure  of  the  scheduler 
is: 

1.  Select  the  task  that  should  be  executed  next. 

2.  Start  the  task  on  the  cpu. 

3.  When  the  task  relinquishes  control  of  the  cpu,  update  its  task-time.  In  general,  cpu-time  tasks 
relinquish  control  whenever  there  is  a  cpu  timer  interrupt  (on  the  Explorer,  this  means  a  task 
gets  at  most  one  cpu  second  before  relinquishing  control).  Explicit-time  and  periodic  tasks 
explicitly  return  control  to  the  task  scheduler. 

4.  Repeat. 

The  scheduler  updates  each  task’s  task-time  by  an  amount  computed  based  on  the  task’s  type.  A 
simple  example  should  illustrate  this. 

Suppose  there  are  four  tasks. 


3 


4 


CHAPTER  2.  TASKS 


Taski  is  a  periodic  task  that  runs  once  every  three  minutes. 

Task2  is  an  explicit-time  task. 

Tasks  is  a  epu-time  task  that  runs  at  5  minules/cpu-second. 

Task±  is  a  epu-time  task  that  runs  at  10  minutes/cpu-second. 

When  the  simulation  begins,  the  task-time  for  each  task  is  zero.  Following  is  a  chronology  of  what 
happens: 

Task\  executes  at  task-time  0  minutes.  (This  means  that  from  the  task’s  point  of  view,  0 
minutes  has  elapsed  since  the  simulation  began).  After  it  is  done,  the  scheduler  updates 
the  task- time  for  Task\  to  be  3  minutes. 

Tasks  executes  at  task-time  0  minutes.  When  it  relinquishes  control,  it  reports  that  it 
used  7  minutes  of  simulation-time.  The  scheduler  updates  its  task-time  to  be  7  minutes. 

Note  that  it  is  now  “out  of  sync”  with  Taski  by  4  minutes  and  Tasks  and  Task ^  by  7 
minutes. 

Tasks  executes  at  task-time  0  minutes.  After  using  1  epu  second,  it  is  interrupted  and  the 
scheduler  updates  its  task-time  to  be  5  minutes  (1  cpu-second  *  5  minutes/cpu-second). 

Taski  executes  at  task-time  0  minutes.  After  using  .8  epu  seconds,  it  is  interrupted  and  the 
scheduler  updates  its  task-time  to  be  8  minutes  (.8  cpu-seconds  *  10  minutes/cpu-second). 

The  scheduler  maintains  a  queue  of  tasks  sorted  by  task-time.  The  task  chosen  to  execute  next  is  the 
task  at  the  head  of  the  queue.  The  queue  currently  looks  like  this  (the  number  is  the  task-time  in 
minutes): 

Tas&i=3,  Tas/?3=5,  Tasks^7y  Tas&4=8 

Task i  execute*  for  three  minutes.  When  complete,  its  time  is  incremented  by  three  minutes 
(the  task’s  period). 

Tas^3=5,  Taski= 6,  Task2=7}  Taski=S 

Tasks  executes  and  gets  .1  cpu-seconds.  Its  task-time  is  updated  to  5.5  minutes. 

Tas&3=5.5,  Taski=  6,  Task2=7}  Taski= 8 

Notice  that  each  task  has  its  own  idea  about  what  time  it  is  (that  is,  their  watches  disagree).  This 
occurs  for  two  reasons.  First,  we  are  simulating  parallelism  on  a  serial  machine.  Second,  some  tasks 
represent  discrete  processes.  Given  this,  the  tasks  are  all  out  of  synchronization  by  some  amount. 
The  maximum  “out  of  sync”  time  is  the  maximum  over  all  tasks  of  period,  explicit  time  interval 
and  max  epu  quantum  •  simulation  time  /  epu  time.  On  the  Explorer,  the  max  epu  quantum  is  1 
second. 


2.2  Defining  and  Using  Tasks 

This  section  describes  how  to  define  each  type  of  task.  Examples  are  given  throughout.  All  tasks 
start  with  the  task  flavor,  that  is,  to  define  a  task  you  must  first  create  a  new  flavor  inheriting  from 
task.  You  must  also  write  a  method  which  will  implement  the  task  and  decide  what  the  task’s  type 
is. 


2.2.  DEFINING  AND  USING  TASKS 


5 


2.2.1  Defining  CPU-time  Tasks 

To  make  a  cpu-time  task  flavor  called  generic-cpu-time-task,  do  the  following: 

(def flavor  generic-cpu-time-task  () 

(task) 

( :def ault-init-plist 

: initial-method  : generic-cpu-time-task-toplevel 
: schedule-type  : cpu-time 

:cpu-usec/internal-time  (round  le6  (minutes->internal-time  5)))) 

This  creates  a  task  flavor  named  generic-cpu-time-task  of  type  : CPU-TIME.  The  ratio  of  cpu- 
time  to  simulation-time  is  expressed  in  cpu-micro-seconds  per  internal-time  unit.  In  the  exam¬ 
ple,  the  ratio  is  set  to  5  simulation-time  minutes  per  one  cpu-second.  The  method  that  executes 
when  the  task  is  run  by  the  system  is  specified  by  : INITIAL-METHOD.  In  this  case,  the  method 
: generic-cpu-time-task-toplevel  must  be  defined.  A  cpu-time  task  normally  shouldn’t  return 
control  from  the  initial  method  once  it  is  called.  If  it  does,  the  task  is  deactivated  (See  section  2.2.4). 

Normally,  a  cpu-time  task  is  interrupted  at  least  once  every  cpu-second  (on  the  Explorer)  and  control 
is  returned  to  the  scheduler.  If  for  some  reason  you  want  to  explicitly  return  control  to  the  scheduler, 
call  swap-in-scheduler.  Processing  will  continue  from  that  point  when  the  task  is  resumed. 

2.2.2  Defining  Periodic  Tasks 

To  make  a  periodic  task  flavor  called  generic-periodic-task,  do  the  following: 

(def flavor  generic-periodic-task  () 

(task) 

( :def ault-init-plist 

: initial-method  : generic-periodic-task-toplevel 

:schedule-type  :periodic 

•.period  (minutes->internal-time  5))) 


This  is  almost  identical  to  creating  a  cpu-time  task.  The  differences  are  :  SCHEDULE-TYPE  and  :  PERIOD. 
When  the  scheduler  decides  to  execute  a  periodic  task,  it  executes  the  : INITIAL-METHOD.  When  the 
method  returns,  the  task-time  is  incremented  by  the  period,  and  the  task  is  put  back  into  the  queue. 


2.2.3  Defining  Explicit-time  Tasks 

To  make  an  explicit-time  task  flavor  called  generic-explicit-task,  do  the  following: 

(def flavor  generic-explicit-task  () 

(task) 

( :def ault-init-plist 

: initial-method  :generic-explicit-task-toplevel 
•.schedule-type  : explicit)) 

This  is  almost  identical  to  creating  a  cpu-time  task.  Again,  when  the  scheduler  runs  an  explicit-time 
task,  its  :  INITIAL-METHOD  is  executed.  When  the  initial-method  returns,  the  task  is  rescheduled 
(that  is,  reinserted  into  the  task  queue).  Sometime  during  the  execution  of  the  method,  the  instance 
variable  restart-time  must  be  set  to  the  appropriate  time  to  run  this  task  again.  If  restart-time 
is  not  reset,  an  error  is  signaled.  If  for  some  reason  the  task  must  restart  again  at  the  same  lime, 


I 


6 


CHAPTER  2.  TASKS 


the  : initial-method  must  return  rRESTART-OK1  At  any  time  during  its  execution,  an  explicit-time 
task  can  return  control  to  the  scheduler.  To  do  so,  it  should  set  restart-time  appropriately,  then 
call  the  function  swap-in-scheduler.  Processing  will  continue  from  the  point  immediately  after  the 
swap-in-scheduler  the  next  time  the  task  is  run. 


2.2.4  The  Task  Life  Cycle 

There  are  several  phases  in  the  life  of  a  task:  creation,  activation,  execution,  deactivation  and  termi¬ 
nation. 


Creation 

The  first  thing  to  do  is  make  an  instance  of  a  task  with  make- instance.  When  you  create  a  task  you 
should  give  it  a  handle .  A  task  handle  is  a  name  (represented  as  a  symbol)  that  can  be  used  to  index 
the  task.  You  can  also  specify  an  :  after  :init  method  to  perform  instantiation-time  actions. 

(make-instance  ’ generic-cpu-time-task  ihandle  } task-1  :name  "Task  1") 


Activation 

When  a  task  is  created,  it  is  not  available  for  execution.  To  make  it  available,  you  must  activate  it. 
(tsend  ’task-1  : activate) 

Once  activated,  a  task  can  be  run  by  the  scheduler.  You  can  specify  an  : after  : activate  method. 
The  : activate  method  is  run  in  the  calling  process,  not  the  process  associated  with  the  task. 
If  you  want  a  task  to  be  activated  at  instantiation  time,  use  the  :  ACTIVATE  initialization  option 
(make-instance  task  ...  : activate  T) 

The  function  tsend  is  like  send,  except  that  it  takes  a  task-handle  instead  of  a  flavor  object. 


Execution 

All  active  tasks  can  be  scheduled  by  the  Phoenix  Scheduler.  Each  task  runs  in  its  own  process. 
Execution  starts  at  the  task’s  : INITIAL-METHOD.  In  a  cpu-time  task,  the  method  should  not  return. 
In  periodic  and  explicit-time  tasks,  when  the  method  returns,  the  scheduler  may  schedule  another 
task.  These  two  types  of  tasks  can  assume  that  they  won’t  be  swapped  until  they  either  explicitly 
release  control,  or  the  method  returns.  A  cpu-time  task  may  be  interrupted  any  time,  at  any  place  in 
its  code. 

Deactivation 

A  task  can  be  stopped  by  deactivating  it.  Once  deactivated,  it  is  no  longer  eligible  for  execution  by 
the  scheduler.  To  deiictivate  a  task,  send  it  a  : deactivate  messcige.  A  task  can  deactivate  itself: 

(send  self  :deactivate) 


INTERNAL  NOTE:  This  will  be  changed  to  :  RESTART-AT-SAHE-TIHE  at  some  point.  It  is  more  intuitive. 


2.2.  DEFINING  AND  USING  TASKS 

or  be  deactivated  by  some  other  process 

(tsend  task-handle  :deactivate) 

You  may  specify  a  : before  : deactivate  method. 


Reactivation 

After  a  task  hiis  been  deactivated,  it  may  be  reactivated  again.  When  a  task  is  reactivated,  execution 
always  begins  from  the  initial-method.  All  internal  state  information  may  be  lost.  Activation  and 
deactivation  do  not  correspond  to  pausing  and  resuming.  Activation  is  “reset  to  initial  state  and  begin 
execution”  and  deactivation  “stop  and  clean  up.1*  Since  a  task  may  be  activated  and  deactivated  many 
times  (the  UCL  command  Reset  deactivates  then  activates  all  tasks),  the  :  after  :  activate  method 
should  make  sure  the  task’s  state  is  properly  initialized,  taking  into  account  that  the  task  may  heave 
been  run  previously. 


Termination 

At  some  point,  you  will  want  to  kill  a  task.  To  do  so,  send  the  task  a  :kill  message.  A  task  can  kill 
itself  or  be  killed  by  some  other  process.  Before  a  task  is  killed,  it  is  deactivated  if  it  is  active.  You 
may  write  rafter  :kill  methods. 

2*2.5  Managing  Time 

The  current  task-time  is  available  to  all  tasks,  and  is  returned  by  the  function  exact-time.  In  a 
epu-time  task,  time  is  continuously  changing,  whereas  in  the  other  types,  time  changes  in  discrete 
steps.  In  cpu-tiine  tasks,  the  scheduler  computes  the  task-time. 

For  periodic  tasks,  task-time  is  updated  by  the  task’s  period  each  time  the  initial  method  is  executed. 
A  periodic  task  may  change  its  period  by  setting  the  period  instance  variable. 

Explicit-time  tasks  are  responsible  for  updating  their  own  time  before  the  initial  method  returns. 
This  is  done  by  setting  the  instance  variable  restart-time  to  be  the  next  time  the  *ask  is  run.  For 
example,  an  explicit-time  task  could  say  “Next  time  my  initial-method  is  started,  start  it  5  minutes 
from  now”  as  follows: 

(incf  restart-time  (minutes->internal-time  5)) 

Each  time  an  explicit-time  task’s  initial  method  is  started,  the  task’s  task-time  is  set  to  its  restart- time. 

All  three  types  of  tasks  can  say,  “Put  me  to  sleep  for  some  amount  of  time.”  For  explicit  time  and 
periodic  tasks: 

(incf  restart-time  (minutes->internal-time  5)) 

( swap-in-scheduler) 

\  i  pi. Gc€& & rug  continues  here  5  minutes  later 
For  epu-time  tasks:2 

2 INTERNA!  NOTE:  A  function  should  be  written  to  do  the  right  tiling  for  oil  types  of  tasks.  In  fact,  n  set  of 
functions  should  be  written  to  handle  task  timing  in  a  totally  consistent  (for  all  task  types)  manner.  To  dote  it  hasn’t 
been  o  problem  because  Phoenix  docs  only  simple  timing.  There  should  be  tilings  like  slccp-for-tune,  wnke-up-at-time, 
etc. 


8 


CHAPTER  2.  TASKS 


(setf  cpu-time-adjustment 
(swap-in-scheduler) 


(*  cpu-usec/internal-time 

(minutes->internal-time  5))) 


2.3  A  Real  Example 


This  section  contains  an  annotated  example  using  four  tasks  that  print  informational  messages.  The 
function  task-format  prints  a  trace  message  to  the  trace  pane  in  the  ‘process-display’  screen  configu¬ 
ration.  The  message  automatically  includes  the  task- time  and  the  task’s  handle.  So  if  the  task  called 
“T-l”  at  1:00  P.M.  on  8/1  executes 


(task-format  "Hello  there") 


the  output  is 


[8/1  13:00  T-l:  Hello  there] 


The  first  task  will  be  a  periodic  task  that  wakes  up  once  every  three  minutes.  This  task  will  keep  track 
of  the  number  of  times  it  has  run  in  the  instance  variable  count.  Notice  that  the  : after  '.activate 
method  sets  count  to  zero. 


(defflavor  periodic-task  (count) 

(task) 

( :default-init-plist 
: initial-method  :periodic-toplevel 
: schedule-type  :periodic 
:period  (minutes->internal-time  3))) 

(def method  (periodic-task  : after  : activate)  () 

;;  When  this  task  is  activated,  reset  count  to  0. 
(setf  count  0)) 

(defmethod  (periodic-task  :periodic-toplevel)  () 

(incf  count) 

: :  task-format  prints  a  trace  message 
(task-format  "Count  is  ~d"  count)) 


The  second  task  will  be  an  explicit-time  task.  This  task  also  keeps  track  of  the  number  of  times  it 
has  been  called  with  the  instance  variable  count.  Explicit- time  tasks  must  keep  track  of  their  own 
time.  The  first  time  this  task  is  run  it  will  take  one  minute,  the  second  time  two  minutes,  then  three 
minutes,  and  so  on. 


2.3.  A  REAL  EXAMPLE 


d 


(defflavor  explicit-task  (count) 

(task) 

( :def ault-init-plist 
: initial-method  : expl icit-toplevel 
: schedule-type  : explicit)) 

(def method  (explicit-task  : after  : activate)  () 

;;  When  this  task  is  activated,  reset  count  to  0. 

(setf  count  0)) 

(defmethod  (explicit-task  : explicit-toplevel)  () 

(incf  count) 

(task-format  "Count  is  'd"  count) 

(incf  restart-time  (*  count  (minutes->internal-time  1)))) 

The  third  and  fourth  tasks  will  be  cpu-time  tasks.  The  difference  between  them  will  be  their  ratio  of 
task  time  to  cpu  time.  Since  a  cpu-time  task’s  initial-method  shouldn't  return,  a  local  variable  can 
be  used  to  keep  track  of  iterations.  The  function  1-second-compute  takes  exactly  one  cpu  second  to 
execute  (on  an  Explorer-II). 

(defflavor  cpu-task  () 

(task) 

( : def ault-init-plist 
: initial-method  :cpu-toplevel 
: schedule-type  : cpu-time)) 

(defmethod  (cpu-task  :cpu-toplevel)  () 

(do  ((count  1  (1+  count))) 

(nil) 

(task-format  "Count  is  'dH  count) 

(1-second-compute) ) ) 


To  save  time  we  have  already  defined  these  task  flavors  and  methods  in  the  file  ltPH:TASKS; DOCUMENTED - 
TASK-EXAMPLE. LIS?” .  To  run  these  tasks,  load  that  file  and  start  Phoenix. 

Once  Phoenix  is  up,  select  the  process-display’  screen  configuration  (user  typein  is  shown  after  a 
Phoenix  prompt). 

Phoenix>  process-display 

Now  we  must  create  the  four  flavor  instances: 

(make-instance  ’explicit-task  ihandle  ’explicit-task  ractivate  T) 

(make-instance  ’periodic-task  :handle  ’periodic-task  :activate  T) 

(make -instance  ’cpu-task  rhandle  ’cpu-task-1 

:cpu-usec/internal-time  (round  le6  (minutes->internal-time  5)) 

: activate  T) 

(make-instance  ’cpu-task  rhandle  ’cpu-task-2 

rcpu-usec/internal-time  (round  le6  (minutes->internal-time  10)) 
ractivate  T) 

The  first  cpu-time  task  runs  at  5  minutes/cpu-second.  The  second  runs  at  10  minutes/cpu-second. 
The  function  create-task-demo-tasks  (also  defined  in  the  DOCUMENTED-TASK-EXAMPLE  file) 
creates  all  the  instances,  so: 


10 


CHAPTER  2.  TASKS 


Phoenix>  (create- task-demo- tasks) 

The  simulation  begins  on  August  first  at  12  noon.  To  run  the  system  for  16  minutes,  type 
Phoenix>  Run  16 

When  you  start  the  system  running,  the  scheduler  will  run  each  task  at  the  appropriate  time.  You 
should  see  the  output  from  the  calls  to  task-format  in  the  trace  window.  The  output  should  start 
as  follows: 

[8/1  12:00  EXPLICIT-TASK:  Count  is  1] 

[8/1  12:00  PERIODIC-TASK:  Count  is  1] 

[8/1  12:00  CPU-TASK-i :  Count  is  1] 

[8/1  12:00  CPU-TASK-2:  Count  is  1] 

If  everything  works  correctly,  the  explicit  task  will  generate  output  at  12:00,  12:01,  12:03,  12:06  etc. 
Each  time  interval  is  one  minute  greater  than  the  previous.  The  periodic  task  will  count  every  three 
minutes.  The  first  cpu-time  task  should  count  in  five  minute  intervals,  and  the  second  at  ten  minute 
intervals.  The  output  should  continue  with: 

[8/1  12:01  EXPLICIT-TASK:  Count  is  2] 

[8/1  12:03  EXPLICIT-TASK:  Count  is  3] 

[8/1  12:03  PERIODIC-TASK:  Count  is  2] 

[8/1  12:05  CPU-TASK-1 :  Count  is  2] 

[8/1  12:06  EXPLICIT-TASK:  Count  is  4] 

[8/1  12:06  PERIODIC-TASK:  Count  is  3] 

[8/1  12:09  PERIODIC-TASK:  Count  is  4] 

[8/1  12:10  EXPLICIT-TASK:  Count  is  5] 

[8/1  12:10  CPU-TASK-1:  Count  is  3] 

[8/1  12:10  CPU-TASK-2:  Count  is  2] 

[8/1  12:12  PERIODIC-TASK:  Count  is  5] 

[8/1  12:15  EXPLICIT-TASK:  Count  is  6] 

[8/1  12:15  PERIODIC-TASK:  Count  is  6] 

[8/1  12:15  CPU-TASK-1:  Count  is  4] 

When  this  runs,  the  output  may  vary  slightly  because  when  two  tasks  should  run  at  the  same  time, 
the  scheduler  picks  one  arbitrarily. 

Suppose  you  want  to  change  the  periodic  task  to  run  at  6  minute  intervals.  To  do  this  you  need  to 
change  the  period  and  reset  the  system. 

Phoenix>  (tsend  ’periodic-task  : set-period  (minutes->internal-time  6)) 
Phoenix>  reset 

If  you  run  it  again,  the  period  will  change.  The  Reset  command  sets  the  clock  back  to  12:00  and 
reactivates  all  the  tasks.  Note  that  if  the  :  after  : activate  methods  weren’t  specified,  the  count 
would  continue  from  where  it  left  off. 


2.4  Input  /  Output 

Since  all  tasks  run  as  background  processes,  doing  i/o  is  not  straightforward.  For  all  types  of  tasks,  the 
easiest  way  to  do  output  is  with  the  functions  task-format  and  debug-format.  These  functions  are 
similar  to  format.  The  difference  is  that  they  generate  an  output  message  that  automatically  includes 
the  task  handle  and  task-time.  The  output  is  sent  to  the  process-trace  pane.  The  debug-format 
function  also  sends  the  output  to  the  Phoenix  Lisp  Listener  pane. 


2.5.  DEBUGGING 


11 


2.4.1  I/O  in  Periodic  and  Explicit-time  Tasks 

In  principle,  it  is  OK  to  perform  any  i/o  function  from  periodic  and  explicit-time  tasks.  It  is 
best  not  to  do  i/o  to/ from  the  lisp  listener  or  any  window  that  isn’t  exposed.  Use  functions  like 
w :pop-up-prompt-and-read  and  utils :pop-up-msg  for  maximum  safety.3  While  a  task  is  waiting 
for  input,  no  other  tasks  execute. 

2.4.2  I/O  from  CPU-time  Tasks 

i/o  from  epu-time  tasks  is  particularly  difficult  because  the  scheduler  can’t  tell  that  the  task  is  wait¬ 
ing  for  input.  To  do  i/o,  you  should  only  use  functions  that  have  been  properly  configured  with 
dont-swapout-f unction.  Currently,  it  is  safe  to  use  the  following  functions: J  w  :pop-up-prompt-and-read, 
tv :careful-notif y,  and  tv :mouse-conf irm.  When  i/o  is  done  from  a  epu-time  task,  the  epu  time 
accounting  may  become  slightly  inaccurate,  i/o  should  only  be  done  from  epu-time  tasks  for  debug¬ 
ging  purposes.  This  is  because  any  time  the  i/o  takes  is  charged  to  the  epu  task.  This  isn’t  a  problem 
with  the  other  task  types.5 


2.5  Debugging 

When  a  task  gets  an  error,  the  scheduler  notices  the  error  and  pops  up  a  window  that  includes  the 
task-handle,  the  function  where  the  error  occurred  and  a  stack  backtrace.  To  deactivate  the  task,  just 
move  the  mouse  off  the  window.  The  execution  of  all  the  other  tasks  can  be  continued.  To  enter  the 
debugger,  click  on  the  window  and  an  error  message  will  appear  on  the  screen.  To  select  the  debugger 
for  the  task,  type  TERM  META-S.  It  is  possible  to  proceed  from  the  debugger,  but  it  doesn’t  always 
work  as  expected.  The  best  thing  to  do  is  use  the  debugger  to  find  and  fix  the  problem,  and  then 
Reset  and  start  again. 


3 Currently,  *terminn!*io*  (and  therefore  oil  the  other  stream  variables)  are  bound  in  the  task  to  a  deexposed  back¬ 
ground  window.  An  error  will  result  if  output  is  directed  to  it. 

^see  u PH:TASKS;SCIIEDULIjR.LISP”  for  further  details. 

J  INTERNAL  NOTE:  If  the  scheduler  could  tell  if  a  epu-time  task  is  waiting  for  i/o,  these  problems  would  disappear. 


12 


CHAPTER  2.  TASKS 


Chapter  3 


Task  Reference  Manual 


*cpu-usec/internal-time*  [  Variable] 

*f  ire-system*  [  Variable] 

Bound  within  all  subprocesses  to  the  current  fire-system. 

*time-units-per~second*  [  Constant] 

Number  of  internal  time  units  per  second. 

1-  second-  compute  [Function] 

This  takes  one  cpu-second  on  an  Explorer-II. 

1/5- second-compute  [Function] 

This  takes  1/5  cpu-second  on  an  Explorer-II. 

base-time  [Function] 

Base  time  (in  seconds). 

brief-time-stamp  internal-time  &optional  (stream  nil)  (current-time  (cur rent- time))  [ Function ] 

Prints  only  those  aspects  of ‘internal-time’  which  differ  from  the  current  time.  Never 
prints  seconds. 

continuation-format  format-string  &rest  args  [Function] 

Like  ‘label-format5  except  that  no  time  or  task  is  printed  (but  space  is  left  for  them). 
Useful!  for  continuing  ‘label-format5  messages. 

jcpu-usec-> internal-time  usee  [Function] 

cpu-usec/internal-time->minutes/cpu-sec  time  [Function] 

current-time  [Function] 

Elapsed  time  (in  internal  time!). 

debug-format  format-string  Brest  args  [Function] 

Prints  debugging  messages  to  the  Lisp  Listener  pane  in  the  Phoenix  system, 
estimated- time  [Function] 

Return  a  quick  approximation  of  the  time  (in  internal  time  units), 
exact-time  [ Function ] 

Return  the  time  as  exactly  as  it  can  be  determined  (in  internal  time  units), 
exact-time-stamp  internal-time  Boptional  (stream  nil)  (base-time  (base-time))  [Function] 


13 


14 


CHAPTER  3.  TASK  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


Prints  ‘internal-time’  in  the  format  (M]M/[D]D  (IIJII:MM.SS. 
find- task  handle  [Function] 

Finds  the  task  associated  with  the  handle.  This  docs  no  error  checking, 
free-operations  &body  body  [Macro] 

Evaluate  forms,  but  don’t  charge  CPU  time  to  the  process  doing  the  evaluation. 
hours-> internal- time  hours  [Function] 

internal- time->hours  internal-time  [Function] 

internal-time- >minutes  internal-time  [Function] 

internal-time- > seconds  internal-time  [Function] 

internal- time- >useconds  internal-time  [Function] 

kill-process  process  [Function] 

Really  kill  a  process,  no  matter  what  its  state  is.  Unwinds  are  handled, 
label-format  format-string  &rest  args  [Function] 

Formats  ‘format-string’  and  args  on  the  Pheonix  message  label  pane  and  the  trace 
pane. 

label-format?  predicate  format- string  &rest  args  [Function] 

A  conditional  version  of  ‘label-format’. 

make-message  [Function] 

message-available-at-time  message  [Function] 

message-channel  message  [Function] 

message-from  message  [Function] 

message-send-time  message  [Function] 

message-text  message  [Function] 

message-type  message  [Function] 

minutes->exact-internal-time  minutes  [ Function j 

minutes- > internal- time  minutes  [Function] 

minutes/cpu-sec- >cpu-usec/internal-time  time  [Function] 

parse-to-internal-time  time-string  [Function] 

Parses  ‘time-string’  into  internal-time  format. 

popup-stop  &  optional  format- string  &rest  args  [Function] 

Stop  the  system  immediately  from  with:u  an  execution  method, 
real-time  [Function] 

Current  time  (in  seconds). 

seconds- >internal-time  seconds  [Function] 

swap-in-scheduler  [Function] 

Allow  the  scheduler  to  run  another  task. 

swap-in-scheduler-if-necessary  task  [Function] 

Allow  the  scheduler  to  run  another  task  unless  we  are  the  task  that  is  going  to  be 
run. 

:  activate  [Method  of  task] 


15 


:  after  :init  &vest  ignore  [Method  of  task] 

:after  ideactivate  [Method  of  task] 

:  closure  [Method  of  task] 

:  cpu-time  [Method  of  task] 

:cpu-usec/internal-time  [Method  of  task] 

ideactivate  [Method  of  task] 

:  edit-parameters  &  optional  additional-items  [Method  of  task] 

See  (:inethod  standard-agent  :around  :edit-parameters)  to  see  how  to  add  items. 
:handle  .  [Method  of  task] 

: initial-args  [Method  of  task) 

:  initial-method  [Method  of  task] 

:kill  [Method  of  task] 


:after  ideactivate 
iclosure 
: cpu-time 

: cpu-usec/internal-time 
ideactivate 


i handle 


:  initial-method 


Kill  a  task.  The  task  is  deactivated  first. 


iperiod 
irestart-time 
i schedule-type 


[Method  of  task] 
[Method  of  task] 
[Method  of  task] 
[Method  of  task] 
[Method  of  task] 
[Fv  notion] 


task-active-p  task  [Function] 

Non-nil  if  the  task  is  active. 

task-dont-swapout  task  [Function] 

task-wait  wait-string  interval  fn  &rest  args  [Function] 

Wait  until  a  specific  event  occurs.  The  fn  is  tested  every  interval  in  the  scheduler 
process.  The  first  argument  to  wait-fn  is  always  the  time  at  which  the  function  is 
being  called.  The  function  can  return  T,  or  the  time  at  which  the  task  should  wake 
up  (maybe  past  or  future) 

task-wait-f or-interval  interval  [Function] 

Wait  until  a  time  interval  has  passed. 

task-wait-until-time  lime  [Function] 

Wait  until  a  specific  time. 

task- format  format-string  &rest  args  [Function] 

Like  ‘label-format’  except  that  the  task-name  and  exact  fime  are  also  printed. 

time-only-stamp  internal-time  &optional  (stream  nil)  (base-time  (base-time))  [Function] 

print-seconds 

Prints  ‘internal-time’  in  the  format  (II]H:MM  or  (H]H:MM.SS  if  print-seconds  is  non- 
nil. 

time-stamp  internal-time  &optional  (stream  nil)  (base-time  (base-time))  print-seconds  [ Function ] 

Prints  ‘internal-time’  in  the  format  (M)M/[D]D  [H]1I:MM  or  [M]M/[D]D  (IljHiMM.SS 
if  print-seconds  is  non-nil. 

tsend  task  6 West  args  [Function] 

Send  a  message  to  a  named  task. 


1C 


CHAPTER  3.  TASK  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


useconds->internal-time  usee 
useconds->minutes  usee 
useconds->seconds  usee 


[ Function j 
[Function] 
[Function] 


Chapter  4 


Phoenix  Task  Scheduler 


The  scheduler  is  responsible  for  making  sure  each  task  gets  allocated  the  appropriate  amount  of  cpu 
time.  Given  the  notion  of  the  scheduler  queue  (from  chapter  2)  and  task-time,  the  basic  algorithm  is: 

1.  Current  task  =  pop(queue) 

2.  Current  time  =  task-time(task) 

3.  Allow  task  to  be  scheduled  on  the  cpu 

4.  When  either:  current  task  is  a  cpu-time  task  and  a  quantum  break  occurs  (on  the  Explorer  this 
happens  every  second),  or  the  task  isn’t  a  cpu-time  task  and  the  task  relinquishes  control  (by 
changing  its  restart-time  and  swapping  in  the  scheduler),  disable  the  task  from  being  scheduled 
on  the  cpu. 

5.  For  cpu-time  tasks  increment  task-time(task)  by  the  product  of  the  task’s  cpu-time-to-real-time 
ratio  and  the  amount  of  cpu  time  used  between  steps  3  and  4. 

6.  For  non  cpu-time  tasks,  set  task-time(task)  to  the  the  task’s  restart-time. 

7.  Insert  the  task  back  into  the  queue.  The  queue  is  sorted  by  task-time  (earliest  first). 

8.  Repeat. 

When  an  error  occurs,  the  scheduler  automatically  stops  to  allow  debugging  (see  section  2.5  for 
details). 


4.1  Scheduler  Imnlementation 

This  section  describes  the  implementation  of  the  Phoenix  task  scheduler  on  the  Explorer.  The  sched¬ 
uler  is  split  into  two  parts.  The  first  is  responsible  for  selecting  which  task  to  execute  and  enabling 
that  task.  This  part  is  implemented  as  a  simple-process  and  is  responsible  for  overall  control  of  the 
task  scheduler.  The  second  part  runs  every  time  a  process  associated  with  a  task  gets  swapped  out 
by  the  Explorer  operating  system.  This  occurs  when  either  a  timer  interrupt  occurs  (once  a  second), 
or  a  process  explicitly  swaps  itself  out. 


17 


18 


CHAPTER  4.  PHOENIX  TASK  SCHEDULER 


4.2  Top  Level  Scheduler  Loop 


This  section  describes  the  first  part  of  tlm  task  scheduler  implementation.  The  scheduler  is  an  instance 
of  the  task-scheduler  flavor,  which  provides  instance  variables  for  I  lie  scheduler  queue  and  more. 
The  scheduler  is  either  running  (allowing  tasks  to  run)  or  stopped  (not  allowing  tasks  to  run).  When 
running,  it  executes  tasks  until  a  specific  simulation  time.  The  queue  is  a  priority  queue  (implemented 
as  a  heap).  The  tasks  are  ordered  by  task-time. 

The  main  loop  is  as  follows: 


;;  If  stopped,  or  currently  running  a  task  or  no  tasks  available, 

; ;  do  nothing . 

If  * current- task*  is  non-NIL  Or  we’re  stopped  Or  the  queue  is  empty 
return 

; ;  Find  the  next  task  ready  to  rim.  (Since  tasks  can  have  a  wait 
;;  function,  it  may  not  be  the  task  at  the  head  of  the  queue). 

Loop 

task  =  head (queue) 

If  task-time(task)  >  run-until-time  then 
stopped  =  true 
return  (from  main  loop) 
pop (queue) 

If  task  has  no  wait  function,  Or  the  wait  function  returns  True, 
exit  loop 

;;  If  the  wait  function  fails,  reschedule  the  task  for  later 
task-time(task)  =  task-time(task)  +  task-wait-interval( task) 
insert (task,  queue) 

Endloop 

;;  At  this  point,  the  task  can  run. 

update  screen  (timestamp  and  scheduler  status-window) 
wait-function(task)  =  NIL 
*current-task*  =  task 

start-cpu-time(task)  =  current-cpu-time(task) 
enable(task) 


This  pseudo-code  selects  which  task  to  run,  then  enables  it. 


4,3  When  Processes  Swap  Out 


The  second  part  of  the  scheduler  implementation  disables  a  task’s  process  and  manages  task- time 
accounting.  The  Explorer  operating  system  has  been  modified  to  call  the  after-task-execution 
function  every  time  a  process  associated  witli  a  task  swaps  out.  The  pseudo-code  for  this  part  is  as 
follows:  (NOTE:  process  is  the  process  associated  with  *current-task*) 


4.4.  PORTABILITY  ISSUES 


19 


;;  Allow  the  debugger  to  run. 

If  process  is  in  an  error  state  return 

;;  Allow  i/o. 

If  *current-task*  has  disabled  swapping  (dont_swapout_task( task)  =  true) 
return 

If  *current-task*  is  not  a  cpu-time  task 

If  restart_time (task)  has  been  set  or  task  returned  :RESTART-OK 
task.time(task)  =  restart_time(task) 

;;  Allow  another  task  to  be  scheduled, 
insert (task,  queue) 
disable (process) 

♦current-task*  =  NIL 
return 

Else 

return  (allow  task  to  continue) 

If  *current-task*  is  a  cpu-time  task 

delta  =  current_cpu_time(task)  -  start_cpu_time( task) 

If  suspend_cpu_accounting(task) 

Then  task_time(task)  =  task-time(task)  + 

cpu_time_adjustment (task) 

Else  task_time(task)  =  task_time(task)  + 

delta*cpu_ratio(task)  + 
cpu.time^adjustment (task) 

;  ;  A  task  can  tell  the  scheduler  to  modify  its  cpu  usage 
cpu_time_adjustment (task)  =  0 
insert(task,  queue) 
disable(process) 

♦current-task*  =  NIL 

If  the  process  was  not  disabled,  the  Explorer  operating  system  would  continue  to  execute  it.  When  a 
task  should  be  discontinued  (for  now),  the  process  should  be  disabled  and  *current-task*  should  be 
set  to  NIL  (to  allow  another  task  to  be  executed). 

It  is  difficult  to  tell  when  a  process  is  in  an  error  state.  To  do  this,  we  put  advice  around  the  function 
that  enters  the  error  handler. 

When  a  cpu-time  task  wants  to  do  i/o,  it  cannot  be  disabled  during  t lie  i/o  wait.  To  allow  i/o  from  a 
cpu-time  task,  a  task  is  given  the  ability  to  say  “don’t  swap  me  out.”  But,  when  doing  i/o,  the  task 
should  not  be  charged  for  the  time  it  takes  a  person  to  enter  the  input.  To  provide  for  this,  a  task 
can  suspend  cpu  time  accounting.1  See  section  2.4  for  more  details. 


4.4  Portability  Issues 

How  difficult  would  it  be  to  implement  this  task  model  on  some  other  hardware?  If  each  task  didn’t 
have  to  run  in  its  own  process,  it  would  be  easy.  Unfortunately,  this  isn’t  the  case  because  tasks 
(especially  cpu-time  tasks)  can  be  interrupted  at  anv  time  and  need  to  save  current  state  on  the 
runtime  stack.  The  fine-grained  process  control  needed  to  deal  with  non-cpu-timc  tasks  is  easy, 
because  those  tasks  know  when  they  need  to  be  swapped  out.  Cpu-time  tasks  are  more  difficult 
because  they  need  to  be  disabled  based  on  some  external  event  (timer  interrupt  or  the  passage  of 
a  specific  amount  of  cpu  time).  Since  these  events  are  operating  system  dependent,  changes  may 
need  to  be  made  to  the  operating  system.  I  can  think  of  one  implementation  that  will  work  without 


INTERNAL  NOTE:  This  whole  tiling  con  (ond  should  be)  cleaned  up. 


20 


CHAPTER  4.  PHOENIX  TASK  SCHEDULER 


operating  system  modifications.  TIte  implementation  requires  several  things:  the  OS  works  on  a 
round-robin  scheme,  each  process  can  enable/disable  another  process,  and  each  process  has  access  to 
the  cpu-accounting  of  another  process.  The  idea  is  to  have  a  scheduler  task  with  the  following  loop: 

Loop 

enable  appropriate  task 
repeat 

;;  If  this  can’t  be  done,  try  sleep(small-amount-of-time) 

Swap  out  to  allow  round-robin  scheduling  to  occur. 

If  *current-task*  is  epu-time,  disable  it. 
until  *current-task*  is  disabled 
update  accounting 
Endloop 

This  partial  solution  doesn’t  deal  with  issues  of  user  interface  and  shared  data. 


4.5  Errors  and  Debugging 

Each  instance  of  fire-system  has  its  own  scheduler  instance.  Thus,  it  is  possible  lo  have  more  than 
one  Phoenix  running  at  a  time.  When  the  Explorer  warm  boots,  it  reinstalls  the  original  version 
of  the  Explorer  scheduler.  You  should  not  try  to  run  Phoenix  after  a  warm  boot!2  If  you  hear  the 
“bomb-drop”  beep,  that  means  that  an  error  has  occurred  in  the  scheduler.  To  debug  this  problem, 
go  to  the  ‘process-display’  configuration.  If  you  don’t  want  to  debug  it  (more  likely),  just  reset  the 
system  with  Reset. 


4.6  Programming  Interface 


It  is  possible  to  interact  with  the  scheduler  programatically.  The  function  current-scheduler  returns 
the  current  scheduler  flavor  instance.  The  methods  that  can  be  used  are  described  in  chapter  5. 


2 INTERNAL  NOTE:  Actually,  one  might  hove  reasonable  success  using  the  lnstall-tosk-schedular  function  to 
reinstall  the  Phoenix  scheduler  after  a  warm  boot,  but  it  is  not  for  the  fainthearted  (or  those  who  hove  not  saved  all 
their  editor  buffers). 


Chapter  5 


Scheduler  Reference  Manual 


♦current-scheduler*  [Variable ) 

A  pointer  to  the  current  instantiation  of  the  Phoenix  Task  Scheduler, 
♦current-task*  [Variable] 

A  pointer  to  the  currently  executing  task. 

♦previous-task*  [ Variable J 

A  pointer  to  the  last  task  executed. 

♦query-task-errors*  [  Variable ] 

If  non-NIL,  errors  are  handled  interactively.  The  default  is  T. 

♦  scheduler-error-message*  [  Variable ] 

Holds  the  error  message  when  a  task  error  occurs. 

♦scheduler-error-where*  ( Far  fa  6/e) 

Holds  the  location  of  the  error  when  a  task  error  occurs. 

♦scheduler -swap  in- count*  [  Variable] 

A  counter  containing  the  number  of  times  the  Phoenix  scheduler  runs, 
current-scheduler  [Function] 

Returns  the  task  scheduler  of  the  current  fire  system, 
dont-swapout-function  fn  [Macro] 


Adds  advice  to  the  function  which  prevents  it  (or  more  correctly,  t lie  task  running 
it)  from  being  swapped  out  while  it  is  being  run. 


in-current- task-p 

Return  T  if  currently  executing  in  *current-task*. 
t  dequeue- task  task 
: edit-parameters 

:  enqueue-task  task  &optional  (time  (current- time)) 

:kill 

Kill  the  scheduler. 

: macro-step-scheduler  &optional  (n  1) 


[Function] 

[Method  of  task-scheduler! 
[Method  of  task-scheduler) 
[Method  of  task-scheduler) 
[Method  of  task-scheduler] 

[Method  of  task-scheduler] 


21 


22 


CHAPTER  5.  SCHEDULER  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


Run  the  system  for  V  macro  steps.  If  V  is  NIL,  run  il  forever. 

: reset  &rest  ignore  [Method  of  task-scheduler j 

Set  the  scheduler  to  an  initial  state. 


:run  n  [Method  of  task-scheduler] 

Run  the  system  for  ‘n’  minutes.  If  ‘n*  is'NIL,  run  it  forever. 

:run-until-time  [Method  of  task-scheduler] 

:  single-step  [Method  of  task-scheduler] 

Run  the  system  for  the  smallest  time  interval  possible;  in  other  words,  run  the  system 
for  one  internal-time  unit  or  until  a  task  swaps  out. 

:stop  &optional  (wait  nil)  [Method  of  task-scheduler] 

Stop  the  scheduler. 

:  trace  [Method  of  task-scheduler] 

without-task-swapout  &body  body  [Macro] 


Execute  ‘body1  without  ever  swapping  this  task  out  for  another  task.  Code  that  does 
user  i/o  or  grabs  locks  should  be  included  here. 


Chapter  6 


Map 


Maps  in  Phoenix  represent  topographical  features  for  aland  area.  The  features  include  ground-cover, 
elevation,  roads,  rivers,  buildings  and  fire.  The  map  of  Yellowstone  is  approximately  75  kilometers 
square.  It  uses  different  representations  for  the  various  types  of  information  present.  The  rest  of  this 
chapter  describes  these  representations  with  some  illustrative  examples. 


6.1  Map  Basics 

6.1.1  Units  and  Positions 

All  units  of  distance  are  represented  in  meters.  A  position  on  the  map  is  represented  as  a  point 
data  structure.  A  point  structure  contains  the  x  and  y  coordinates  of  a  point  in  meters.  The 
position  0,0  is  the  upper  left  of  a  map.  Unless  otherwise  specified,  map  access  functions  take  posi¬ 
tions  as  a  point.  In  general,  the  values  of  the  x  and  y  coordinates  should  be  integers  in  the  range 
[0,  i  width  —  in  —  meters*]  and  (0,  (height  —  in  -  meters  t]  respectively. 

To  create  a  point  at  position  x=123  and  y =45000: 

(setf  p  (point  123  45000))  ==>  (123  .  45000) 

(point-x  p)  ==>  123 
(point-y  p)  ==>  45000 

The  x  and  y  components  of  a  point  can  be  accessed  and  set  with  the  functions  point-x  and  point-y.1 
The  map  reference  chapter  describes  many  of  the  point  functions  and  geometry  functions  that  operate 
on  points. 

6.1.2  Grid  Arrays 


A  grid-array  is  an  array-based  representation  of  a  map.  Eaiii  array  element  corresponds  to  a  square 
region  of  the  map.  The  size  that  an  element  corresponds  to  is  called  the  grid-array- size  and  the 
resolution  of  the  grid  array  is  the  log  of  the  size  to  base  2.  For  instance,  the  size  256  corresponds  to 
the  resolution  8.  If  the  world  is  76,000  meters  on  a  side  (as  is  our  Yellowstone  map),  a  grid-array 
representation  of  Yellowstone  at  resolution  3  (size— 256incters)  is  a  300x300  array.  At  resolution  7. 

1  Points  ore  just  represented  os  cons  cells,  but  that  doesn't  mean  you  should  use  car,  edr  nnd  cons  to  manipulate  nr 
create  them. 


23 


24 


CHAPTER  6.  MAP 


the  array  size  is  000x600.  Grid-arrays  are  t\  ped  arrays.  The  term  cell  is  used  to  denote  an  element 
of  a  grid-array. 


6.2  The  Map  Representation 

A  map  is  represented  as  an  instance  of  the  f  iremap  flavor.  There  are  a  large  number  of  functions  and 
methods  that  operate  on  firemaps.  The  set  of  functions  is  described  in  chapter  7. 

6.2.1  Ground  Cover 

The  map  representation  currently  contains  11  types  of  ground  cover.  The>  arc  agriculture  (fields), 
chapparal,  hardwood,  lake,  marsh,  meadow,  rocky,  softwood,  suburban,  and  urban  areas.  The  eleventh 
is  named  boundary,  and  is  used  as  a  sentinel  around  the  borders  of  the  map.  Ground  cover  is 
represented  as  a  grid  array  at  resolution  *gc-cell-resolution*  (8).  So  each  cell  in  the  ground- 
cover  inap  corresponds  to  an  area  +gc-cell-size*  (256  meters)  on  a  side.  Each  clement  of  the 
grid-array  is  of  type  (mod  16).  Given  a  firemap  named  f iremap,  the  functions  cell-ground-cover 
and  ground-cover-name  can  be  used  to  access  ground  cover  as  follows: 

(cell-ground-cover  (point  34000  12000)  firemap)  ==>  3 
(ground-cover-name  3)  ==>  "Lake" 

There  are  eleven  constants,  each  corresponding  to  the  different  type  of  ground  cover.  *gc-agriculture* , 
*gc-boundary*, *gc-chapparal*,  *gc-hardwood*,  *gc-lake*, *gc-marsh*, *gc-meadow*, *gc~rocky*, 
*gc-sof twood*,  *gc-suburban*  and  *gc-urban*. 

6.2.2  Elevation 

Elevation  is  represented  as  a  grid  array  of  type  (mod  65536)  at  resolution  *elevation-cell-resolution* 
(8).  Elevations  arc  represented  in  meters  above  sea  level.  Since  the  elevation  data  is  stored  as  a  grid, 
it  is  necessary  to  do  some  form  of  interpolation  to  prevent  large  discontinuities.  For  example,  suppose 
the  part  of  the  elevation  array  looks  like 


30 

40 

50 

44 

50 

40 

45 

40 

30 

Since  each  cell  represents  an  area  of  256  meters  on  a  side,  uninterpolated  the  elevation  at  (253  .  0)  — 
30,  (254  .  0)  =  30,  (255  .  0)  =  30  and  (256  .  0)  =  40!  Notice  the  discontinuity  at  the  cell  boundary. 
Phoenix  interpolates  elevation  as  follows:  Imagine  the  cell  at  (0  .  0)  from  above.  The  elevation  at 
each  corner  of  the  cell  is  fixed  by  the  elevation  data. 

30—40 


44—50 


6.2.  THE  MAP  REPRESENTATION 


25 


Since  three  points  define  a  plane,  a  diagonal  through  the  cell  defines  (wo  planes: 

30— -40 

I  /I 
I  /  I 
1/  1 
44 - 50 

When  you  ask  for  the  elevation  of  a  position,  the  elevation  is  interpolated.  This  technique  guarantees 
that  elevation  is  continuous  over  the  entire  map  (If  there  are  supposed  to  be  discontinuities-cliffs-they 
are  lost).  The  function  cell-elevation  returns  the  interpolated  elevation  (rounded  to  meters). 

(cell-elevation  (point  0  .  0)  firemap)  ==>  30 
(cell-elevation  (point  128  .  0)  firemap)  ==>  35 
(cell-elevation  (point  256  .  0)  firemap)  ==>  40 

cell-approx-elevation  returns  the  uninterpolated  value  directly  from  the  grid  array. 

(cell-approx-elevation  (point  0  .  0)  firemap)  ==>  30 
(cell-approx-elevation  (point  128  .  0)  firemap)  ==>  30 
(cell-approx-elevation  (point  256  .  0)  firemap)  ==>  40 


6*2.3  Roads,  Rivers  and  Buildings 

Roads,  rivers  and  buildings  are  represented  as  features.  Each  feature  type  has  a  specific  width. 
Currently  there  arc  eleven  types  of  features. 

*f-building+  Buildings.  (8  meters  wide) 

*f-fireline*  Fireline.  (4  meters  wide) 

*f-river!28*  128  meter  wide  river. 

*f -river64*  64  meter  wide  river. 

*f-river32*  32  meter  wide  river. 

*f-riverl6*  16  meter  wide  river. 

*f-river8*  8  meter  wide  river. 

*f-river4*  4  meter  wide  river. 

*f-roadl6*  16  meter  wide  road. 

*f-road8*  8  meter  wide  road. 

*f-road4*  4  meter  wide  road. 

Each  feature  type  has  a  specific  width  (while  not  a  requirement,  feature  widths  are  powers  of  two  for 
historical  reasons).  In  the  map,  features  are  represented  as  directed  line  segments.  The  feature-edge 
structure  contains  a  feature  type,  start  point  and  end  point.  Since  each  feature-edge  has  a  width  (the 
width  of  the  feature  type),  the  shape  of  a  feature  edge  is: 


26 


Off  AFTER  6.  MAP 


S - + - E 

_ _ I _ 

Draw  a  feature  edge 

A  point  is  on  a  feature-edge  iff  the  distance  from  the  point  to  the  line  segment  from  the  start  point 
to  the  end  point  is  less  then  1/2  the  width  of  the  feature. 

Feature  types  are  split  into  two  types:  static  and  dynamic.  Static  features  never  change  while  the 
program  is  running.  Dynamic  features  do  change.  (Currently,  the  only  dynamic  feature  is  fireline.) 
There  are  several  reasons  for  this  separation: 

•  Firemaps  are  large.  By  guaranteeing  that  some  features  are  static,  we  can  reuse  the  same  static 
data  structure  objects  in  many  firemaps. 

•  Space/Time  tradeoff.  The  data  structures  used  to  represent  static  features  are  large  in  terms 
of  space,  but  extremely  fast  to  index.  If  each  copy  of  the  firemap  was  large  (no  data  sharing), 
this  tradeoff  couldn’t  be  made.  Dynamic  features  are  indexed  more  slowly,  but  in  a  more  space 
efficient  data  structure. 

•  Cleanup.  By  marking  some  parts  of  the  map  as  dynamic,  it  is  easy  to  reset  the  map  to  its  initial 
state — just  clear  the  dynamic  parts. 


6.2*4  Static  Features 

There  are  two  indexing  methods  for  static  features.  The  first  method  answers  the  question  “What 
feature-edge  is  at  a  specific  position  in  the  map?”  The  second  answers  the  question  “Given  a  feature 
edge,  what  are  the  other  ‘adjacent  feature  edges?” 

To  facilitate  the  position  to  feature-edge  mapping,  a  grid  array  at  resolution  *f  eature-cell-resolution* 
(8)  is  used.  Stored  in  each  cell  is  a  list  of  all  feature-edges,  (containing  static  features)  that  touch  the 
cell  in  any  way.  A  feature-edge  touches  a  cell  if  any  part  of  the  rectangle  defined  by  the  segment  and 
width  cover  any  part  of  the  cell.2  The  question  “What  feature-edge  is  at  a  specific  point?”  is  answered 
by  searching  the  list  of  feature-edges  in  the  cel)  to  see  if  the  point  is  on  any  edge.  This  algorithm  is 
quite  efficient.  Most  cells  (90  percent  or  more)  contain  no  features,  so  no  searching  is  done,  and  when 
a  cell  does  contain  features,  there  are  usually  only  two  or  three.  To  answer  the  question  “Is  a  point 
on  a  feature?”  requires  finding  the  distance  from  the  point  to  the  line  segment  of  the  edge.  This  can 
also  be  implemented  very  efficiently. 

Since  it  is  possible  for  a  point  to  be  on  more  than  one  feature,  a  precedence  of  features  is  defined.  The 
order  of  precedence  is  building,  roads  (wide  to  narrow),  river  (wide  to  narrow).  This  way,  if  a  road 
crosses  a  river,  a  point  that  is  on  the  road  over  the  river  is  considered  to  be  on  the  road. 

To  answer  the  question  “Given  an  edge,  what  edges  are  connected  to  it”  several  data  structures  are 
used.  All  edges  start  and  end  at  a  vertex.  Each  vertex  contains  a  position  and  a  pointer  to  all  ofthe 
edges  that  start  or  end  at  that  position.  Since  edges  point  to  vertices  and  vice  versa,  it  is  possible  to 
follow  roads  and  rivers.  For  this  to  work  properly  anytime  two  edges  can  only  meet  at  a  vertex,  edges 
are  not  allowed  to  cross.  So  when  features  are  added  to  the  map,  the  system  automatically  creates 
vertices  at  the  appropriate  places  and  splits  single  edges  into  multiple  edges.  For  instance: 

7  So  the  circular  positions  at  the  edge  of  the  cell  aren't  included.  This  isn’t  n  problem  because  ofthe  way  feature- edges 
are  connected. 


6.3.  FIRE 


27 


Before:  *=vertex 

*  - *  edgel 

*  - *  edge2 

After  (add  a  vertical  edge) 

*  e3 

I 

e6  * - * - *  el 

I  e4 

e7  * - * - *  e2 

I 

*  e5 

Adding  a  single  edge  of  feature  results  in  two  existing  edges  being  split  into  four  edges,  and  the  new 
edge  into  three  edges.  Four  new  vertices  are  created. 


6,2.5  Dynamic  Features 

Dynamic  features  are  also  represented  with  feature-edges  though  indexing  I  hem  is  different-  Instead 
of  using  a  grid-array  to  index  features  bv  position,  a  simple  sparse  array  representation  is  used.  We 
use  a  vector  representation  for  the  array.3  To  access  the  list  of  static-features  in  a  cell  at  a  specific 
point:*1 


(getf  (svref  vector  (round  (point-x  point)  *f eature-cell-size*) ) 

(round  (point-y  point)  *f eature-cell-size*) ) 

This  saves  significant  space  (a  300  element  vector  instead  of  a  300x300  array)  at  a  cost  of  some  speed. 
Since  there  are  usually  5 — 10  firemaps  being  used  at  a  time  (in  the  current  system),  we  deemed  that 
this  was  an  appropriate  tradeoff.  It  works  reasonably  well  because  (in  current  applications)  the  vector 
is  sparse. 

We  do  not  represent  vertices  for  dynamic  features.  Dynamic  feature  may  intersect  at  non-end  points. 
The  cost  of  this  decision  is  that  tracing  along  dynamic  features  is  more  difficult;  the  advantage  is  that 
the  cost  of  creating  dynamic  features  is  low. 


6.3  Fire 


Fire  is  r  presented  using  a  grid-array  at  resolution  7.  Thus,  the  grain  size  of  a  fire  is  128  meters.  The 
clement  type  of  the  fire  grid  array  can  be  either:  bit  ,  (mod  16)5,  f  ixnum0  or  T. 

Currently,  there  are  five  fire  states,  no  fire,  low  fire,  l  ot  fire,  smoldering  fire  and  burned  out.  These 
states  correspond  to  different  points  in  a  fire's  burn-cycle.  Each  state  is  a  number,  corresponding  to 

INTERNAL  NOTE:  A  hash  table  is  another  possible  representation  we  might  want  to  investigate. 

4  Actually,  instead  of  round  we  use  (Ish  ...  *f  eaturo-coll-rosolution*) .  The  use  of  power  of  two  moth  saves  a 
significant  amount  of  epu  time. 

INTERNAL  NOTE:  Why  isn’t  thh  (mod  8)? 

cThe  use  of  fixnum  instead  of  (med  24)  enables  us  to  use  all  of  the  logical  number  operations.  The  drawback  is  that 
it  makes  the  code  non-portable  because  other  Common  Lisp  implementations  might  have  different  length  fixnums 


28 


CHAPTER  6.  MAP 


the  constants  *cs-no-fire*  (0),  *cs-low-f ire*  (1),  *cs-hot-f ire*  (2),  *cs-smoldering-f ire* 

(3)  and  *cs-burned-out-f ire*  (4\ 

Each  of  the  grid-array  element-types  can  be  used  to  represent  fire  to  differing  levels  of  detail. 

bit  This  tvpe  represents  either  the  presence  or  absence  of  fire.  The  absence  of  fire  is  *cs-no-f  ire*: 
the  presence  of  fire  is  *cs-low-f  ire<*. 

(mod  10)  With  this  type  each  of  the  five  fire  states  can  be  represented. 

fixnum  This  type  uses  the  low  order  bits  (four  bits)  to  represent  fire  state,  and  the  high  order  bits 
to  store  other  information.  Currently,  the  20  high  order  bits  are  used  as  flags.  Functions  and 
variables  can  be  used  to  mask  out  the  high  and  low  order  bits. 

T  With  element  type  T,  the  data  in  the  grid-array  is  either  a  fixnum  as  above,  or  an  instance  of 
a  fire-info  structure.  Fire-info  structures  are  used  by  the  fire  simulation.  This  structure 
contains  a  fixnum  (fire-state)  as  above,  and  information  used  by  the  fire  simulation  such  as  the 
ignition  time  of  cell. 

When  you  create  instances  of  a  f  iremap,  you  can  specify  what  element  type  the  fire  grid-array  should 

be,  or  specify  that  a  fire  array  shouldn’t  even  be  created. 


6.4  Creating  and  Editing  Firemaps 


To  create  a  firemap,  create  an  instance  of  the  f iremap  flavor.  When  a  (iremap  is  created,  the  new 
map  shares  information  about  ground  cover,  elevation  and  static  features  from  a  default  firemap 
(*default-f  iremap*).  The  default  firemap  is  a  map  of  Yellowstone  National  Park.  Firemaps  can  be 
read  and  written  from  disk,  edited  and  examined.  Care  must  be  taken  when  editing  maps  because  all 
maps  have  common  data-structures.  Each  map  gets  its  own  set  of  dynamic  features  (initially  empty) 
and  fire  representation.  When  instantiating  a  map,  the  type  (if  any)  of  the  fire  representation  should 
be  specified. 

; ;  create  a  map  of  Yellowstone  with  a  bit  fire  representation 
(make -instance  ’firemap  : fire-element-type  ’bit) 

; ;  create  a  map  of  Yellowstone  with  no  fire  representation 
(make-instance  ’firemap  : fire-element-type  NIL) 

; ;  create  an  empty  map,  and  then  fill  if  from  a  disk  file 
(setf  map  (make -instance  ’firemap  : initialize-from  NIL)) 

(send  map  : load-map  "map-filename") 

The  firemap  creation  options  are  described  in  chapter  7. 

When  a  firemap  is  no  longer  needed,  it  is  best  to  reclaim  the  memory  used  by  the  map  ( they  are 
large)  by  sending  it  a  : deallocate  message.  In  order  to  return  a  map  to  its  initial  state  (no  fire,  no 
dynamic  features),  send  it  an  : erase-fire  message. 

The  basic  map  access  functions  are: 


cell-ground-cover  point  map  returns  the  ground  cover  as  a  number  (eg.,  the  value  of  *gc-hardwood*). 
cell-elevation  point  map  returns  the  interpolated  elevation  in  meters. 


6.5.  THE  REAL  WORLD  FIREMAP 


29 


cell-feature  point  map  returns  the  feature  at  point  as  a  number  (eg.,  the  value  of  *f-road4*)  or 
Nil  if  there  is  no  feature. 

cell-fire-state  point  map  returns  the  fire  state  as  a  number.  The  tvpe  of  the  number  depends  on 
the  fire  element  type.  If  the  fire  element  tvpe  is  T  and  the  cell  contains  a  fire-info  structure, 
the  fire  state  from  the  structure  is  returned  as  a  ftxnuin. 

Some  access  functions  are  implemented  as  functions,  some  as  methods,  and  some  as  both.  The  choice 
of  technique  to  use  for  each  is  based  on  efficiency,  convenience  and  style. 


6.5  The  Real  World  Firemap 

There  is  one  firemap  which  is  used  to  represent  the  “real  world”.  When  tasks  look  into  the  world, 
they  should  look  into  the  real  world  firemap.  The  function  real-world-f iremap  returns  that  map. 
Tasks  can  change  the  “real  world.”  A  typical  change  is  the  placement  of  fireline  (this  should  be  done 
be  sending  a  message  to  fire-system  rather  than  real-world-f  iremap). 


6.6  Geometry 

Phoenix  provides  many  functions  for  geometric  reasoning  over  the  map.  These  functions  range  from 
simple  unit  conversions  to  basic  geometry  (do  two  line  segments  intersect?)  to  region-growing  algo¬ 
rithms.  Chapter  7  describes  these  functions. 


30 


CHAPTER  6.  MAP 


Chapter  7 


Map  Reference  Manual 


7.1  Firemap  Flavor 


f iremap-dynamic-edges  firemap 

[Furaciion] 

: dynamic-edges 

(il/e^od  0/  firemap] 

f  iremap-edge-vector  firemap 

( Ft/nciion) 

: edge-vector 

(AfeJ/iod  0/ firemap] 

f  iremap-elevation  firemap 

[Function] 

: elevation 

[ATeJ/zod  0/ firemap) 

f  iremap-f  ilename  firemap 

(Function] 

:  filename 

{jl/eJAod  0/ firemap] 

f  iremap-f  ire  firemap 

[Function] 

:f  ire 

[Method  of  firemap] 

f  iremap-f  ire-extents  firemap 

[ Function ) 

:f ire-extents 

[Method  of  firemap] 

f iremap-f iremap-windows  firemap 

[Function) 

:f iremap-windows 

[Method  of  firemap) 

f  iremap-ground-cover  firemap 

[Function] 

: ground-cover 

[Method  of  firemap] 

f  iremap-objects-to-display  firemap 

[Function) 

:objects-to-display 

[Method  of  firemap] 

f iremap-static-edges  firemap 

[Function) 

:  static-edges 

[Method  of  firemap] 

f  iremap-update-windows  firemap 

[Function) 

:update-windows 

[Method  of  firemap] 

f  iremap-vertex-vector  firemap 

[Function) 

:  vertex-vector 

[Method  of  firemap] 

31 


32 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


7.2  Map  Definitions 

7.2.1  Elevation 

*elevat ion-cell-resolution* 

*elevation-cell-size* 

Size  of  elevation  grid  cell  side  (in  meters). 

7.2.2  Fire  States 

*cs-burned-out-f ire* 

*cs-low-f ire* 

*cs-hot-f ire* 

*cs-mask* 

*cs-no-f; re* 

*cs-smoldering-f ire* 

*f ire-cell-resolution* 

*f ire-cell-size* 

Size  of  fire  grid  cell  side  (in  meters). 

*f ire-names* 

*f s-f eatures -present* 

*f s-ignitable* 

*f s-mask* 

*f s-not-ignitable* 

*number-of -fire-states* 

deff ire  symbol  number  name  &key  color- character  b&w-character  color 
fire-name  fire-stale 

Returns  a  string  which  describes  ‘fire-slate*. 


[Constant] 

[Constant] 


[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[Constarit] 
[Constant] 
[ Constant ] 
[Constant] 

[  Variable] 
[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[A f aero] 
( Function j 


7.2.3  Fire  Info 


allocate-f  ire-info  [Function] 

fire-bum-state  /  [Macro] 

Return  the  burn  state  from  a  fire-info  fixnuin.  *cs-no-fire*  ->  ^cs-bumed-out-firc* 
f  ire-flag->number  fs  [Function] 

fire-flags  /  [Macro] 


Returns  the  flag  part  of  a  fire-info  fixnuin. 


fire-info-bum-state  fire-info  [Macro] 

fire-info-change-time  fire-info  [Function] 

f ire-info-ignite-time  fire-info  [Function] 

fire-info-point  fire-info  [Function] 


7.2.  MAP  DEFINITIONS 


33 


fire-info-state  fire-info 

[ Function ] 

free-f ire-info  arg 

[Function] 

firep  / 

[Macro] 

Return  T  if  there  is  fire  in  a  fire-info  fixnum  (includes 

*cs-burncd-out-fire+). 

ignitable-p  / 

[A  / aero] 

Returns  T  if  there  is  no  fireline  in  a  fire  info  cell. 

live-fire-p  / 

[iUacro] 

Return  T  if  there  is  live  fire  in  a  fire-info  fixnum  (does  not  include  *cs-burned-out- 

fire*). 

not-ignitable-p  / 

[Macro] 

Returns  T  if  there  is  fire  line  in  a  fire  info  cell. 

7*2.4  Features 

*all-f eatures-f lag* 

[Constant] 

*dynamic-f eature-f lags* 

[Variable] 

*f-building* 

[Constant] 

*f-f ireline* 

[Constant] 

*f-riverl28* 

[Constant] 

*f-riverl6* 

( Constant ] 

*f-river32* 

[Constant] 

*f-river4* 

[Constant] 

*f-river64* 

( Constant ] 

*f-river8* 

( Constant ] 

*f-roadl6* 

[Constant] 

*f-road4* 

[Constant] 

*f-road8* 

[Constant] 

♦feature-cell-resolution* 

[Constant] 

♦feature-cell-size* 

[Constant] 

Size  of  feature  grid  cell  side  (in  meters). 

♦feature-names* 

[Variable] 

Array  of  feature  names. 

♦feature-overlay-order* 

( Variable] 

The  precedence  of  features. 

*f eature-widths* 

[  Variable] 

Array  of  feature  widths  (in  meters). 

*number-of-f eatures* 

[  Variable] 

*point-f eature-f lags* 

( Variable] 

♦river-flags* 

( Variable] 

♦road-flags* 

[  Variable] 

34 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


*road-or-uncrossable-river-f  lags*  i  Variable) 

♦  static-feature-flags*  ( Variable  J 

*uncrossable-river-f  lags*  [  Variable) 

deff eature  symbol  name  number  width  &key  roadp  riverp  uncrossable-rwer-p  b&w-character\Macro\ 
color-character  dynamicp  color  b&w  minimum- display-size  pointp 


feature-name  feature 
feature-width  feature 
roadp  feature 
riverp  feature 


[Function] 
[Function) 
[ Function ] 
( Function ] 


7.2.5  Ground  Cover 


*gc-agriculture* 

[  Constant) 

*gc-boundary* 

[Constant] 

*gc-cell-resoluticn* 

[Constant) 

*gc-cell-size* 

[ Constant ) 

Size  of  ground  cover  grid  cell  side  (in  meters). 

*gc-chapparal* 

[Constant) 

*gc-hardwood* 

[ Constant ] 

*gc-lake* 

[Constant) 

*gc-marsh* 

[Constant) 

*gc-meadow* 

f Constant ] 

*gc-rocky* 

[Constant) 

*gc-sof twood* 

( Constant ] 

*gc- suburban* 

[Constant) 

*gc-urban* 

[Constant) 

♦ground-cover-names* 

( Variable) 

*ground-cover-types* 

( Variable) 

*number-of -ground-covers* 

[  Variable ] 

bumable-ground-cover-p  ground-cover 

[Function] 

defground-cover  symbol  number  name  &key  type  color  b&w 

[Macro) 

ground- cover-name  gc 

[ Function ) 

ground-cover-type  gc 

[Function) 

vegatation-ground-cover-p  gc 

[ Function ) 

7.3  Map  Access  Functions  and  Methods 

defmapfn  slot  &key  (slot-postfix  slot)  (resolution  (quote  * gc- cell- resolution *))  [Macro] 

Define  a  set  of  map  slot  access  functions  at  a  specific  resolution.  Specifically,  I  his 
defines  a  standard  ’’point”  reader:  CELL-{SLOT}  <point>  <map>  a  ”xy”  reader 
CELL-{SLOT}-X-Y  <x>  <y>  <map>  and  a  standard  ’’point”  writer  function  which 
is  also  the  setf  method  for  the  standard  reader.  If ‘slot-postfix’  is  specified  it  is  used 
in  place  of  ‘slot’  to  generate  the  function  names. 


7.3.  MAP  ACCESS  FUNCTIONS  AND  METHODS 


35 


7.3.1  Elevation 


cell-approx-elevation  point  map 
cell-elevation  point  map 

Find  the  real  elevation  of  a  point  to  the  nearest  nictor. 
rhighlight-elevation  el  &optional  (range  0) 

: set-cell-elevation  point  new-elevation 


[ Function ] 
( Function ] 

[Method  o/firemap] 
[Method  of  f  iremap] 


7.3.2  Features 

cell-boundary-crossed-multiply-by-f  eatures-p  point  resolution  firemap  &  optional  [Function] 
(features  xall-fcatures-flag *) 

Return  T  if  the  cell  boundary  is  crossed  more  than  once  by  features, 
cell-dynamic-edges  point  map  [Function] 

cell-dynamic-feature  point  map  [Function] 

cell-dynarnic-f  eature-edge  point  map  [Function] 

Return  the  line  feature  edge  under  ‘point’. 

cell-dynamic-f  eatures-in-area  point  map  resolution  [Function] 

Return  the  set  of  dynamic  features  at  ‘point’  and  ‘resolution’  as  a  fixnutn  bit-array, 
cell-feature  point  map  •  [Function] 

: cell-feature  point  [Method  o/firemap] 

cell-feature-edge  point  map  [Function] 

cell-feature-flag  point  map  [Function] 

cell-f  eatures-in-area  point  map  resolution  [Function] 

cell-static-edges  point  map  [Function] 

cell-static-feature  point  map  [Function] 

Return  the  feature  under  point. 

cell-static-feature-edge  point  map  [Function] 

Return  the  line  feature  edge  under  point. 

cell-static-features-in-area  point  map  resolution  [Function] 

Return  the  set  of  static  features  at  ‘point’  and  ‘resolution’  as  a  fixnum  bit-array. 
:create-static-edge  from-point  to-point  type  &kcy  (refresh  t)  [Method  of  firemap] 

Create  astatic  edge  between  the  specified  points.  If  the  new  edge  intersects  any  oilier 
edges  at  a  non-vertex,  create  a  new  vertex  at  that  intersection  point. 


:  delete-edge  edge  &key  (refresh  t) 

Delete  an  edge. 

:delete-edge-from-array  edge 

Delete  a  static  edge  from  a  firemap. 

: delete-point-edges 

Delete  ail  edges  that  start  and  end  at  the  same  vertex. 
: delete-point-feature-near-point  point  &rest  ignore 


[Method  of  firemap] 


[Method  of  firemap] 


[Method  of  firemap] 


[Method  of  firemap] 


36 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


Delete  a  feature  near  point 

dynamic-edge-exists-p  from  to  firemap  [Function] 

:f ind-edge-nearest-to-point  point  within- distance  [Method  of  firemap) 

Find  the  edge  closest  to  point  within  a  certain  distance, 
f  ind-point-on-some-f  eatur e-in-cell  cell-point  resolution  feature- flags  map  [Function] 

Pick  a  random  point  on  a  feature  that  matches  feature-flags  in  the  cell. 

:f  ind-vertex-at-point  point  &key  (create  nil)  ( Method  of  firemap) 

:f ind-vertex-nearest-to-point  point  within- distance  ( Method  o/firemap) 

Find  the  vertex  closest  to  point  within  a  certain  distance, 
f  ireline-in-cell-p  point  firemap  resolution  [Function] 

:place-dynamic-f eature  from  to  type  [Method  of  firemap) 

Draw  a  dynamic  feature  of  type  from  point  to  point. 

:  place-edge-in-array  edge  [Method  of  firemap) 

Insert  a  static  edge  into  the  firemap. 

:place-static-edge  from-point  to-point  type  &hey  (refresh  t)  [Method  of  firemap] 

Create  an  edge  of  type  from  point  to  point.  Vertices  are  created  at  the  endpoints  if 
necessary.  The  new  edge  should  NOT  intersect  other  edges  (except  at  endpoints). 

point-on-f  eature-of-type-p  point  firemap  feature-flags  [Function] 

Return  the  feature  if  point  is  above  a  feature  of  a  specified  type, 
point-on-lake-p  point  map  [Function] 

point-on-road-p  point  map  [Function] 

river- in-cell-p  point  firemap  resolution  [Function] 

road-in-cell-p  point  firemap  resolution  [Function] 


[Function] 
[Method  of  firemap) 

[Method  of  firemap) 

[Method  of  firemap] 


7,3*3  Ground  Cover 

cell-ground-cover  point  map 
:  cell-ground-cover  point 
:  set-cell-ground-cover  point  cover 


[Function] 
[Method  of  firemap] 
[Method  of  firemap] 


7.3.4  Fire 

cell-fire  point  map 
cell-fire-bum-state  point  map 

Return  the  burn  state  at  a  point  in  a  map. 

: cell-fire-burn-state  point 
: cell-fire-display-info  point 

Return  three  values;  state,  change-time,  ignite- time, 
cell-fire-flags  point  map 

Return  the  fire  flags  for  a  cell. 


[Function] 

[Function] 

[Method  of  firemap) 
[Method  of  firemap) 


[Function] 


7 A.  OTHER  FIREMAP  VARIABLES  AND  ROUTINES 


37 


cell-fire-info-structure  point  map  [ Function ] 

Create  a  fire-info  stricture,  or  return  the  existing  one  for  point  in  map. 
cell-fire-state  point  map  [Enaction] 

Return  the  full  state  and  flags  at  a  point  in  the  map. 
cell-ignite-time  point  [Function] 

Return  the  ignite  time  of  a  cell.  Return  inost-positive-fixnum  if  not  known. 

:  erase-fire  c ^optional  confirm  (refresh  t)  [Method  of  firemap] 

Reset  the  map  to  a  nice,  clean,  no-fire  state.  This  really  should  be  called  :resct-all- 
dynamic-edges. 

:  ignite-cell  &rest  args  [Method  of  firemap] 

:update-cell-f  ire  point  new-state  &optional  old-state  [Method  of  firemap] 

:  set-cell-fire-burn-state  point  &optional  (new-state  ' cs-low-fire ')  [Method  of  firemap] 

(refresh  t) 

:  set-cell-fire-state  point  &optional  (new-state  ' cs-low-fire ')  (refresh  t)  [Method  of  firemap] 


7.4  Other  Firemap  Variables  and  Routines 

*def ault-f iremap* 

Default-firemap  for  ground  cover  and  elevation, 
♦default-map-file* 

♦height -in-meters* 

♦width- in-meters* 
all-f iremaps 

: check-f or-non- vert ex-intersections 


See  if  there  are  any  intersections  that  don’t  meet  at  a  vertex. 


:deallocate 


( Variable] 

( Variable] 
[Constant] 
[Constant] 
[Function] 
[Method  of  firemap] 

[Method  of  firemap] 


Return  the  grid  arrays. 


:  delete-window  window 


[Method 

: draw-ob j  ect s  [  Method 

:  load-map  &  optional  file  confirm  [Method 

real-world-f iremap 

Returns  the  real- world-fi remap  of  the  current  fire  system. 

: rebuild- vertex-and-edge-vectors  [Method 

Given  a  firemap  static-edge- vector,  construct  a  new  vertex  vector  and 
edge  vector.  Vertices  and  vertex  numbers  are  recomputed  from  scratch 
is  recomputed  from  just  the  edge-type,  start-point  and  end-point. 

:  refresh  [Method 

:  save-map  &optional  file  confirm  [Method 

: validate-vertex-and-edge- vectors  [Method 

Do  some  consistency  checking  over  features. 


of firemap] 
of  f .  remap] 
of firemap) 
[Function] 

of firemap] 

clean  up  the 
.  Everything 

of firemap) 
of firemap] 
of firemap] 


38 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


7.5  Grids 


grid-array-aref  array  x  y  resolution  ( Function ] 

Use  V  and  ‘y}  as  indices  into  a  grid  array.  Can  be  used  with  ‘setf*. 
grid-array-ref  array  point  resolutton  [ Function ] 

Use  ‘point5  as  an  index  into  a  grid  array  at  the  specified  resolution.  Can  be  used  with 
‘setf*. 

set-grid-array-aref  array  x  y  resolution  value  ( Function ] 

Use  ‘x5  and  V  as  indices  to  set  an  element  in  a  grid  array, 
set-grid-array-ref  array  point  resolution  value  [ Function j 

Use  ‘point5  as  an  index  to  set  an  element  in  grid  array  at  the  specified  resolution, 
truncate-to-grid  n  [lifacro] 


7.6  Vertices  and  Feature  Edges 

copy-feature-edge  object  ( Function j 

edges-meet-at-vertex-p  el  c2  ( Function ) 

Return  true  if  the  edges  share  a  vertex. 

edge-cell-list  edge  resolution  [ Function ] 

Return  a  list  of  the  cells  touched  by  edge.  Each  cell  is  returned  only  once.  The  order 
is  random. 


edges-in-area  edges  point  resolution 

[Function] 

featur e-edge-bo t-point-from  feature-edge 

[Function] 

featur e-edge-bo t-point- to  feature-edge 

[Function] 

f  eature-edge-cen-point-from  feature-edge 

[Function] 

f  eature-edge-cen-point-to  feature-edge 

[Function] 

f  eature-edge-from-point  feature-edge 

[Function) 

f  eature-edge-from-vertex  feature-edge 

[Function] 

feature-edge-index  feature-edge 

[Function] 

feature-edge-length  feature-edge 

[ Function ) 

f eature-edge-p  object 

[ Function ] 

f  eature-edge-plist  feature-edge 

[ Function ] 

featur e-edge-to-point  feature-edge 

[Function) 

f  eature-edge-to-vertex  feature-edge 

[Function] 

featur e-edge-top-point-f rom  feature-edge 

( Function 1 

feature-edge-top-point-to  feature-edge 

[Function] 

feature-edge-type  feature-edge 

[ Function j 

f  eature-of-type-in-area-p  point  firemap  feature-flags  resolution 

[Function) 

find-point-on-edge-in-cell  edge  cell-point  resolution 

[ Function ) 

7.7.  CONVERSION  FUNCTIONS 


39 


Given  an  edge,  return  some  point  on  that  edge  within  a  ceil.  If  (he  edge  doesn't  enter 


the  cell,  return  NIL. 

point-distance-from-edge-squared  point  edge  [ Function ] 

Return  the  square  of  the  distance  from  the  edge  centerline  to  point, 
point-on-edge-p  point  edge  [Function] 

Return  T  if  point  is  on  edge. 

type-of-connection-between-vertices  vl  v2  [Function] 

vertex-edges  vertex  [Function] 

vertex-index  vertex  [ Function ] 

vertex-p  object  [Function] 

vertex-point  vertex  ( Function ] 


7.7  Conversion  Functions 


*f  eet-pei*“km*  [Constant] 

*km-per-mile*  [Constant] 

*meters-per-chain*  [Constant] 

chains/hour->meters/internal-time  n  [ Function ) 

chains/hour~>meter  s/minute  n  [Function] 

chains/hour- >meters/second  n  [Function] 

chains->km  chains  [Function] 

chains->meters  chains  [Function] 

degrees- >radians  degrees  ( Function ] 

km->feet  km  [Function] 

km- > miles  km  [Function] 

km/hour->meterc/ir  ternal-time  n  [Function] 

km/hour->meters/sec  ond  km  [Function] 

miles->km  miles  [Function] 


7.8  Geometry  Functions 

*essentially-zero-threshold*  [  Variable] 

To  test  if  a  point  is  on  a  line,  we  find  its  distance  from  the  line  and  if  it’s  essentially 
zero  [it  might  be  non-zero  due  to  round-off  errors),  we  deem  it  to  be  on  the  line.  This 
number  sets  the  threshold  for  being  essentially  zero. 

angle-between-points  pi  p2  [Function] 

Return  the  angle  of  the  ?;ector  from  pi  to  p2  (in  radians), 
area-of-triangle  pO  pi  p2  [Function] 

Return  the  area  of  the  triangle  pO  pi  p2. 

average-point  new-point  &rest  points  [ Function ) 


40 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


Computes  a  new  (rounded)  point  which  is  the  average  of  some  points, 
cell-center-point  cell-point  resolution  [Function] 

Return  the  center  point  of  a  cell  at  resolution. 

center-point  point  [Function] 

copy-extent  object  [ Function ] 

create-extent  &key  upper-left  lower-right  ( Function ] 

direction  vector  [Function] 

exact-point-separation  pi  p2  ( Function J 

Return  the  distance  between  two  points  as  a  floating-point  number.  Since  points 
range  from  [0,0]  to  [8000,8000],  the  result  is  accurate  to  within  -f/-  i  meter. 

extend-segment  pO  pi  extend-amount  &optional  (extend-to  (point))  ( Function ] 

Extend  the  segment  from  ‘p0’  to  ‘pi’  by  ‘extend-amount’.  Returns  the  new  segment 
end  [pi]  rounded  to  meters. 

extent-intersection  ull  Irl  ul2  lr2  [Function] 

Given  two  extents,  return  their  intersection. 

extent-lower-right  extent  [Function] 

extent-p  object  [Function] 

extent-upper-left  extent  [Function] 

half-line-intersects-segment-p  10  ll  sO  si  [Function] 

Returns  T  iff  the  half-infinite  line  [aka  the  ray]  starting  at  L0  and  going  through  Ll 
intersects  the  segment  [SO, SI). 

magnitude  vector  [ Function ] 

make-extent  point  [ Function ) 

make-vector  direction  magnitude  [ Function ] 

Create  a  vector.  ‘Magnitude’  and  ‘direction’  should  be  regular  floats, 
nearest-point-on-segment  pomtj  line-ptl  line-ptk  [ Function ] 

Find  the  point  on  the  segment  defined  by  ‘line-ptL’  ‘line-ptK’  nearest  to  ‘pointJ’.  The 
returned  point  may  be  ‘eq’  to  a  segment  end  point. 

point  &optional  (x  nil  x-specified)  y  (setpoint  nil  setpoint-specified)  [Function] 

Make  a  new  point  using  ‘x’  and  ‘y\  If ‘setpoint’  is  specified  it  is  destructively  modified 
and  returned. 

point-at-resolution  point  resolution  [Function] 

Make  a  copy  of  a  point  at  a  specific  resolution. 

point-at-resolution*  point  resolution  [Function] 

point-at-resolution-with-off sets  pi  p2  resolution  [Function] 

Return  a  point  in  the  same  cell  as  pi  with  the  same  offsets  as  p2. 
point-difference  pi  p2  ( Function ] 

Return  pi  -  p2. 

point-difference*  pi  p2  [Function] 

Return  pi  =  pi  -  p2. 


7.8.  GEOMETRY  FUNCTIONS 


-11 


point-distance-f rom-ext exits  test-point  upper-left  lower-right  &opiional  (solid?  t)  [Function] 

This  returns  the  distance  between  a  point  and  a  rectangle  specified  by  ‘upper-left* 
and  ‘lower-right’.  The  rectangle  may  be  solid;  if  it  is  and  the  point  lies  inside  it,  the 
returned  distance  is  negative  and  is  the  distance  from  the  point  to  the  edge  of  the 
rectangle. 

point-distance-f rom-segment-squared  point j  line-ptl  line-ptk  [ Function ) 

Copied  from  Bowyer  &  Woodark,  pg.  47. 

point-distance-f rom-square  test-point  square-origin  size  Boptional  (solid?  t)  [Function] 

This  returns  the  distance  between  a  point  and  a  rectangle  specified  as  an  origin  and 
a  size.  The  rectangle  may  be  solid;  if  it  is  and  the  pc' ‘t  lies  inside  it,  the  returned 
distance  is  negative  and  is  the  distance  from  the  point  to  the  edge  of  the  rectangle. 

point-distance-squared-from-star-polygon  point  star-point  polyline  [Function] 

Return  0.0  if  the  point  is  in  the  polygon,  or  the  distance  squared  from  the  point  to 


the  polygon. 

point-extent-sector-code  point  extent  [Function] 

point-in-bounds-p  point  [Function] 

point-in-extent-p  point  extent  [Function] 

Return  T  if  point  is  within  the  extent. 

point-in-star-polygon-p  point  star-point  polyline  [ Function j 

point-left-of-line-p  point  pO  pi  ( Function ] 

Determine  if  ‘point5  is  in  left  half-plane  defined  by  the  directed  line  segment. 
po?nt-on-line-p  point  pO  pi  [Function] 

Determine  if  ‘point5  lies  along  line  defined  by  segment, 
point -on-segment- >parameter  pO  pi  point  &optional  error-check?  [Function] 


If  POINT  is  on  the  segment  [P0,P1],  returns  the  parametric  specification  of  POINT. 
Actually,  this  works  for  any  point  on  the  half-infinite  line  [ray]  from  PO  through  Pi 
to  infinity.  If  POINT  is  on  the  line  but  not  on  the  ray,  the  parameter  returned  is  the 
negative  of  the  correct  answer;  that  is,  the  correct  answer  is  negative,  but  the  answer 


returned  is  the  absolute  value  of  the  correct  answer, 
point-right-of-line-p  point  pO  pi  [Function] 

Determine  ‘point5  is  in  right  half-plane  defined  by  the  directed  line  segment, 
point-rot  at  e-around-point  theta  rotate-point  around-point  [Function] 

point-rotate-origin  theta  pt  [Function] 

point-rotate-origin*  theta  pt  [Function] 

point  round  point  [Function] 

Rounds  POINT.  Returns  a  new  point. 

point -round*  point  [Function] 

Rounds  POINT.  Destructively  modifies  POINT. 

point-sector-code  point  top-left  bottom-right  [ Function ] 

point-separation  pi  p2  [Function] 


Return  the  distance  between  the  two  points  +/-  1  meter.  Use  exact-point-separation 
if  necessary. 


42 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  UEFEUENCE  MANUAL 


point-separation-and-sin-cos  pi  p2  [ Function ) 

Find  the  distance  between  points.  Return  the  sin  and  cos  of  the  angle  between  them, 
point-separation-lessp  pi  p2  distance  ( Function \ 

Return  T  if  distance  between  pl&p2  <  distance. 

point-separation-squared  pi  p2  ( Function j 

Return  the  square  of  the  distance  between  the  two  points.  The  result  is  a  single¬ 
precision  floating  point  number. 

point -sum  pi  p2  [  Function] 

Return  PI  +  P2. 


point-sum*  pi  p2 

Return  Pi  =  PI  +  P2. 


[ Function ] 


point- wrt-line  point  pO  pi  [Function] 

Return  0  if ‘point’  is  on  the  line,  <  0  if  left,  >  0  if  right, 
point-x  point  [ Function ] 

point-y  point  [Function] 

point=  pi  p2  [Function i 

pointp  t  oint  ( Function j 

points-in-same-cell-p  pi  p2  resolution  ( Function ] 

Return  T/NIL  if  the  two  points  share  the  same  cell  at  the  given  resolution. 
polyline->segments  polyline  &key  (closedp  t)  ( Function ) 

Converts  a  polyline  into  a  list  of  segments  [represented  as  a  list  of  two  points], 
polyline-intersects-cell-p  polyline  point  resolution  ( Functions 

Returns  T  iff  some  segment  of  POLYLINE  goes  through  the  cell  of  size  RESOLU¬ 
TION  containing  POINT. 

polyline-length  polyline  &key  (closedp  t)  ( Function ] 

quick-segment-intersects-cell-p  pO  pi  cell-point  resolution  [Function] 

True  iff  the  segment  (P0,P  1)  passes  through  the  cell  containing  CELL-POINT  at 
RESOLUTION.  Returns  the  point  [rounded]  where  the  segment  intersects  a  diagonal 
of  the  cell.  [BUG:  fails  if  the  segment  ends  inside  the  cell  without  intersecting  a 
diagonal.] 

radians->degrees  rad  [Function] 

rounded-point-p  point  [Function] 

same-side-p  line-ptl  Hne-pt2  pointl  point2  [ Function ] 

Return  T  if  ‘pointl*  and  tpoint2*  arc  both  in  the  same  half  plane  determined  by 
‘linepl’  and  l!incp2\ 

8egment&parameter->point  pO  pi  parameter  [Function] 

Given  a  segment  and  a  parameter,  return  a  point  on  the  segment.  The  point  is  not 
rounded. 

segr«ent&parameter->point*  pO  pi  parameter  [Function] 

Given  a  segment  and  a  parameter,  return  a  point  on  the  segment.  The  new  point  is 
not  rounded  and  is  returned  in  PO. 


7.8.  GEOMETRY  FUNCTIONS 


43 


segment&parameter->pointl*  pO  pi  parameter  [ Function ] 

Given  a  segment  and  a  parameter,  return  a  point  on  the  segment.  The  point  is  not 
rounded  and  is  returned  in  pi. 

segment&parameter-  >point2  pO  pi  parameter  p2  [Function] 

Given  a  segment  and  a  parameter,  return  a  point  on  the  segment.  The  point  is 
rounded  and  is  returned  in  p2. 

segment-cell-intersection  pO  pi  cell-point  resolution  [Function] 

Return  the  first  intersection  point  of  the  segment  (PO.PH  with  the  cell  containing 
CELL-POINT  at  RESOLUTION.  If  there  is  no  intersection,  returns  NIL.  The  re¬ 
turned  point  isn’t  rounded.  Caution:  The  border  of  a  cell  is  defined  by  four  seg¬ 
ments,  the  North,  South,  East  and  West  edges.  Points  on  the  North  and  West  edges 
are  *in*  the  cell,  while  points  on  the  South  and  East  edges  are  *not*  in  the  cell;  they 
are  in  the  cells  to  the  South  and  East,  because  those  same  segments  are  the  borders 
of  other  cells,  and  each  point  can  only  be  in  one  cell.  Essentially,  the  points  +in*  a  cell 
are  (x,y),  such  that  CELL-SIZE  =  2-RESOLUTION  FLOOR[x/CELL-SIZE]  <=  x 
<  FLOOR[x/CELL-SIZE]+CELL-SIZE  and  similarly  for  y.  Note  the  <~  versus  the 
<.  See  SEGMENT-CELL-INTERIOR-INTERSECTION  for  an  alternative  function. 

segment-cell-intersection-parameter  pO  pi  cell-point  resolution  [ Function ] 

Return  the  parameter  corresponding  to  the  first  intersection  point  of  the  segment 
with  the  border  of  the  cell.  This  point  is  not  guaranteed  to  be  in  the  cell,  since 
the  North  and  West  borders  of  a  cell  are  in  the  cell,  while  the  South  and  East 
borders  are  not — they  belong  to  the  cells  to  the  South  and  East,  respectively.  See 
SEGMENT-CELL-iNTFRIOR-INTERSECTION-PARAMETER  for  an  alternative 
function.  In  more  detail:  The  border  of  a  cell  is  defined  by  four  segments,  the 
North,  South,  East  and  West  edges.  Points  on  the  North  and  West  edges  are  *in+  the 
cell,  while  points  on  the  South  and  East  edges  are  *not*  in  the  cell;  they  are  in  the 
cells  to  the  South  and  East,  because  those  same  segments  are  the  borders  of  other 
cells,  and  each  point  can  only  be  in  one  cell.  Essentially,  the  points  *in*  a  cell  are 
(x,y),  such  that  CELL-SIZE  =  2-RESOLUTION  FLOOR(x/CELL-SIZE]  <=  x  < 
FLOOR(x/CELL-SIZE]-f  CELL-SIZE  and  similarly  for  y.  Note  the  <=  versus  the 
<. 

segment-ce?l  -interior-intersection-parameter  pO  pi  cell-point  resolution  [Function] 

Return  the  parameter  corresponding  to  the  first  intersection  point  of  the  segment 
with  the  points  *in*  the  cell.  This  point  *is*  guaranteed  to  be  in  the  cell.  See 
SEGMENT-CELL-INTERSECTION-PARAMETER  for  an  alternative  function. 

segment-edge-intersection-parameter  pO  pi  edge  [Function] 

segment-feature-border-intersection- in-cell  pO  pi  cell-point  resolution  fcatureflags[Function ] 
map 

Return  the  fust  intersection  point  of  the  segment  with  the  border  of  an  edge  of  type 
‘featureflags’.  The  returned  point  is  not  rounded. 

segment-f eature-centerline-intersection- in-cell  pO  pi  cell-point  resolution  [Function] 

featureflags  map 

Return  the  intersection  point  of  the  segment  with  Hie  centerline  of  an  edge  of  type 
*fcatureflags\ 

segment-intersection  pk  pi  pm  pn  [Function] 

Return  the  point  of  intersection  or  nil.  Copied  from  Bowycr  &  Woodwark. 
segment-intersection-parameter  pk  pi  pm  pn  [Function] 


44 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


Return  the  parameter  of  intersection  on  the  segment  (Pk.PI).  If  the  segments  don’t 
intersect,  return  NIL.  If  the  segments  are  coincident,  an  endpoint  of  [Pm,Pnj  that  is 
on  [Pk,Pl]  is  returned. 

segment-intersection-parameters  pk  pi  pm  pn  [ Function j 

Return  the  parameters  of  the  intersection  of  the  lines  determined  bv  segments  [Pk,PI] 
and  (Pm,Pn).  The  first  value  is  the  parameter  on  [Pk,PI],  the  second  on  (Pm,Pn).  If 
the  segments  intersect,  both  parameters  will  be  between  0  and  1,  inclusive.  If  the 
lines  do  not  intersect,  NIL  is  returned.  If  the  lines  are  coincident,  the  correct  result 
is  calculated. 


segment-intersects-cell-p  pO  pi  point  resolution 


[ Function } 


Returns  T  iff  the  segment  [P0,P1]  goes  through  the  cell  of  size  RESOLUTION  con¬ 
taining  POINT. 


segment-intersects-edge-type-in-cell-p  start  finish  cell-point  flags  map 


( Function ] 


Return  T  iff  the  segment  from  start  to  finish  intersects  an  edge  with  flags  within 
cell-point. 

segment-side-segments  pi  p2  width  &optional  (slO  (point))  (sll  (point))  (s20  (point))  ( Function } 
(s21  (point)) 

Return  the  two  segments  on  the  boundary  of  the  argument  segment  (rounded). 

segment-to-implicit-line  pk  pi  [ Function ) 

Given  a  line  segment,  return  the  iniplict  form  Ax  4*  By  +  C  =  0. 

segment-to-parametric-line  pO  pi  ( Function j 

Given  a  segment,  return  the  parameters  of  the  line  x  =  Xo  -f  Fs  y  =  Yo  4*  Gs. 

segment-touches-edge-p  pO  pi  edge  [Function] 

Return  T  if  the  segment  from  pO  to  pi  comes  in  contact  with  edge. 

segments- >polylines  segments  [Function] 

Converts  an  unsorted  list  of  SEGMENTS,  each  represented  as  a  list  of  two  points, 
into  a  list  of  polylines  by  joining  segments. 

segments-intersect-p  pk  pi  pm  pn  [Function] 

Return  the  point  of  intersection  or  nil.  Copied  from  Bowyer  &  Woodwark. 

set-point-x  point  value  [Function] 

set-point-y  point  value  [Funciion] 

vector-end-point  start-point  angle  radius  &optional  (end-point  (point  0  0))  [ Function j 

Given  a  vector  specified  by  ‘start-point’,  ‘angle’  and  ‘radius’,  calculate  and  return  an 
endpoint. 

xy-segment-to-implicit-line  xk  yk  xl  yl  { Function ] 

Given  a  line  segment,  return  the  implict  form  Ax  4-  By  4  C  =  0. 
xy-segments-intersect-p  xk  yk  xl  yl  xm  ym  xn  yv.  [Function] 

Return  the  point  of  intersection  or  nil.  Copied  from  Bowyer  &  Woodwark. 


7.9.  ITERATION  CONSTRUCTS 


45 


7.9  Iteration  Constructs 


♦circle-neighborhood-radius-index*  [  Varia6/e] 

♦circle-neighborhoods*  [\'ariablc] 

♦  fire-neighborhood*  ( Variable] 

♦  square-neighborhood*  ( Variable] 

do-f eature-edges  (edge  cell-point  map  &key  feature- flags  (edge-type  :boih))  &body  body  [Macro] 


Iterate  over  all  edges  in  a  cell  matching  feature  flags,  edge-type  is  either  :both  (de¬ 
fault),  :static  or  :dynamic.  Body  is  repeated  for  both  types  of  edges  if  necessary. 
Dynamic  features  are  done  first.  A  (return)  will  get  you  out  of  the  current  edge  type 
loop,  not  the  do-feature-edges  loop! 

do-point-set  (point  seed-point  &key  (resolution  (quote  ' gc- cell-resolution <))  (x  (gensym))  [Afacro] 
(y  (gensym))  visited-poini-biiarray)  (&rest  finish-forms)  &body  body 
Iterate  over  a  bunch  of  points.  Body  adds  points  to  the  set  of  points,  do-point- 
set  guarantees  that  each  point  is  visited  only  once.  Use  the  macro  (visit-xv  x  y) 
or  (visit-point  point)  to  add  a  point  to  the  set  to  visit.  Body  is  executed  until  the 
set  of  points  is  empty.  Point  can  be  modified  by  body,  but  its  value  is  changed 
each  time  through  the  loop  (so  use  copy-point  to  keep  the  point  around).  Visited 
points  are  remembered  at  the  specifed  resolution.  This  also  defines  the  macro  (do- 
poirt-neighbors  (connectedness)  &body  body).  Point  is  set  to  each  neighbor  (*l  or  8 
connected)  in  turn  and  body  is  executed.  The  expansion  is  of  the  form  (setf  point 
nl)  body  (setf  point  n2)  body  ... 

do-polyline  (pO  pi  polyline  &key  (closedp  i)  (return  nil))  &body  body  [A/ocro] 

Iterate  over  each  segment  in  a  polyline.  If  body  doesn’t  do  an  explicit  return,  ‘return’ 
is  returned. 


do-vertex-neighbors  (neighbor  connection  vertex  &key  (edge  (gensym)))  &body  body  [Macro] 
Iterate  over  the  neighbors  of ‘vertex’.  ‘Vertex’  and  ‘neighbor’  are  structures, 
dofiremap  (point  &key  upper-left  lower-right  (resolution  *gc-cell-resolution*))  &body  body  [Macr>\ 

Iterate  over  a  rectangular  area  of  a  map  inclusive  of  upper-left  and  lower-right  points. 
If  the  bounds  aren’t  specified,  use  the  full  extent  of  the  map. 

doneighbors  (neighbor  point  &key  (neighborhood  *  square-neighborhood*)  neighborlist  [Macro] 

min-radius  max-radius  distance  angle  path  (resolution  *gc- cell-resolution') 

(grid-size  nil)  (check-bounds  nil)  (index  nil))  &body  body 

Iterate  over  neighbor  points  in  neighborhood  array.  If ‘neighborlist’  is  not  specified, 
iterate  over  all  neighbors.  Note:  ‘neighbor’  is  destructively  modified. 

map-fire-region  function  fire  map  [ Function ] 

Iterate  over  every  point  contained  in  the  region  of  fire. 

map-f  ire-to-boundary  function  fire  map  &key  (resolution  ' fire- cell-resolution* )  [Function] 

(stop-at-natural-boundaries  t)  (boundary-in-region-p  nil) 

( natural- boundaries -in-region-p  nil)  ( visits d-point- bit o rryz y  -nil) 

Iterate  over  every  point  contained  in  the  region  of  fire,  up  to  the  fire  boundary.  Slop 
spreading  at  natural  boundaries. 

map-pixals-on-line  function  pi  p2  resolution  &rest  othcr-args  [Function] 


[Function] 


Map  over  all  pixels  between  two  points.  The  traversal  is  from  pi  to  p2.  The  point 
argument  to  the  function  is  destructively  modified.  If  the  function  returns  two  values, 


46 


CHAPTER  7.  MAP  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


and  the  fust  value  is  -.return,  then  l he  mapping  is  terminated  and  the  second  value 
is  returned;  otherwise,  returns  NIL. 


some-pixel-on-line  predicate  start  finish  resolution 

Execute  predicate  for  each  point  on  line, 
value. 


(iUacrf)] 

If  predicate  returns  non-nil,  return  that 


visit-neighbors  connectivity 


[Macro] 


Visit  all  neighbors  4  or  8  connected  from  the  current  point.  Can  only  be  used  within 
the  lexical  scope  of  ‘do-point-set’. 


Chapter  8 


Interface 


This  chapter  describes  how  to  interface  with  Phoenix.  There  are  three  broad  interfacing  activities: 
Defining  new  commands,  displaying  things  on  the  firemap  windows  and  adding  new  types  of  windows 
on  the  desktop. 

When  Phoenix  is  started,  an  instance  of  the  fire-system  flavor  is  created.  The  entire  user  interface 
is  based  on  UCL  (TI’s  Universal  Command  Loop),  therefore  the  fire-system  flavor  is  built  up  from 
UCL  flavors  and  mixins.  Almost  all  interface  commands  are  messages  to  the  current  fire  system. 


8.1  Adding  New  Commands 

Several  UCL  command  tables  are  used  by  Phoenix.  To  define  a  new  UCL  command  decide  which 
command  table  to  add  the  command  to  or,  if  necessary,  create  a  new  command  table.  The  convention 
used  in  Phoenix  is  that  a  directory  of  code  may  contain  two  files:  COMMAND-METHODS. LISP  and 
MAKE-COMMANDS. LISP.  The  command-method  file  contains  all  of  the  methods  used  to  implement 
the  commands  and  the  make-command  file  contains  all  of  the  calls  to  define  the  commands  and  build 
the  command  tables.  All  command  methods  must  be  methods  of  the  fire-system  flavor.  Look  at 
some  of  the  existing  files  to  see  how  command  tables  and  commands  are  defined. 


8.2  I/O  and  Firemaps 

A  library  of  functions  can  be  used  to  perform  graphical  operations  on  windows  that  display  firemaps 
(eg.  highlight-line).  In  addition,  the  mouse  can  be  used  to  select  positions  and  icons  from  a  map. 
These  functions  are  described  in  chapter  9. 


8.3  Icons 


An  icon  is  an  graphical  object  that  can  be  displayed  and  moved  around  on  a  firemap.  All  firemaps 
contain  sets  of  icons  that  are  automatically  displayed.  Icons  can  be  cre;ited,  deleted  and  moved  on  a 
firemap.  All  agents  in  Phoenix  are  displayed  by  icons  (bulldozers,  watchtowers,  etc.)  Icons  and  the 
routines  for  manipulating  them  are  described  in  more  detail  in  chapter  9  . 


47 


48 


CIIA  PTER.  8.  INTFR FA  CE 


8.4  Defining  New  Desktop  Windows 


To  build  a  new  window  suitable  for  use  on  the  desktop,  add  the  utils:  rdor.kfcop-mixin  flavor  to  the 
component  flavors  of  the  window.  Write  a  “make”  function  to  make  a  new  instance  of  your  window 
and  initialize  it  -  the  function  select-or-create-window-on-desktop  should  be  useful  for  this.  The 
def ine-deskt op- window  macro  will  associate  the  window  type  with  the  make  function  and  will  also 
add  the  window  type  to  the  list  of  window  types  that  can  be  created  by  left-clicking  on  the  desktop. 
The  following  code  was  written  for  the  system  to  take  an  existing  flavor,  f  iremap-window,  and  build 
a  new  flavor  that  can  be  used  on  the  desktop. 

(pushnew  ’desktop-f iremap-window  *standalone-f lavors*) 

(def flavor  desktop-f iremap-window 

0 

(utils: :desktop-mixin 
f iremap-window) 

( :def ault-init-plist 

: font-map  *f ire-system-font-map* 

: f oregroimd-color  *f ire-system-f g-color* 

: background-color  *f ire-system-bg-color* 

: border-color  *f ire-system-border-color* 

: scroll-bar-mode  : maximum) ) 

(defmethod  (desktop-f iremap-window  rafter  :init)  (ignore) 

(declare  (ignore  ignore)) 

(send  self  :set-firemap  (real-world-f iremap) ) ) 

(def ine-desktop-window  "Firemap"  make-desktop-f iremap-window) 

(defun  make-desktop-f iremap-window  () 

"Create  a  firemap  window  on  the  desktop." 

(let*  ((window  (select-or-create-window-on-desktop  ’desktop-f iremap-window) ) ) 
(send  window  : set-label  ‘(rstring 

, (format  nil  "Real  World  Firemap")  reentered)) 

(send  window  : expose) 
window) ) 


Notice  that  this  did  some  of  initializations  in  make-desktop-f  iremap-window  and  used  an  rafter 
:init  method  to  do  the  rest.  This  is  purely  a  matter  of  style. 


Chapter  9 

Interface  Reference  Manual 


♦b&w-desktop-color* 

♦banded-color-map* 

A  pointer  to  the  phoenix  color  map. 
♦bitmap-pathname-def  aults* 

Place  where  bitmaps  are  written  and  can  always  be  read. 


( Variable] 
[  Variable] 

[  Variable] 


♦blip-alist*  { Variable ] 

The  alist  of  mouse  character  blips  that  the  fire-system  window  handles. 

♦color- >highlight-b&w*  [  Variable] 

*color->highlight-color*  ( Variable] 

♦color-desktop-color*  [  Variable] 

♦command- command- table*  [  Variable] 

♦command- tables*  [Variable] 

A  list  of  all  command  table  names. 

♦debug- screen*  [  Variable] 

♦default-elevation-gradient*  ( Variable] 

♦default-map-editor-state*  [  Variable] 

*distance-f  or-sensitivity*  [  Variable] 

The  pixel  distance  at  which  the  mouse  is  considered  to  be  on  top  of  an  object. 


♦highlight-b&w-mappings* 

[  Variable] 

♦highlight-colors* 

[  Variable] 

♦highlight-cyan* 

[  Variable] 

♦highlight-orange* 

( Variable J 

♦highlight-purple* 

[  Variable] 

♦highlight-red* 

[  Variable  J 

♦highlight-white* 

[  Variable] 

♦highlight-yellow* 

[  Variable] 

♦initial-resolution* 

[  Variable] 

49 


50 


CHAPTER  9 .  INTERFACE  REFERENCE  MANUA  L 


The  resolution  at  which  a  firemap-window  initially  displays  the  lirctnap. 


♦  initial-screen-configuration*  *  ( Variable ) 

The  initial  fire-system  window  configuration. 

♦leave-ghost-objects*  [  Variable) 

A  weird  drawing  variable  that  results  in  objects  leaving  a  trail  of  where  they  have 
been. 

♦phoenix- command-menu*  [  Variable) 

♦query-about-selecting-phoenix*  [  Variable) 

If  true,  ask  for  confirmation  before  bringing  up  Phoenix. 

♦remember-highlight  s  *  [  Variable] 

If  non-nil  then  highlights  are  stored  so  that  the  won’t  be  lost  during  a  refresh, 
♦task-command-table*  ( Variable] 

♦task-inspector-menu*  [  Variable) 

♦task-menu*  [ Variable ] 

♦use-cached-maps*  [Variable] 

Determines  whether  the  firemap  bitmap  caching  is  enabled. 

*use-color-p*  [  Variable] 

Set  to  NIL  to  force  B&W. 

create-bitmaps  &optional  ('fire- system*  * fire- system")  ( Function ) 

def  ine-desktop-window  name  function  [Macro] 

Add  this  window  type  to  the  menu  of  windows  that  can  be  created  on  the  desktop. 


display-phoenix-icon-window  &optional  label  &key  (font  * icon-window-label- font')  fg  [ Function j 
(bg  (aref  ' phoenix-icon '  0  0)) 

Display  the  Phoenix  startup  icon. 

do-exposed-map-windows  (mapwindow  &  optional  window  map)  &body  body  [Macro] 

Execute  ‘body’  with  ‘mapwindow*  bound  to  each  of  the  exposed  firemap  windows  in 
succession. 


domapwindows  (window  &optional  point  (can-be-deexposed  nil))  &body  body 


[Macro] 


Iterate  over  each  of  the  windows  viewing  this  map.  If  point  is  specified,  point  must 
be  visible.  If  can-be-deexposed  is  nil,  then  the  window  must  be  exposed. 


find-phoenix-system 


[Function) 


Called  when  SYSTEM  S  is  hit. 


: activate-all-tasks 
:activate-task  &optional  task 
: active-agents 
:all-f iremaps 
: all-inf eriors 
: all-tasks 
: base-time 
: clear-highl^ghts 


[Method  of  f  ire-systemj 
[Method  of  f  ire-systeml 
[Method  of  f ire-systemj 
[ Method  of  f  ire-systemj 
[Method  of  i ire-systemj 
[Method  of  f  ire-systemj 
[Method  of  fire-systemj 
[Method  of  fire-system] 


51 


:  clear- trace-window 
:deactivate-task  &oplional  task 
:delete-task  task 
:  describe-task  &optional  task 
: edit-environment 
:edit-f ire 

:  edit-task  &optional  task 
: elapsed-time 

:  erase-fire  Boptional  (confirm  t)  (refresh  t) 

:  exposed-f iremap-windows 
: get-environment 

: get-environment-parameter  param  &optional  default 
:  inspect-task  &optional  task 
: macro-step-scheduler  &opiional  (n  1) 

Macro  step  the  system  n  Himes’. 
:macro-step-scheduler-and-wait  &optional (n  1) 

:meter-task  &optional  task 

Turn  on  task  metering. 

: real-world-f iremap 
: refresh-all-windows 
: ref resh-ob j ect s 

:  reinitialize  &optional  (query  t)  (create- agents  i) 
:reset-and-activate-all-tasks  &optional  (query  t) 

Reset  all  the  tasks  and  the  scheduler.  Erase  the  fire. 


[Method  of  fire-svstemi 
[Method  of  fire-system) 
[Method  of  fire-systemi 
[Method  of  i ire-systemj 
[Method  of  fire-systemi 
( Method  of  f  ire-systemj 
[Method  of  fire-system) 
[Method  of  fire-system) 
[Method  of  fire-system) 
[Method  of  fire-systemi 
[Method  of  fire-system) 
[Method  off  ire-systemj 
[Method  off  ire-systemj 
[Method  of  fire-system) 

[Method  of  fire-system] 
[Method  of  fire-systemi 

[Method  of  fire-system] 
[Method  of  fire-system] 
[Method  of  fire-system] 
[Method  of  fire-system] 
[Method  of  fire-system) 


:run  &optional  time-to-run  [Method 

Run  the  system.  Optionally,  run  it  for  Hime-to-run’  minutes. 

:  scheduler  [Method 

:  select-configuration  [Method 

:  set-all-tasks  .newvalue.  [Method 


off  ire-systemj 


: set-base-time  .newvalue. 

:  set-environment  plist 
:  set-environment-parameter  param  value 
: set-real-world-f iremap  .newvalue. 

:  single-macro-step-scheduler 

Macro  step  the  system  one  time. 

:  single-step 

Run  the  system  for  the  smallest  time  interval  possible. 

:  start 

Start  the  system. 


[Method 

[Method 

[Method 

[Method 

[Method 

[Method 

[Method 


of  fire 
of  fire 
of  fire 
of  f  ire 
of  fire 
of  f  ire 
of  fire 
of  fire 


-system) 

-system) 

-system] 

-system) 

-system] 

-system] 

-system] 

-system] 


[Method  of  fire-systemi 


[Method  of  fire-system) 


52 


CHAPTER  9 .  INTERFACE  REFERENCE  AM iVFM  L 


:  start-fire  &optional  radius  point  &oplional  point-y  [Method  of  fire-system) 

•stop  [Method  of  fire-system) 

Stop  the  system. 

:  task-menu-items  &optional  (task-type  t)  initial- task- list  [Method  of  fire-system) 

:  toggle-f  iremap  &opiional  (nextp  t)  [Method  of  fire-system] 

Make  the  left  firemap  pane  in  a  ‘two- view*  configuration  di-play  a  new  fi remap.  The 
firemap  chosen  is  the  next  one  in  the  firemap  list.  If  nextp  is  NIL,  use  the  previous 
map  on  the  li«t. 

:view-f  iremap  &optional  task  [Method  of  fire-system) 

fire-system-all-tasks  fire-system  [ Function ] 

fire-system-base-time  fire-system  [ Function ] 

f  ire-system-elapsed-time  fire-system  [ Function ) 

f ire-system-real-world-f  iremap  fire-system  [Function] 

fire-system-scheduler  fire-system  [Function] 

:  edit-parameters  [Method  of  f iremap-window] 

:  find-object-near-point  point  [Method  of  f  iremap-window] 

Returns  the  object  nearest  to  point. 

:  firemap  [Method  of  f  iremap-window] 

:  mouse-select-window-point  &optional  (mouse-doc  ” select  a  screen  [Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
point.”)  &key  (mouse-char 
tv:mouse-glyph-hollow-circle-pointcr) 

Select  a  point  from  the  map  using  the  mouse.  Return  the  point  selected  and  the 
button  clicked.  Only  single  clicks  are  accepted.  Mouse-M  is  bound  to  Abort  (that  is, 
it  returns  NIL  as  the  point  selected). 

: move-object  object  old-position  new-character  [Method  of  f  iremap-window] 

Draw  object  on  screen. 

:  object-menu  x  y  ( Method  of  f  iremap-window] 

Called  when  right  click  near  object 


[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 


[Method  off  iremap-window] 


:ongm-x 

:origin-y 

:point-on-screen-p  point 
:point-screen-x  point 
:point-screen-y  point 
: redraw-cell  point 

Redraw  a  single  cell. 

: refresh-highlights 
: refresh-objects 

:set-f  iremap  map  &optional  (refresh  t) 

highlight -cell  point  &key  resolution  color  type  alu  map  window 


[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 

[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Method  of  f  iremap-window] 
[Function] 


Highlight  a  cell.  Hype'  is  .'filled  or  :out!ine.  All  visible  maps  are  highlighted  unless 
‘map*  or  ‘window’  is  specified. 


53 


highlight-edge  edge  &key  full  width  color  type  alu  units  arrowp  map  window  [Ft/nctionJ 

Highlight  an  edge,  ‘width’  is  width  of  line  (in  units  :pixels  (default)  or  nneters). 
‘type’  is  :solid  or  clashed.  All  visible  maps  are  highlighted  unless  map  or  window  is 
specified. 

highlight-extent  pi  p2  &key  width  color  type  alu  map  window  [ Function ) 

Highlight  a  rectangular  region.  ‘PI’  can  be  either  a  point  or  an  extent  structure, 
‘type’  is  : filled,  :outline,  or  :dashed.  All  visible  maps  arc  highlighted  unless  ‘map’  or 
‘window’  is  specified. 

highlight-fire  fire  &rest  args  &key  (spokes  nil)  (color  'highlight- cyan*)  (projections  [Function] 
nil)  &allow-other-keys 

highlight-fire-cell  point  &key  color  type  alu  map  window  [Function] 

Highlight  a  ceil  at  fire  resolution,  ‘type’  is  either  :fillcd,  :outline.  All  visible  maps  are 
highlighted  unless  ‘map’  or  ‘window’  is  specified. 

highlight-line  from-point  to-point  &key  width  color  type  alu  units  arrowp  arrowheadsize[Function ) 
fill-arrow-p  band  clip  map  window 

Highlight  aline  between  two  points,  ‘width’  is  width  ofline  in  ‘units’  (’.pixels  (default) 
or  ’.meters)),  ‘type’  is  :solid  or  idashed.  If  ‘arrowp’  is  T,  draw  an  arrow  head  at  ‘to- 
point’.  All  visible  maps  are  highlighted  unless  map  or  window  is  specified. 

highlight-point  point  &key  radius  color  type  alu  units  map  window  [Function] 

Highlight  a  point  (draw  a  circle  around  it),  ‘units’  is  the  units  of  ‘radius’  (:pixcls 
(default)  or  :meters.)  ‘type’  is  either  :outline  or  rfillcd  (default).  All  visible  maps  are 
highlighted  unless  ‘map’  or  ‘window’  is  specified. 

highlight -polyline  point-list  &key  width  color  type  alu  units  arrowp  elosedp  center  map[Function] 
window 

Highlight  a  chain  of  line  segments  defined  by  the  list  of  points,  ‘width’  is  width  of 
line  (in  units  :pixels  (default)  or  :meters).  ‘type’  is  :solid  or  tdashed.  If  ‘arrowp’  is 
T,  draw  an  arrow  head  at  the  end  point,  if ‘elosedp’  is  T  (default),  the  points  form  a 
closed  polygon.  All  visible  maps  are  highlighted  unless  ‘map’  or  ‘window’  is  specified. 

highlight- vector  point  angle  radius  &key  width  color  type  alu  units  arrow  map  window  [Function] 

Highlight  a  vector,  ‘width’  is  width  of  line  (in  units  :pixels  (default)  or  :meters). 
‘type’  is  isolid  or  :dashed.  If  ‘arrowp’  is  T,  draw  an  arrow  head  at  the  end  point, 
‘length’  is  the  length  of  the  vector  in  dength-units  (:meters  (default)  or  ’.pixels)  All 
visible  maps  are  highlighted  unless  map  or  window  is  specified. 


:add-firemap  map 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  after  :  init  &rest  ignore 

[Method  of  icon] 

: after-draw-character-function 

[Method  of  icon] 

:b&w-character 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  before  :  kill  &rest  ignore 

[Method  of  icon) 

:bg-color 

[Method  of  icon] 

: color-character 

[Method  of  icon] 

: current-character 

[Method  of  icon] 

:fg-color 

[ftfetkod  of  icon) 

:firemaps 

[Method  of  icon] 

: minimum-display-size 

[Method  of  icon] 

54 


CHAPTER  9.  INTERFA CE  REFERENCE  MANUA L 


:name 

[Method  of  icon] 

:object-size 

[Method  of  icon] 

: orientations 

[Method  of  icon] 

tposition 

[Method  of  icon] 

: print-self  stream  Brest  ignore 

[Method  of  icon] 

:remove-f  iremap  map 

[Method  of  icon] 

: set-after-draw-character-function  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon] 

:set-bfew-character  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  set-bg-color  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  set-color  color 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  set-color-character  . newvalue . 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  set-current-character  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon) 

:set-fg-color  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  set-f  iremaps  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon] 

: set-minimum-display-size  . newvalue . 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  set-name  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon] 

: set-object-size  . newvalue . 

[Method  of  icon] 

: set-orientations  . newvalue . 

[Method  of  icon] 

:  set-position  .newvalue. 

[Method  of  icon] 

: wrapper  :  set-position  Bbody  body 

[Method  of  icon] 

icon-after-draw-character-function  icon 

[  Function) 

icon-b&w-character  icon 

[ Function ] 

icon-bg-color  icon 

[Function] 

icon-color-character  icon 

[Function] 

icon-current-character  icon 

[Function] 

icon-fg-color  icon 

[Function] 

icon-f iremaps  icon 

[Function] 

icon-minimum-display-size  icon 

[Function] 

icon-name  icon 

[Function] 

icon-object-size  icon 

[Function] 

icon-orientations  icon 

[Function] 

icon-position  icon 

[Function] 

load-bitmaps  Bkey  (background  i) 

[ Function ] 

Load  the  bitmaps  for  fi remap  bitmap  caching. 

make-desktop-f iremap-window 

[Function] 

Create  a  fi  remap  window  on  the  desktop. 

move-an-object  object  Boptional  old-position  new-charactcr 

[Function] 

move-rectangle-within-window  window  z  y  width  height 

[Function] 

outline-cell  point  Brest  args 

[Function] 

55 


outline-fire-cell  point  Brest  args  [Function] 

random-highlight  [Function] 

Picks  a  random  color  from  *  ’‘highlight-colors1'*. 

save -bitmaps  [Function] 

Save  the  bitmaps  for  firemap  bitmap  caching.  See  H  bit mnp-path name-defaults*, 
save-color-map  Boptional  (filename  ”ph:fonts;banded- color-map”)  [Function] 

Use  this  function  to  write  the  color  map  to  disk. 

set-phoenix-icon-background-color  color  [Function] 

spurn  [Function] 

S  elect  P  oint  U  nder  M  ouse  -  selects  a  point  with  the  mouse  and  returns  it. 
using-band  (band)  Bbody  body  [Macro] 


Use  a  band  just  in  a  single  window.  This  alters  the  plane-mask  of  the  window  so  that 
only  the  specified  color  planes  will  be  changed  by  drawing  routines. 


with-highlight  (highlight- form)  Bbody  body 


[Macro] 


Executes  body  with  highlight  specified  in  *  highlight-form*  turned  on  then  turns  it 
off. 


with-method-clipping  Bbody  body 

Should  be  used  if  drawing  methods  are  used. 


[Macro] 


56 


CHAPTER  9.  INTERFACE  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


Chapter  10 


Fire  Simulation 


The  fire  simulation  is  controlled  by  a  periodic-task  which  is  an  instance  of  the  fire-simulation  flavor. 
By  default,  the  fire-simulation  updates  the  fire  every  five  minutes.  The  computation  of  rate  of  spread 
is  based  on  ground-cover,  elevation  gradient,  wind  speed,  wind  direction,  humidity  and  temperature. 
The  simulator  implements  most  parts  of  the  fire  model  in  [4],  though  it  doesn’t  include  season,  cloud 
cover,  time  of  day  and  slope  orientation  (ie.  south  side  of  a  mountain)  as  provided  in  the  model. 
Information  about  burn  times  and  spotting  was  empirically  derived. 

The  basic  implementation  idea  is  as  follows:  whenever  a  cell  catches  on  fire,  the  ignite  lime  of  all 
its  neighbors  is  computed.  If  a  neighbor  already  has  an  ignite  time,  and  the  ignite  time  from  the 
newly  ignited  cell  is  earlier,  the  earlier  time  is  used.  The  simulator  maintains  a  large  queue  of  cells 
to  be  ignited,  sorted  by  ignite  time.  Since  fire  changes  state,  (low->hot~>smoIdering->burned-out), 
burning  cells  have  state  change  times.  Burning  cells  are  also  kept  in  the  queue. 

While  the  next  event  in  the  queue  occurs  before  the  end  of  the 
current  five  minute  cycle 
If  the  event  is  an  ignition  event 
ignite  the  cell 
compute  its  change  state  time 
enqueue  the  change  event 
for  all  neighbors  of  the  cell 
if  neighbor  is  ignitable 

it  =  time  it  takes  for  fire  to  spread  from  cell  to  neighbor  + 
ignite_time(cell) 

if  ignite__time  of  neighbor  is  nil  or  it  <  ipnite_time (neighbor) 
ignite_time (neighbor)  =  it 
enqueue (neighbor ) 

If  event  is  a  change  state  event 
set  cell  fire  state 
if  cell  is  still  burning 

compute  new  change  state  time 
enqueue(cell) 

The  “neighbor”  set  of  a  cell  consists  of  all  adjacent  cells  (8  connected)  plus  all  cells  a  knight’s  move 
away;  thus  a  cell  has  16  neighbors.  The  reason  for  the  including  the  knight’s  tour  is  to  smooth  out 
the  shape  of  a  fire.  With  only  8  neighbors,  fires  tend  to  be  oddly  shaped  unless  the  wind  comes  from 
one  of  the  eight  compass  points.  Even  with  16  neighbors  the  fire  looks  odd  when  the  wind  comes  from 
certain  directions.  This  can  be  fixed,  at  a  cost  in  epu  time,  by  increasing  the  number  of  directions  in 
which  a  fire  could  spread. 


57 


58 


CHAPTER  10.  FIRE  SIMULATION 


Before  deciding  to  compute  the  ignition  of  a  neighbor,  the  simulation  checks  to  see  if  the  neighbor  is 
ignitablc.  A  neighbor  is  ignitable  if: 

•  The  neighbor  contains  burnable  ground  cover  (ie.  no  lake)  AND 

•  Either  there  arc  no  obstructions  between  the  cell  and  neighbor  (roads  &  rivers)  or  the  obstruction 
can  be  jumped  (tested  probabilistically) 

When  the  simulator  changes  a  fire  state  it  modifies  the  real-world-f iremap.  The  simulator  stores 
simulation  information  in  the  real-world  map  in  fire-info  data  structures.1 


1  INTERNAL  NOTE:  This  should  he  changed.  The  real-world  map  should  just,  contain  fire  state,  type  (mod  4)  . 
The  simulation  can  use  its  own  map  of  type  T,  to  store  the  fire-info.  That  would  really  clean  up  the  fire  access  code 
and  hide  the  simulation's  implementation  from  other  tasks 


Chapter  11 


Fire  Simulation  Reference  Manual 


♦default-fire-increment*  [  Variable] 

Default  period  for  the  fire  simulation  task. 

*def  ault-spotting-scale-f  actor*  [Variable] 

Amount  to  modify  the  base  probabilities  of  fire  spotting.  0  =  no  spotting.  This  is  a 
multiplier  for  the  values  in  ^jump-probabilities*’. 

*f  eatures-that-stop-f  ire*  [  Variable] 

*gc-transition-times*  ( Variable] 

AN  array  containing  the  amount  of  time  to  change  from  state  to  state  (nothing  -> 

low  ->  hot  ->  smouldering  ->  burnedout)  indexed  by  ground  cover. 

*humidity-temperature->f  uel-moisture*  [  Karza6/e] 

♦  initial-environment*  [ Variable] 

♦jump-probabilities*  [Variable] 


The  probability  that  a  fire-cell  containing  a  feature  of  the  specified  type  will  catch 
fire. 


♦primary-wind-direction-change-interval*  [  Variable] 

♦primary-wind-speed-change-interval*  ( Variable] 

burnable-cell?  cell-point  map  [Function] 

T  iff  the  cell  has  burnable  ground  cover  [that  is,  it  isn’t  water]. 

bumable-ground-cover-p  ground-cover  [Function] 

calculate-ros  from-gc  angle  slope-percent  &optional  (verbose  nil)  (randomize  i)  [Function] 

Given  a  cell  on  fire,  calculate  the  rate  of  spread  in  the  direction  of  to-cell.  Return  a 
value  in  meters/minute. 

cell-stops-f  ire-p  p map  &optionaF(resolutinn  *  go- cell-resolution')  [ Function 1 

chop-up-segment-at-nonburnable-cells  pO  pi  map  [Function] 

Returns  a  new  list  of  segments  on  the  segment  [P0,P1]  which  don’t  cross  any  non- 
burnable  cells  [lakes],  but  with  endpoints  that  are  in  the  lakes. 

copy-fuel-model  object  [Function] 

create-fire-info  [Function] 


59 


60 


CHAPTER  H.  FIRE  SIMULATION  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


current-wind-direction 
fire-simulation 
:highlight-queued-f or-ignition 
:ignite-cell  point  Brest  ignore 

Interactively  set  cell  on  fire. 
:recalculate-all-ignite-times 
:recalculate-ignite-time  point 


( Function j 
[ Function j 

[Method  of  f  ire-simulation] 
[Method  of  f  ire-simulationj 

[Method  of  fire-simulation] 
[Method  of  f  ire-simulationj 


Recalculate  the  ignite  time  for  the  specified  point.  This  should  be  called  anytime 
something  happens  that  may  effect  the  ignite-  time  (ie.,  fire-line,  retardent,  wind 
change,  etc.). 


:  set-update-maps  .newvalue.  [Method  of  fire-simulation) 

fuel~model-moisture->base-ros  fuel-model  [Function] 

fuel-model-non-array-wind-factor  fuel-model  [Function] 

fuel-model-p  object  [Function] 

fuel-model-slope-percent->slope-f  actor  fuel-model  ( Function ] 

fuel-model-type  fuel-model  [Function] 

fuel-model-wind-> wind-factor  fuel-model  [Function] 

pfi  Boptional  (point  (spurn))  [ Function j 

P  rint  F  ire  I  nfo  at  ‘point’  to  ^standard-output*.  Used  for  debugging, 
randomize-wind-magnitude  mag 

Modify  wind  mag.  +/-  10%. 
rate-of-spread  gc  direction  grade 

re-calc-ignite-time  point  Boptional  (combination-method  : minimum ) 

Recalculate  the  ignite  time  for  the  specified  point,  ‘combination-method’  is  either 
:set  or  :minimum. 

ros  pi  p2  map  [ Function ] 

Return  the  rate  of  spread  of  the  fire  from  pi  to  p2  in  meters/second.  Return  NIL  if 
fire  can’t  spread  over  the  ground  cover. 

simulate-forward  Boptional  (steps  1)  (refresh  t)  [Function] 

Run  the  fire  simulator  for  ‘steps’  steps  of  its  default  period.  If  ‘refresh’  is  non-nil  the 
display  is  updated. 

time-to-ignite  gc  distance  angle  delta- elevation  [ Function ] 

Return  the  time  ignite-cell  should  catch  on  fire  (in  seconds) 
wind-magnitude-fn  magnitude  angle  [Function] 


[Function] 

[Function] 

[Function] 


Chapter  12 


Miscellaneous  Functions  Reference 
Manual 


*f iremap-area* 

GC  area  where  firemap  data  is  stored. 


fpi 

pi  as  a  single  float, 
assocf  alist  item  &  optional  default 
assocq  alist  item 
break-string  string  length 

Break  a  string  at  spaces  and  hyphens  across  several  lines  of  length, 
call-stack  &optional  (process  current-process) 

Return  a  list  of  the  functions  on  the  call  stack, 
deletef  item  list  &rest  delete-args 

Same  as  (setf  list  (delete  item  list  delete-args)). 
div2  i  &  optional  (power  1) 

Divide  positive  fixnum  i  by  2  or  a  power  of  2. 


exp2  n 

2~n 

flag->object  flag 
log2  n 

Log  of  n  to  base  2. 

make-initialized-array  &rest  inits 
max-using-zero-if-nil  a  b 
mod2  n  power 

Find  n  mod  a  power  of  2. 

name-of  object 


Tries  to  return  a  reasonable  handle  for  object. 


( Variable] 

[ Constant } 

(Fundmn] 
(Function) 
( Function j 

( Function ] 

[Macro] 

[Macro] 

[Macro] 

[Macro] 

[Macro] 

[Function] 

[Function] 

[Macro] 

[ Function ] 


61 


62 


CHAPTER  12.  MISCELLANEOUS  FUNCTIONS  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


nice-call-stack  [Function] 

Return  a  call  stack  starting  at  the  right  spot. 

nmsrge-list  listl  Usi2  compare-fn  &key  (key  (function  identity))  [ Function ] 

Destructive  merge  of  list2  into  listl.  Both  lists  care  may  be  changed.  This  works  best 
if  the  lists  are  NOT  cdr-codcd. 

object->flag  object  [Macro] 

object-in-resource-p  resource-name  object  [Function] 

Determine  if  object  is  in  the  free  pool  of  resource  RESOURCE-NAME, 
ject-set  &rest  objects  %  [Macro] 

Forms  a  set  out  of  a  bunch  of  objects.  Same  as  (set-add  (object->flag  ol)  (object- 
>flag  o2)  ...). 

ordered-insert  tit  list  &optional  (test-fn  (function  <))  key  [Function] 

Insert  elt  into  an  ordered  set. 

ordered-insertf  item  list  &rest  args  [Macro] 

Same  as  (setf  list  (ordered-insert  item  list  args). 

ph-apropos  string  &key  predicate  boundp  fboundp  [Function] 

Looks  for  STRING  in  the  Phoenix  package  only. 

ph-who-calls  symbol-or-symbols  [Function] 

Print  who  calls  ‘symbol-or-svmbols’  in  the  Phoenix  package, 
phoenix-float  n  [Macro] 

A  faster  version  of  (float  n  l.OfO). 

remassoc  alist  key  [Function] 

removef  item  list  &rest  delete-args  [Macro] 

Same  as  (setf  list  (remove  item  list  delete-args)). 

set-add  set  &rest  flags  [Macro] 

set-addf  set  &rest  flags  [Macro] 

set-assocf  alist  key  value  [Macro] 

Alist  must  be  a  setffable  form.  Shouldn’t  be  a  function  returning  an  alist. 
set-clear  set  &rest  flags  [Macro] 

set-clearf  set  &rest  flags  [Macro] 

set-test  set  flag  [Macro] 

some*  (element  list)  &body  body  [Macro] 

An  iterative  version  of  the  function  ‘some’.  Bind  each  element  of  list  in  turn.  If  body 
returns  non-nil,  return  the  result.  This  is  faster  than  the  regular  function,  especially 


when  lexical  variables  are  used  in  the  predicate. 


square  x 

times2  i  Boptional  power 

Multiply  by  a  power  of  2. 
trunc-coord  coord 
trunc-x  point 


[j Function] 
[Macro] 

[Macro] 

[Macro] 


63 


trunc-y  point  [Macro] 

t rune 2  n  power  [Macro] 

Truncate  n  to  a  power  of  2. 

truncate-to-f actor  n  factor  [Macro] 

with-phoenix-package  &body  body  [Macro] 


64 


CHAPTER  12.  MISCELLANEOUS  FUNCTIONS  REFERENCE  MANUA  L 


Appendix  A 

File  Organization 


The  Phoenix  sources  are  distributed  among  various  directories  on  the  logical  host  “PH:". 

“AM;"  Definitions  of  the  standard  agent  model,  communication,  reflexes  and  sensors. 

“A  U;"  Agent  utilities. 

“ BD ;"  Bulldozer  KBs  and  definitions. 

“COLOR;"  Color  enhancements. 

“ DFB ;"  Distributed  .treboss  KBs  and  definitions. 

“DOC;"  Documentation. 

“FD;"  Fireboss  KBs  and  definitions. 

“FC;"  Fuel  carrier  KBs  and  definitions. 

“FD;"  Fuel  depot  KBs  and  definitions. 

“FIREMAP;"  Firemaps  and  firemap  window  definitions. 

“FONTS;"  Fonts  and  color  tables. 

“FS;"  Interface  and  top  level  definitions. 

“IN;"  Instrumentation  utilities. 

“MAPS;"  Compiled  map  files. 

“PA;"  The  Phoenix  agent  definitions  and  utilities. 

“PATCHES;"  Patch  files  and  directories. 

“PII;"  The  top  level  Phoenix  directory. 

“PL;"  Plane  KBs  and  definitions. 

“SCENARIOS;"  Scenarios  and  scripts. 

“SIM;"  Fire  simulator  code. 

“TASKS;"  Tasks  and  task  scheduler  code. 

“WT;"  Watchtower  KBs  and  definitions. 


65 


APPENDIX  A 


.  FILE  ORGANIZATION 


Appendix  B 


System  Loading  and  Maintenance 
Reference  Manual 


*do-phoenix-init*  [Variable] 

De. ermines  whether  the  initializations  on  ‘phoenix-initialization-list’  are  run  when 

the  system  is  loaded. 

♦phoenix-initialization-list*  ( Variable ] 

This  initialization  list  is  run  during  the  initialization  of  the  Phoenix  system. 

♦phoenix-package*  [  Variable] 

The  "Phoenix”  package. 

*phoenix-system-generic-±iles*  [  Variable] 

A  list  of  all  generic  pathnames  that  make  up  phoenix.  This  is  needed  to  make  sure 

that  no  pathnames  are  GC’ed  away. 

♦standalone-flavors*  ,  [Variable] 

List  of  all  flavors  that  should  be  compiled. 

add-phoenix-initialization  name  form  ^  [Function] 

Add  a  form  to  be  run  at  Phoenix  initialization  time. 

compile-phoenix-for-load-band  &opiional  force-increment-patch-version  [Function] 

Compiles  and  loads  Pheonix,  rebuilds  flavors  and  clears  patches. 

f ind-component-systems-with-files  system  [Function] 

Return  the  list  of  component-systems  for  a  system.  The  components  are  returned  in 
an  order  suitable  for  compilation. 

make-phoenix  £ best  make-system-args  [Function] 

Run  make-system  for  *all  Phoenix  subsystems. 

make-phoenix-specific  &rest  make-system-args  [Function] 

Run  make-system  for  all  Phr  nix  specific  systems. 

make-phoenix-utils  Brest  make- system- args  [Function] 

Run  make-system  for  the  Phoenix  External  Utils  system. 

phoenix-patch-level  [Function] 

Returns  the  number  of  patches  that  have  been  made  to  the  current  Phoenix  system. 


67 


68 


APPENDIX  B.  SYSTEM  LOADING  AND  MAINTENANCE  REFERENCE  MANUAL 


69 


Glossary 

band  A  bit  pattern  used  to  mask  Uie  color  lookup  (able  during  graphics  drawing  operations.  Also 
known  as  a  color  plane  mask 

cell  An  element  in  a  grid  array. 

command  typein  The  process  bv  which  a  user  uses  the  keyboard  and/or  mouse  to  select  a  predefined 
interfacing  action  to  execute. 

epu  time  The  representation  of  time  that  an  Explorer  process  maintains. 

desktop  An  overlapping  window  interface  to  Phoenix. 

Explorer  Texas  Instrument’s  standalone  Lisp  workstation. 

Explorer  II  A  high-performance  Explorer  based  upon  a  TPs  VLSI  Lisp  microprocessor. 

feature  edge  A  representation  of  a  topographical  surface  feature  which  has  a  start  point,  an  end 
point  and  a  width. 

firemap  A  comprehensive  data  structure  which  represents  topographical  information  such  as  ground 
cover,  roads,  rivers,  buildings,  fire  and  firelines. 

firemap  pane  A  tiled  window  component  of  the  Phoenix  window  interface  which  displays  the  firemap. 

grid  array  A  two  dimensional  matrix  which  holds  topographical  information. 

internal  time  The  representation  of  time  which  is  used  by  the  internal  data  structures  of  the  testbed. 

neighborhood  A  descriptive  specification  using  relative  positions  of  the  cells  near  a  cell  in  a  grid 
array. 

pointset  A  data  structure  consisting  of  a  set  of  points.  Often  used  in  region-growing  algorithms. 

polyline  A  data  structure  consisting  set  of  lines.  Used  to  define  curves. 

process  An  Explorer  process.  A  set  of  sequential  operations  in  shared  virtual  address  space  with  a 
program  counter,  stack  of  function  calls  and  special-variable  bindings. 

simple  process  A  process  that  does  not  save  its  state  between  calls. 

simulation  time  The  representation  of  time  which  is  presented  to  the  user  by  the  Phoenix  interface. 

task  The  basic  computational  organizational  unit  in  the  testbed.  Built  upon  Explorer  processes. 

task  time  The  representation  of  internal  time  that  a  task  maintains. 


70 


Bibliography 


(lj  Adrian  Bowyer  and  John  Woodwark.  A  programmer's  geometry.  Butterworths,  1983. 

[2]  Paul  R.  Cohen,  Michael  Greenberg,  David  Hart,  and  Adcle  Howe.  Trial  by  fire:  Understanding  the 
design  requirements  for  agents  in  complex  environments.  AI  Magazine ,  Fall  1989.  also  Technical 
Report  89-61,  COINS  Dept,  University  of  Massachusetts. 

[3]  David  M.  Hart  and  Vipul  Gupta.  The  phoenix  user  manual.  Technical  report,  COINS  Dept., 
University  of  Massachusetts,  Amherst,  MA,  1990. 

[4]  National  Wildfire  Coordinating  Group,  Boise,  Idaho.  NWCG  Fireline  Handbook ,  November  1985. 


71 


Index 


(mod  16) 

Element  type  of  ground  cover  grid-array, 
24 

Element  type  of  fire  grid-array,  27 
(mod  4) 

Element  type  of  fire  grid-array,  58 
(mod  65536) 

Element  type  of  elevation  grid-array,  24 
1 - s  e  c  ond- c  omput  e 
Function,  9,  13 
1 /5-second-compute 
Function,  13 
: activate 

Method  of  task,  6,  14 
Keyword,  6 
rafter  : activate 

Method  of  task,  6-7,  10 
Method  of  periodic-task,  8 
: activate-all-tasks 

Method  of  fire-system,  50 
r activate-task 

Method  of  fire-system,  50 
: active-agents 

Method  of  fire-system,  50 
: add-fir emap 

Method  of  icon,  53 
add-phoenix-initialization 
Function,  67 

: after-draw-character-function 
Method  of  icon,  53 
after-task-execution 
Function,  18 
*all-f eatures-flag* 

Constant,  33 
all-f iremaps 
Function,  37 
: all-f iremaps 

Method  of  fire-system, 50 
rail- inferiors 

Method  of  fire-system, 50 
rail-tasks 

Method  of  fire-system, 50 


allocate- fire-info 
Function,  32 
angle-bet ween-points 
Function,  39 
area-of -triangle 
Function,  39 
assocf 

Function,  61 
assocq 

Function,  61 
average-point 
Function,  39 
rb&w-character 

Method  of  icon,  53 
*b&w-desktop-color* 

Variable,  49 
*banded-color-map* 

Variable,  49 
base-time 

Function,  13 
rbase-time 

Method  of  fire-system,  50 
rbg-color 

Method  of  icon,  53 

bit 

Element  type  of  fire  grid-array,  27 
♦bitmap-pathname-defaults* 
Variable,  49 
*blip-alist* 

Variable,  49 
break-string 
Function,  61 
brief -time-stamp 
Function,  13 
burnable-cell? 

Function,  59 

bumable-ground-cover-p 
Function,  34,  59 
calculate-ros 
Function,  59 
call-stack 

Function,  61 


72 


INDEX 


73 


tv : careful-notif y 
Function,  11 

cell-approx-elevation 
Function,  25,  35 

cell-boundary-crossed-multiply-by-f eatures-p 
Function,  35 
cell-center-point 
Function,  40 
cell-dynamic-edges 
Function,  35 
cell-dynamic-feature 
Function,  35 

cell-dynamic-feature-edge 
Function,  35 

cell-dynamic-features -in-area 
Function,  35 
cell-elevation 

Function,  25,  28,  35 
cell-feature 

Function,  29,  35 
: cell-feature 

Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
cell-feature-edge 
Function,  35 
cell-feature-flag 
Function,  35 

cell-f eatures-in-area 
Function,  35 
cell-fire 

Function,  36 
cell-fire-bum-state 
Function,  36 

: cell-f ire-burn-state 
Method  of  firemap,  36 
: cell-fire-display-info 
Method  of  firemap,  36 
cell-fire-flags 
Function,  36 

cell-fire-info-structure 
Function,  37 
cell-fire-state 
Function,  29,  37 
cell-ground-cover 
Function,  24,  28,  36 
:  cell-grouncl-co  ver 

Method  of  firemap,  36 
cell-ignite-time 
Function,  37 
cell-static-edges 
Function,  35 
cell-static-feature 


Function,  35 

cell-static-feature-edge 
Function,  35 

cell-static-features  in-area 
Function,  35 
cell-stops-f ire-p 
Function,  59 
center-point 
Function,  40 
chains->km 

Function,  39 
chains->meters 
Function,  39 

chains/hour- >meters/internal- time 
Function,  39 

chains/hour-  >meters/minute 
Function,  39 

chains/hour->meters/second 
Function,  39 

tcheck-for-non- vertex-intersect ions 
Method  of  firemap,  37 
chop-up-segment-at-nonburnable-cells 
Function,  59 

♦circle-neighborhood-radius-index* 
Variable,  45 

♦circle-neighborhoods* 

Variable,  45 
: clear-highlights 

Method  of  fire-system, 50 
: clear-trace-window 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: closure 

Method  of  task,  15 
*color->highlight-b&w* 

Variable,  49 

*color->highlight-color* 

Variable,  49 
: color-character 

Method  of  icon,  53 
♦color-desktop-color* 

Variable,  49 

♦command-command-table* 

Variable,  49 
♦command- tables* 

Variable,  49 

compile-phoenix-for-load-band 
Function,  67 
continuation-format 
Function,  13 
copy-extent 
Function,  40 


74 


INDEX 


copy-feature-edge 
Function,  38 
copy-fuel-model 
Function,  59 
count 

Instance  Variable  of  periodic-task,  8 
Instance  Variable  of  explicit-task,  8 
:cpu-time 

Method  of  task,  15 
Keyword,  5 

cpu-usec->internal-time 
Function,  13 

*cpu-usec/internal-time* 

Variable,  13 

: cpu-usec/ internal-time 
Method  of  task,  15 

cpu-usec/internal-time->minutes/cpu-sec 
Function,  13 
cr eat e-bitmaps 
Function,  50 
create-extent 
Function,  40 
create-f ire-info 
Function,  59 
: create-static-edge 

Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
create-task-demo-tasks 
Function,  9 

*cs-burned-out-f ire* 

Constant,  28,  32 
*cs-hot-f ire* 

Constant,  28,  32 
*cs-low-f ire* 

Constant,  28,  32 
*cs-mask* 

Constant,  32 
*cs-no-fire* 

Constant,  28,  32 
*cs-smoldering-f ire* 

Constant,  28,  32 
:  current-character 
Method  of  icon,  53 
current-scheduler 
Function,  20-21 
♦current-scheduler* 

Variable,  21 
♦current-task* 

Variable,  18,  21 
current-time 
Function,  13 

current-wind-direction 


Function,  GO 
:deactivate 

Method  of  task,  6,  15 
:after  :deactivate 
Method  of  task,  15 
:before  :deactivate 
Method  of  task,  7 
: deactivate- task 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: deallocate 

Method  of  f  iremap,  28,  37 
debug-f ormat 

Function,  10,  13 
♦debug-screen* 

Variable,  49 

♦default-elevation-gradient* 
Variable,  49 

*def ault-f ire-increment* 

Variable,  59 
*def ault-f iremap* 

Variable,  28,  37 
♦default-map-editor-state* 
Variable,  49 
♦default-map-file* 

Variable,  37 

*default-spotting-scale-f actor* 
Variable,  59 
deffeature 
Macro,  34 
deff ire 

Macro,  32 
def ground-cover 
Macro,  34 

define-desktop-window 
Macro,  48,  50 
defmapfn 

Macro,  34 

degrees->radians 
Function,  39 
:delete-edge 

Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
: delete-edge-f rom-array 
Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
: delete-point-edges 

Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
: delete-point-feature-near-point 
Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
:delete-task 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: delete-window 

Method  of  f  iremap,  37 


INDEX 


75 


deletef 

Macro,  61 
: dequeue-task 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  21 
:describe-task 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
utils: rdesktop-mixin 
Flavor,  48 
direction 

Function,  40 

display-phoenix-icon-window 
Function,  50 

*distance-f or-sensitivity* 
Variable,  49 
div2 

Macro,  61 

do-exposed-map-windows 
Macro,  50 
do-feature-edges 
Macro,  45 

*do-phoenix-init* 

Variable,  67 
do-point-set 
Macro,  45 
do-polyline 
Macro,  45 

do-vert ex-neighbors 
Macro,  45 
dof iremap 
Macro,  45 
domapwindows 
Macro,  50 
doneighbors 
Macro,  45 

dont-swapout-f unction 

Macro,  11,  21 
: draw-objects 

Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
dynamic-edge-exists-p 
Function,  36 
: dynamic-edges 

Method  of  f  iremap,  31 
♦dynamic-feature-flags* 
Variable,  33 
edge-cell-list 
Function,  38 
:edge-vector 

Method  of  f  iremap,  31 
edges-in-area 
Function,  38 

edges-meet-at-vertex-p 


Function,  38 
; edit-environment 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
:edit-f ire 

Method  of  fire-system, 51 
: edit-parameters 

Method  of  task,  15 
Method  of  task-scheduler, 21 
Method  of  f iremap-window, 52 
:edit-task 

Method  of  fire-system, 51 
: elapsed-time 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: elevation 

Method  of  f  iremap,  31 
♦elevation-cell-resolution* 
Constant,  24,  32 
*elevat ion-cell-size* 

Constant,  32 
: enqueue-task 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  21 
:erase-fire 

Method  of  f  iremap,  28,  37 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
*essentially-zero-threshold* 
Variable,  39 
estimated-time 
Function,  13 

exact-point-separation 
Function,  40 
exact-time 

Function,  7,  13 
exact -time-stamp 
Function,  13 

exp2 

Macro,  61 

:  exposed-f iremap-windows 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
extend-segment 
Function,  40 
extent-intersection 
Function,  40 
extent-lower-right 
Function,  40 
exient-p 

Function,  40 
extent-upper-left 
Function,  40 
*f-building* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-f ireline* 


76 


INDEX 


Constant,  25,  33 
*f-riverl28* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-riverl6* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-river32* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-river4* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-river64* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-river8* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-roadl6* 

Constant,  25,  33 
*f-road4* 

Constant,  25,  29,  33 
*f-road8* 

Constant,  25,  33 
♦feature-cell-resolution* 
Constant,  26,  33 
♦feature-cell-size* 

Constant,  33 
feature-edge 

Data  Structure,  25 
f eature-edge-bot-point-from 
Function,  38 

f eature-edge-bot-point-to 
Function,  38 

f eature-edge-cen-point-from 
Function,  38 

f eature-edge-cen-point-to 
Function,  38 

feature-odge-from-point 
Function,  38 

feature-edge-from-vertex 
Function,  38 
feature-edge-index 
Function,  38 
f  eatur e-edge-length 
Function,  38 
f eature-edge-p 
Function,  38 
feature-edge-plist 
Function,  38 

f eature-edge-to-point 
Function,  38 

feature-edge-to-vertex 
Function,  38 

feature-edge-top-point-from 
Function,  38 


feature-edge- top-point- to 
Function,  38 
feature-edge-tvpe 
Function,  38 
feature-edges 

Data  Structure,  27 
feature-name 
Function,  3*1 
♦feature-names* 

Variable,  33 

f eature-of-type-in-area-p 
Function,  38 

♦feature-overlay-order* 

Variable,  33 
feature-width 
Function,  34 
♦feature-widths* 

Variable,  33 

*f eatures-that-stop-f ire* 

Variable,  59 
*f eet-per-km* 

Constant,  39 
:fg-color 

Method  of  icon,  53 
: filename 

Method  of  firemap,  31 
f ind-component-systems-with-f iles 
Function,  67 

:f ind-edge-nearest-to-point 
Method  of  firemap,  36 
: f ind-ob j ect-near-point 

Method  of  firemap- window,  52 
f ind-phoenix-system 
Function,  50 

f ind-point-on-edge-in-cell 
Function,  38 

find-point-on-some-feature-in-cell 
Function,  36 
find-task 

Function,  14 

: f ind-vert ex-at-point 
Method  of  firemap,  36 
:f ind-vertex-nearest-to-point 
Method  of  firemap,  36 
:fire 

Method  of  firemap,  31 
fire-bum-state 
Macro,  32 

♦fire-cell-resolution* 

Constant,  32 
♦fire-cell-size* 


INDEX 


Constant,  32 
:f ire-extents 

Method  of  firemap,  31 
f  ire-flag- >number 
Function,  32 
fire-flags 
Macro,  32 
fire-info 

Data  Structure,  28-29,  58 

fire-info-bum-state 

Macro,  32 

fire-inf o-change-time 
Function,  32 

f ire-inf o-ignite-time 
Function,  32 
fire-info-point 
Function,  32 
fire-inf o- state 
Function,  33 
fire-name 

Function,  32 
★fire-names* 

Variable,  32 
★fire-neighborhood* 

Variable,  45 
fire-simulation 
Function,  60 
Flavor,  57 
fire-system 

Function,  2,  29 
Flavor,  2,  20,  47 
★fire-system* 

Variable,  13 

fire-system-all-tasks 
Function,  52 

fire-system-base-time 
Function,  52 

fire-system-elapsed- time 
Function,  52 

f ire-system-real-world-f iremap 
Function,  52 

fire-system-scheduler 
Function,  52 
f ireline-in-cell-p 
Function,  36 
firemap 

Flavor,  24,  28 
:  firemap 

Method  of  f iremap-window,  52 
★f iremap-area* 

Variable,  61 


f iremap-dynamic-edges 
Function,  31 
firemap-edge- vector 
Function,  3 1 
f iremap-elevatd  on 
Function,  31 
f iremap-f ilename 
Function,  3 1 
f iremap-f ire 
Function,  31 
f iremap-f ire-extents 
Function,  31 

f iremap-f iremap-windows 
Function,  31 
f iremap-ground-cover 
Function,  31 

f iremap-objects-to-display 
Function,  31 
f iremap-static-edges 
Function,  31 

f iremap-update-windows 
Function,  31 

f iremap-vertex-vector 
Function,  31 
f iremap-window 
Flavor,  48 
: f iremap-windows 

Method  of  firemap,  31 
:f iremaps 

Method  of  icon,  53 
f  irep 

Macro,  33 
fixnum 

Element  type  of  fire  grid-array,  27-28 
f  lag->object 
Macro,  61 
fpi 

Constant,  61 
free-f ire-info 
Function,  33 
free-operations 
Macro,  14 

*f s-features-present* 

Constant,  32 
*f s-ignitablc* 

Constant,  32 
*f s-mask* 

Constant,  32 
*f s-not-ignitable* 

Constant,  32 

fuel-model-moisture->base-ros 


78 


INDEX 


ft 


w 


Function,  60 

fuel-model-non-array-wind-factor 
Function,  60 
fuel-model-p 
Function,  60 

fuel-model-slope-percent- >  slope-factor 
Function,  60 
fuel-model-type 
Function,  60 

fuel-model-wind-  >wind-f  actor 
Function,  60 
*gc-agriculture* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-boundary* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-cell-resolution* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-cell-size* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-chapparal* 

Constant,  24,  34 
*gc-hardwood* 

Constant,  24,  28,  34 
★gc-lake* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-marsh* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-meadow* 

Constant, -24,  34 
★gc-rocky* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-softwood* 

Constant,  24,  34 
*gc- suburban* 

Constant,  24,  34 
★gc-transition-times* 

Variable,  59 
★gc-urban* 

Constant,  24,  34 
generic-cpu-time-task 
Flavor,  5 

: gener ic-cpu-time-task-toplevel 

Method  of  generic-cpu-time-task,  5 
generic-explicit-task 
Flavor,  5 

generic-periodic-task 
Flavor,  5 

: get-environment 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: get-environment-parameter 
Method  of  fire-system, 51 


grid-array 

Data  Structure,  23 
grid-array-aref 
Function,  38 
grid-array-ref 
Function,  38 
grid-arrays 

Data  Structure,  24 
: ground-cover 

Method  of  firemap,  31 
ground-cover-name 
Function,  24,  34 
★ground-cover-names* 

Variable,  34 
ground-cover-type 
Function,  34 
★ground-cover-types* 

Variable,  34 

half -line-inter sects- segment -p 
Function,  40 
:handle 

Method  of  task,  15 
★height-in-meters* 

Constant,  37 
Variable  j -23 

★highlight-b&w-mappings* 
Variable,  49 
highlight -cell 
Function,  52 
★highlight-colors* 

Variable,  49 
★highlight-cyan* 

Variable,  49 
highlight-edge 
Function,  53 
: highlight-elevation 
Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
highlight-extent 
Function,  53 
highlight-fire 
Function,  53 
highlight-f ire-cell 
Function,  53 
highlight-line 
Function,  47,  53 
★highlight-orange* 

Variable,  49 
highlight-point 
Function,  53 
highlight-polyline 
Function,  53 


INDEX 


79 


♦highlight-purple* 

Variable,  49 

:highlight-queued-f or-ignition 
Method  of  fire-simulation, GO 
♦highlight-red* 

Variable,  49 
highlight- vector 
Function,  53 
♦highlight-white* 

Variable,  49 
♦highlight-yellow* 

Variable,  49 

hours->  internal- time 
Function,  14 

♦humidity- temperature- >fuel-moisture* 
Variable,  59 
icon 

Data  Structure,  47 

icon-after-draw-character-function 
Function,  54 
icon-b&w-character 
Function,  54 
icon-bg-color 
Function,  54 
icon-color-character 
Function,  54 

icon-current-character 
Function,  54 
icon-fg-color 
Function,  54 
icon-f iremaps 
Function,  54 

icon-minimum-display-size 
Function,  54 
icon-name 

Function,  54 
icon-object-size 
Function,  54 
icon-orientations 
Function,  54 
icon-position 
Function,  54 
ignitable-p 
Mcicro,  33 
: ignite-cell 

Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
Method  of  fire-simulation,  GO 
in-current-task-p 
Function,  21 
: after  :init 

Method  of  task,  G,  15 


Method  of  desktop-firemap-window,  48 
Method  of  icon,  53 
:initial-args 

Method  of  task,  15 
♦initial-environment* 

Variable,  59 
: initial-method 

Method  of  task,  6,  15 
Keyword,  5-G 
♦initial-resolution* 

Variable,  49 

♦initial-screen-configuration* 

Variable,  50 
: inspect-task 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
install-task-scheduler 
Function,  20 
internal-t  ime- >hours 

*  Function,  14 

internal-t  ime- >minutes 
Function,  14 

internal- 1  ime-  >  seconds 
Function,  2,  14 
internal-t  ime- >useconds 
Function,  14 
♦jump-probabilities* 

Variable,  59 
:kill 

Method  of  task,  7,  15 
Method  of  task-scheduler, 21 
:after  :kill 

Method  of  task,  7 
:before  :kill 

Method  of  icon,  53 
kill-process 
Function,  14 
km->f  eet 

Function,  39 
km->miles 

Function,  39 
*km-per-mile* 

Constant,  39 

km/hour->meters/ internal-time 
Function,  39 

km/hour->meters/ second 
Function,  39 
label-format 
Function,  14 
label-format? 

Function,  14 

♦leave-ghost-objects* 


80 


INDEX 


Variable,  50 
live-f ire-p 
Macro,  33 
load-bitmaps 
Function,  54 
: load-map 

Method  of  f  iremap,  37 

log2 

Macro,  61 

:macro-step-scheduler 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  21 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
:macro-step-scheduler-and-wait 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
magnitude 

Function,  40 

make-desktop-f iremap-window 
Function,  48,  54 
make-extent 
Function,  40 

make-initialized-array 
Function,  61 
make-instance 
Function,  6 
make-message 
Function,  14 
make-phoenix 
Function,  67 

make-phoenix-specific 
Function,  67 
make-phoenix-utils 
Function,  67 
make-vector 
Function,  40 
map-fire-region 
Function,  45 
map-f ire-to-boundary 
Function,  45 
map-pixels-on-line 
Function,  45 

max-using-zero-if-nil 
Function,  61 

message-available-at-time 
Function,  14 
message- channe 1 
Function,  14 
message-from 
Function,  14 
message-send-time 
Function,  14 
message-text 


Function,  14 
message-type 
Function.  14 
:meter-task 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
*meters-per-chain* 

Constant,  39 
miles->km 

Function,  39 

: minimum-display-size 
Method  of  icon,  53 
minutes- >  exact -internal- time 
Function,  14 

minutes->  internal-time 
Function,  2,  14 

minutes/cpu-sec->cpu-usec/internal-time 
Function,  14 

mod2 

Macro,  61 
tv  tmouse-conf irm 
Function,  11 

: mouse-select-window-point 

Method  of  f  iremap-window,  52 
move-an-object 
Function,  54 
:move-object 

Method  of  f  iremap-window,  52 
move-rectangle-within-window 
Function,  54 
:name 

Method  of  task,  15 
Method  of  icon,  54 
name-of 

Function,  61 

nearest-point-on-segment 
Function,  40 
nice-call-stack 
Function,  62 
nmerge-list 
Function,  62 
not-ignitable-p 
Macro,  33 

*number-of -features* 

Variable,  33 

*number-of -fire-states* 

Constant,  32 

*number-of -ground- co vers* 

Variable,  34 
object->flag 
Macro,  62 

object-in-resource-p 


INDEX 


81 


Function,  G2 
: object-menu 

Method  of  f iremap-window,  52 
object-set 
Macro,  62 
:object-size 

Method  of  icon,  54 
: ob j  ects-t o-display 

Method  of  f  iremap,  31 
ordered-insert 
Function,  62 
ordered-insertf 
Macro,  62 
: orientations 

Method  of  icon,  54 
:origin-x 

Method  of  f  iremap-window,  52 
:origin-y 

Method  of  f  iremap-window,  52 
outline-cell 
Function,  54 
outline-fire-cell 
Function,  55 

parse-to-internal-time 
Function,  14 
period 

Instance  Variable  of  task,  7 
tperiod 

Method  of  task,  15 
Keyword,  5 

pfi 

Function,  60 
ph-apropos 

Function,  62 
ph-who-calls 
Function,  62 

♦phoenix- command-menu* 

Variable,  50 
phoenix-float 
Macro,  62 

♦phoenix-initialization-list* 
Variable,  67 
♦phoenix-package* 

Variable,  67 
phoenix-patch-level 
Function,  67 

♦phoenix-system-generic-files* 
Variable,  67 

: place-dynamic-feature 
Method  of  f  iremap,  36 
: place-edge-in-array 


Method  of  firemap,  36 
: place-static-edge 

Method  of  firemap,  36 
point 

Function,  40 
Data  Structure,  23 
point-at-resolution 
Function,  40 
point-at-resolution* 

Function,  40 

point-at-resolution-with-off sets 
Function,  40 
point-difference 
Function,  40 
point-difference* 

Function,  40 

point-distance-from-edge-squared 
Function,  39 

point-distance-from-extents 
Function,  41 

point-distance-f rom-cegment-squared 
Function,  41 

point-distance-from-square 
Function,  41 

point-distance-squared-from-star-polygon 
Function,  41 

point-extent-sector-code 
Function,  41 

♦point-feature-flags* 

Variable,  33 
point-in-bounds-p 
Function,  41 
point-in-extent-p 
Function,  41 

point-in-star-polygon-p 
Function,  41 
point-left-of-line-p 
Function,  41 
point-on-edge-p 
Function,  39 

point-on-feature-of-type-p 
Function,  36 
point-on-lake-p 
Function,  36 
point-on-line-p 
Function,  41 
poiat-on-road-p 
*  Function,  36 
:point-on-screen-p 

Method  of  f iremap-window,  52 
point-on-segment->parameter 


82 


INDEX 


Function,  41 

point-right-of-line-p 
Function,  41 

point-rot at e-around-point 
Function,  41 
point-rotate-origin 
Function,  41 
point-rotate-origin* 

Function,  41 
point-round 
Function,  41 
point-round* 

Function,  41 
:point-screen-x 

Method  of f iremap-window,  52 
:point-screen-y 

Method  of  f  iremap-window,  52 
point-sector-code 
Function,  41 
point-separation 
Function,  41 

point-separation-and-sin-cos 
Function,  42 

point-separation-lessp 
Function,  42 

point-separation-squared 
Function,  42 
point-sum 

Function,  42 
point-sum* 

Function,  42 
point-wrt-line 
Function,  42 
point-x 

Function,  23,  42 
point -y 

Function,  23,  42 
point= 

Function,  42 
pointp 

Function,  42 

point s-in-same-cell-p 
Function,  42 
polyline-  >  segment  s 
Function,  42 

polyline-intersects-cell-p 
Function,  42 
polyline-length 
Function,  42 
utils :pop-up-msg 
Function,  11 


w : pop-up-prompt-and-read 
Function,  11 
popup-stop 

Function,  14 
tposition 

Method  of  icon,  54 
*previous-task* 

Variable,  21 

♦primary- wind-direct ion-change-interval* 
Variable,  59 

*primary.-wind-speed-change-interval* 
Variable,  59 
:print-self 

Method  of  icon,  54 
*query-about-selecting-phoenix* 

Variable,  50 
♦query- task-errors* 

Variable,  21 

quick-segment-intersects-cell-p 
Function,  42 
radians->degrees 
Function,  42 
random-highlight 
Function,  55 

randomize-wind-magnitude 
Function,  60 
rate-of-spread 
Function,  60 
re-calc-ignite-time 
Function,  60 
real-time 

Function,  14 
r eal-world-f iremap 
Function,  29,  37 
Data  Structure,  58 
: real-world-f iremap 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: rebuild-vertex-and-edge-vectors 
Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
: recalculate-all-ignite-times 
Method  of  fire-simulation, 60 
: recalculate-ignite-time 

Method  of  fire-simulation, 60 
: redraw-cell 

Method  of  f iremap-window, 52 
irefresh 

Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
: refresh-all-windows 

Method  of  f ire-rsystem,  51 
: refresh-highlights 

Method  of  f  iremap-window,  52 


INDEX 


83 


: refresh-objects 

Method  of  fire-system, 51 
Method  of  f iremap-window,  52 
reinitialize 

Method  of  fire-system, 51 
remassoc 

Function,  62 

♦remember-highlights* 

Variable,  50 
: remo ve-f iremap 

Method  of  icon,  54 
removef 

Macro,  62 
reset 

Command,  7,  10-11,  20 
rreset 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  22 
: reset-and-activate-all-tasks 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: restart-at-same-time 
Keyword,  6 
:restart-ok 
Keyword,  6 
restart-time 

Instance  Variable  of  task,  5-7 
:restart-time 

Method  of  task,  15 
♦river-flags* 

Variable,  33 
river-in-cell-p 
Function,  36 
riverp 

Function,  34 
♦road-flags* 

Variable,  33 
road-in-cell-p 
Function,  36 

*road-or-uncrossable-river-f lags* 
Variable,  34 
roadp 

Function,  34 

ros 

Function,  60 
round 

Function,  27 
rounded-point-p 
Function,  42 
:run 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  22 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
:run-until-time 


Method  of  task-scheduler,  22 
same-side-p 
Function,  42 
save-bitmaps 
Function,  55 
save-color-map 
Function,  55 
: save-map 

Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
•.schedule- type 

Method  of  task,  15 
Keyword,  5 
: scheduler 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
♦scheduler-error-message* 

Variable,  21 

♦scheduler-error-vhere* 

Variable,  21 

♦scheduler-swapin-count* 

Variable,  21 

seconds ->  internal-  time 
Function,  14 

segment&parameter->point 
Function,  42 

segment&parameter->point* 

Function,  42 

segment&parameter->pointi* 

Function,  43 

segment&parameter->point2 
Function,  43 

segment-cell-interior-intersection-parameter 
Function,  43 

segment-cell-intersection 
Function,  43 

segment-cell-intersection-parameter 
Function,  43 

segment-edge-intersection-parameter 
Function,  43 

segment-feature-border-intersection-in-cell 
Function,  43 

segment-feature-centerline-intersection-in-cell 
Function,  43 
segment-intersection 
Function,  43 

segment-intersection-parameter 
Function,  43 

segment-intersection-parameters 
Function,  44 

segment-intersects-cell-p 
Function,  44 

segment-intersects-edge-type-in-cell-p 


84 


INDEX 


Function,  44 

segment-side-segments 
Function,  44 

segment-to-implicit-line 
Function,  44 

segment-to-parametric-line 
Function,  44 

segment-touches-edge-p 
Function,  44 
segments- >poly  lines 
Function,  44 
segment s-intersect-p 
Function,  44 

: select-configuration 

Method  of  fire-system, 51 
select-or-create-window-on-desktop 
Function,  48 
send 

Function,  6 
set-add 

Macro,  62 
set-addf 

Macro,  62 

: set-after-draw-character-function 
Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-all-tasks 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
set-assocf 
Macro,  62 

: set-b&w-character 
Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-base-time 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
:set-bg-color 

Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-cell-elevation 

Method  of  f  iremap,  35 
: set-cell-fire-burn-state 
Method  of  f iremap,  37 
: set-cell-fire-state 
Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
: set-cell-ground-cover 
Method  of  f  iremap,  36 
set-clear 
Macro,  62 
set-clearf 
Macro,  62 
:  set-color 

Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-color-character 
Method  of  icon,  54 


: set-current-character 
Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-environment 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: set-environment-parameter 
Method  nf fire-system, 51 
:set-fg-color 

Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-f iremap 

Method  of  f iremap-window,  52 
: set-f iremaps 

Method  of  icon,  54 
set-grid-array-aref 
Function,  38 
set-grid-array-ref 
Function,  38 

: set-minimum-display-size 
Method  of  icon,  54 
:  set-name 

Method  of  icon,  54 
:set-object-size 

Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-orientations 
Method  of  icon,  54 

set-phoenix-icon-background-color 
Function,  55 
set-point-x 
Function,  44 
set-point-y 
Function,  44 
: set-position 

Method  of  icon,  54 
: wrapper  : set-position 
Method  of  icon,  54 
: set-real-world-f iremap 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
set-test 

Macro,  62 
: set-update-maps 

Method  of  fire-simulation,  60 
simulate-forward 
Function,  60 

: single-macro-step-scheduler 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
:  single-step 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  22 
Method  of  fire-system,  51 
some* 

Macro,  62 

some-pixel-on-line 
Macro,  46 


INDEX 


85 


spurn 

Function,  55 
square 

Function,  62 

♦square-neighborhood* 

Variable,  45 

’•standalone-flavors* 

Variable,  67 
: start 

Method  of  fire-system,  51 
: start-fire 

Method  of  fire-system, 52 
: state 

Method  of  task,  15 
: static-edges 

Method  of  f  iremap,  31 
★static-feature-flags* 

Variable,  34 
:  stop 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  22 
Method  of  fire-system,  52 
swap-in-scheduler 
Function,  5-6,  14 

swap-in-scheduler-if -necessary 
Function,  14 
t 

Element  type  of  fire  grid-array,  27-29, 

task 

Flavor,  4 
task-active-p 
Function,  15 
★task-command-table* 

Variable,  50 
task-dont-swapout 
Function,  15 
task-format 

Function,  8,  10,  15 
★task-inspector-menu* 

Variable,  50 
★task-menu* 

Variable,  50 
: task-menu-items 

Method  of  fire-system, 52 
task-scheduler 
Flavor,  18 
task-wait 

Function,  15 

task-wait-f or-interval 
Function,  15 
task-wait-until-time 
Function,  15 


time-only-stamp 
Function,  15 
time-stamp 

Function*  15 
time-to-ignite 
Function,  GO 

*time-units-per-second* 

Constant,  13 
times2 

Macro,  62 
: toggle-f iremap 

Method  of  fire-system,  52 
: trace 

Method  of  task-scheduler,  22 
trunc-coord 
Macro,  62 
trunc-x 

Macro,  62 
trunc-y 

Macro,  63 
trunc2 

Macro,  63 

truncate-to-f actor 
Macro,  63 
truncate-to-grid 
Macro,  38 
tsend 

Function,  6,  15 

t ype-of -connect ion-between-vert ices 
Function,  39 

★uncrossable-river-flags* 

Variable,  34 
: updatercell-f ire 

Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
: update-windows 

Method  of  f  iremap,  31 
★use-cached-maps* 

Variable,  50 
*use-color-p* 

Variable,  50 

useconds->internal-time 
Function,  16 
useconds-  >minutes 
Function,  16 
useconds-  >  seconds 
Function,  16 
using-band 
Macro,  55 

: validate-vertex-and-edge- vectors 
Method  of  f  iremap,  37 
vector-end-point 


86 


INDEX 


Function,  44 

vegatation-ground-cover-p 
Function,  34 
vertex 

Data  Structure,  26 
vertex-edges 
Function,  39 
vertex-index 
Function,  39 
vertex-p 

Function,  39 
vertex-point 
Function,  39 
: vertex-vector 

Method  of  f  iremap,  31 
:view-f iremap 

Method  of  fire-system, 52 
visit-neighbors 
Macro,  46 

♦width- in-meters* 

Constant,  37 
Variable,  23 
wind-magnitude-fn 
Function,  60 
with-highlight 
Macro,  55 

with-method-clipping 
Macro,  55 

with-phoenix-package 
Macro,  63 

without-task-swapout 
Macro,  22 

xy-segment-to-implicit-line 

Function,  44 

xy-segments-intersect-p 
Function,  44 


