J  iia 


NAVAL  POSTGRADUATE  SCHOOL 

Monterey,  California 


Approved  for  public  release,  distribution  unlimited. 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


«.  TITUS  r*"^  Mtuu} 


READ  mSTRUCTtONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 


MBCIFISNT'S  CATALOG  NUMOCM 


*.  TVFC  or  nSFOAT  A  FCRIOO  COVBRCO 


Evaluation  of  the  Artificial  Intelligence  Program ^  Thesis;  March  1981 
Stammer  2  in  the  Tactical  Situation  Assessment  ' 

Problem 


•.  FBRFORWIMO  ORO.  RBRORT  nuMBBR 


.  author^*) 


John  Peter  Ferranti,  Jr. 


t.  rbrfonmimg  oroamixation  namb  and  aoorbh 

Naval  Postgraduate  School 
Monterey,  California  93940 


II.  cortrollino  offics  namb  ano  aoorbu 

Naval  Postgraduate  School 
Monterey,  California  93940 


NCV  NAMB  A  AOORBtV/f  Mitarmi  i 


frooram  blbmbht.  rrojbct.  task 

ARBA  A  WORK  UNIT  nUMBSRS 


It.  RBRORT  OATS 


March  1981 


It.  MUMRBR  of  RAOBt 


CMmllMA  Oltt«A>  I  It.  tBCURITV  CUAtt.  (ml  <Ai«  i 


Unclassified 


It.  OItTRIRuTlON  tTATBMBNT  (m!  <RU  RaraH} 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


IT.  OISTRIBUTiON  ST  ATBMBNT  (m!  iAf  rAaRmi  mmimtm4  In  Btmmk  30,  II  Ottlmnnl  limm  Mmomni 


It.  RBY  wOROt  (Cmnllmtm  mn  immmmm  miOm  II  nmmmmmmn  *"0  Utmllo  Or  OlmmO  i 

STAMMER2 

Tactical  Situation  Assessment  (TSA) 


to.  AMTMACT  fCillAMt  ••  *1^  I#  RM  Ap  Mrrc 


"  STAMMER2  (System  for  Tactical  Assessment  of  Multi  source  Messages,  Even 
Radar)  is  an  experimental  program  created  as  part  of  an  investigation  into 
methods  of  correlating  information  in  the  naval  environment.  This  thesis 
is  an  exploration  into  the  application  of  artificial  Intelligence  to  the 
tactical  situation  assessment  problem  and  into  various  evaluation 
methodologies  for  STAMMER2.  Included  is  an  overview  of  one  of  these  _ 


experiments,  using  the  facilities  of  the  Naval  Postgraduate  School 
Command,  Control  and  Communications  Laboratory  and  the  Naval  Ocean 
Systems  Center,  San  Diego. 


2 


Api-roved  fcr  public  release,  distritutica  uallrrited. 


:LVcli:ction  of  the  Artificial  I atel  1  iser.ce  Prc^rjran  STa^I' 
ia  the  Tactical  Situation  Assessment  Problem 


by 


John  Peter  Ferranti, Jr. 
Lieutenant  Germander,  United  States  Navy 
P.S.,  r^arauette  University,  1568 


Submitted  in  partial  fulfillment  cf  the 
requirements  for  the  degree  of 


MASTER  OF  SCIENCE  IN  SYSTEMS  TECHNCIOGY  -  C2 


from  the 

NAVAL  postgraduate  SCRCCl 
March  1561 


Academic  Lean 


AES TRACT 


STA^^^'2P.2  (System  for  Tactical  Assessment  of 
i^ultisource  Messages,  Svea  Radar)  is  an  eijerimental  program 
created  as  part  of  an  investigaticn  intc  methods  of 
correlating  information  in  the  naval  environment.  This 
thesis  is  an  explcraticn  intc  the  application  cf 
artificial  intelligence  to  the  tactical  situation 
assessment  prohlem  and  intc  various  evaluaticn 
methodologies  for  STAMMrR2.  Included  is  an  overview  of 
one  of  these  experiments,  using  the  facilities  cf  the 
Naval  Pcstgraduate  School  Commend,  Control  and 
Ccnmunicat lens  lahoratcry  and  the  Naval  Ccean  Systems 
Center,  Sac  Diego,  California. 


4 


IfvTrlODUCTION 


9 


C.  STAGZ-THRiE  IXPZnir^SNTS  _ 43 

1.  Objective  _ 43 

2.  Resources  Reouirel  _  43 

3.  General  Context  _ 45 

4.  Rvaluaticn  _ 4c 

5.  Comments  and  Special  Instructions  _  48 

V.  SA^:?I^  EXPIRIMENT _ 5e 

A.  lESCRIPTION  _ 50 

B.  RESULTS  AND  CONCLUSIONS _ 54 

APPENDIX  A  STAN’MEP.2  GUIDE _ 67 

APPENDIX  B  DATA  EASE _ 69 

APPENDIX  C  RULES  _ 71 

APPENDIX  D  MESSAGES  _  62 

APPENDIX  S  SCENARIO  _  64 

LIST  OF  REFERENCES  _ 85 

INITIAL  DISTRIBUTION  LIST  _  _  _  SB 


6 


LIST  CF  FIGUHFS 


STAN'KFRZ  Graphics  Display,  Came  f^inute  3 
STAf^r^ERZ  Graphics  Display,  Game  f'iinute  14 
STAMhZRZ  Graphics  Display,  Game  Minvte  45 


ACiNOVklLDGE^'INTS 


I  wish  to  acknovleage  the  patient  instruction  of  rry 
tnesis  advisors,  Professor  Gcnald  E.  Earr  and  Professor 
Gilbert  T.  Howard,  who  nave  irade  tnis  thesis  research  an 
enjoyable  and  educational  experience.  Additionally,  I  would 
like  to  note  the  titre  and  assistance  given  by  Kssrs.  Dennis 
C.  McCall  and  Robert  J.  Eechtel  of  Naval  Ccean  Systems 
Center,  San  Diego,  California,  wnose  technical 
expertise  made  the  task  possible.  The  pri-r^ary 
acknow  ledger  eat  is  to  ny  wife,  iinne,  who  gave  me  the 
support  and  inspiration  for  my  work. 


6 


ixTRcrucT  :c:. 


i-..  back:;?.  CUM) 

STA^.'i^ZR2  (S/sterr'  fcr  Tactical  Assessner.t  cf 

^'ul  t  i  s  ou  rce  '^esseees,  Zver.  Radar)  Is  ar.  experinerte  1 
corrruter  ]  roarrar  created  as  part  cf  an  investi^at icr 
into  new  r^ethcis  of  ccrrelatin.-:  inforn'atior.  available  in 
a  naval  environrent  in  response  to  tne  tactical  sitvation 
assessTent  ^TSA}  problem.  It  was  written  by  the  Tactical 
Corrand  and  Control  Division  of  the  Naval  Ccean  Systems 
Center,  San  Die^;c,  California.  STAKMZRE  has  served  as  a 
testbed  for  explorations  of  applications  of  rnle-based 
artificial  in  tel  1  i.^ence  inference  systems,  witn  a  general 
end  flexible  approach  to  the  ranee  of  acceptable  inputs 
tc  the  system. 

In  practical  application,  information  in  a  oasic 
forrat  is  received  from  a  variety  of  sensors.  This 
information  is  processed  within  e  networh  of 
interconnected  rules  or  conaiticaal  statements  whicn 
■^ay  be  satisfied  by  this  infcrmaiicn,  even 
responding  to  infornatior.  in  cases  involving  varyine” 
degrees  cf  uncertainty.  STAn:MRZ  is  capable  cf 
performing  deductions  based  or.  this  received  information 
tc  speed  the  decisicr  process  in  a  rapidly  chan:?ing 
environment . 


9 


3efcre  we  discuss  tue  specifics  of  STA^"^’ZR2  arl  a 
f^ethol  of  testin.-  the  utility  of  this  decision  aid, 
tackerouhd  information  will  te  presented  to  set  the  stance 
for  the  why,  where,  end  how  such  a  system  was  developed. 


3.  OBJECTIVES 


There  are  three  principal  objectives  for  this  thesis: 

1.  Identify  the  characteristics  of  an  artificial 

intelligence  prcgra"”,  with  an  overview  of  the 

applications  to  a  specific  military  situation. 

2.  Pronose  various  levels  of  evaluation  methodologies 
for'  STAKriRP . 

3.  Present  the  results  of  an  experiment  conducted 

with  STAMMZR2  using  one  of  the  methodologies 

presented . 


10 


/ 


II 


I.\TZIIIGIKCZ 


A.  LZi'INITIGK 

Artificial  ia tel 1 i^ence  (aI)  is  defined  as  "the  stccy 
cf  ideas  wnich  enacle  ccTp\'ters  tc  ic  the  things  tnat  maAe 
people  seer  intelligent”  ^Ze  f .  l]  end  "the  science  of  ma’ring 
rachines  do  things  that  wouia  rei^uire  intelligence  if  dene 
t/  ren '  [!aef  .  2]  . 

The  intricate  processes  from  which  these  things 
have  evolved,  such  as  learning,  growtn,  or  raturation 
are  hy^-assed  in  the  artificial  intelligence  pregrer  tc 
create  a  facslr i le  of  he ran  thought  and,  su o sequent ly, 
iecis icn-reiing.  But  the  bypassing  is,  in  reality,  e  very 
careful  corpilation  of  tne  eierents  which  are,  or  seer  tc 
he,  parts  cf  the  huran  theugnt  patterns  and  strategies 
leading  to  decisions.  That  is,  huran  thought  is  analyzed 
and  dissected  into  discrete  eierents  which  ray  be 
recorbinei  artificially  to  riric  huran  intelligence. 

Alternatively,  differing  patterns  or  retneds  are 

explored  to  uncover  new  routes  which  could,  in  fact,  lead  to 
sirilar  results. 

B.  BIS'^USSION 

To  iragiae  tne  thought  process  as  a  branched  tree, 
with  decisions  rade  at  eacr.  juncture,  cr  node, 


11 


i  c 

a 

simplification 

which  does  not 

reflect 

the  complexity 

cf 

tn 

e  problem  cf 

describing 

nur  an 

thought.  The 

actual 

repre sen ta  tier. 

must 

consider 

many 

interconnected 

pat  hs , 

with  mult  ini  re 

ctioaal 

flow 

through 

those  paths. 

A  c  c 

r.t  r  ol  mechanism 

must 

also 

he  considered  which 

carries  a  thought  throueii  to  conclusion  and  tr,initrizes 
retraced  rr  ncn-prcduct i ve  rentes. 

A  roal  of  artificial  intellif,ence  in?uiry  is  to 
duplicate  this  ccrplex  structure  in  a  corputer  prograr.  A 
difficulty  lies  i:i  the  multi-diDensionel  nature  of  the 
thought  process  v»hich  requires  equally  corn  lei 
investigation.  By  eiarining  the  problem  from  the  viewpoint 
of  discrete  elements,  it  ray  he  possible  to  find  the 
cc^tinatich  which  accurately  reflects  a  pattern  which  net 
cnly  duplicates  what  happens  in  the  case  of  a  specific 
rrobler,  but  also  a  general  case  which  ray  be  artlicable  to 
ether  prcolems. 

If  STAhMlR2  can  duplicate  the  reasoning  process  of  a 
decision  raker,  with  a  data  base  and  memory  consistent  with 
the  situation  presented,  then  it  is  possible  to  use  this 
artificial  intelligence  program  as  an  "intelligent 
assistant"  in  the  tactical  situatlcn  assessment  problem 
which  will  be  discussed  in  the  next  section. 

The  computer  is  the  "ideal  experimental  animal.' 
Infinitely  patient  and  easy  to  care  for,  the  computer 
requires  structured  instruction,  composed  of  discrete 


12 


elements,  whicn  it  cc^tines  as  prci^raT’T'ed .  The  corrit  inat  Icr 
end  recopbinetior.,  lone  at  speeds  s\:fficient  to  expose 
unproductive  rains  rapidly,  can  provide  a  practical  test  of 
tne  precision  with  whicn  the  experimenter  defines  his 
thought  polel  [Hef.  3] .  Additions  or  deletions  which 
tne  exrerirenler  may  h/potnesize  as  crucial  (cr  useless)  to 
the  final  result  of  his  pattern  may  be  evaluated  with 
relative  ease.  Flaws  or  conceptual  mistakes  which  ray 
exist  are  likely  tc  be  detected  in  the  computer  because 
the  computer  (generally  will  not  accept  ambiguity  cf 
instructicr.  and  may  simply  cease  eiecuticn  cf  the 
prOf'ram.  However,  a  program  designed  to  answer  a  certain 
sort  cf  question  does  not  guarantee  a  correct  answer 
[Ref.  4] . 

The  applicability  of  computers  end  prcgramm.ing  is  not 
tne  emphasis  cf  artificial  intelligence.  However,  the 
unambiguous  nature  of  the  program  is  mentioned  to  reinforce 
tne  "  transparency"  cf  the  actual  machine  and  focus  on  the 
precision  cf  understanding  human  thought. 

Using  artificial  intelligence  techniques,  research  has 
been  done  to  explore  vision,  problem  solving,  language,  and 
neurosis  [Ref.  5] .  Some  of  these  models  have  been 
successful  in  predicting  behavior  under  specified  conditions 


while  others 

have  been  at  least 

of  metaphorical  value 

in 

helping  tc 

understand  the 

possible 

mechanism 

cf 

intelligence. 

By  representing 

thought  and 

knowledge , 

in 

13 


.er.8ral,  in  a  useful  cDcL  flexible  rtanner  it  is  also  possible 
to  arran=:e  an  interaction  between  a  human  and  tne  machine  in 
c  tcslc  oriented  environment. 

hnowledf^e  is  defined  as  a  collection  of  facts,  the 
state  of  Knowing,  or  ell  that  has  been  perceived  by  the 
human  mind  [Ref.  6] .  Knowledge  ray  be  in  human  or  machine 
T-eTcry  or  in  a  data  base.  It  is,  however,  also  in  the 
actual  procedures  that  operate  on  or  by  reference  to  the 
data.  To  store  disjointed  facts  in  computer  memory  or  in 
a  data  base  from  which  the  labelled  information  units  may 
be  retrieved  is  not  the  j^oal  of  artificial 
intelligence.  The  identif icat  ion  cf  the  desired  fact  icr  a 
location  code  by  which  that  fact  nay  be  retrieved)  is  a 
problem  of  database  management.  To  discern  which  fact  is 
reiuirei  is,  however,  the  end  of  a  series  of  steps.  In 
the  problem  sclvln^  case,  the  solution  process  is  the 
strategy  of  gaining  information  after  "  a  forward  or 
backward  looking  reasoning  method'  [Ref  7] . 

Analogies  to  other  burner  processes  exist.  Ror  example, 
radar  provides  target  information  in  a  manner  analogous 
to  the  eye.  Data,  such  as  target  presence,  range,  and 
bearir.;  may  be  useful  to  the  operator  as  well  as  in  a  form 
which  can  be  compared  tc  characteristics  stored  in  computer 
memory . 


The  specific  goal  of  STA^'^ER2  is  to  practically  combine 
this  sensory  data  with  the  problem  solving  process  of 


data  receipt,  corparison  and  retrieval  usin^?  the  knowledge 
stored  ir.  the  artificial  intelligence  prcsrraT. 


Ill 


TACTICAL  SIlUATICr.  ASS  TSSr-'iV  T 


STA^Fvrz 


TACTICAL  SITUATIC^  ASSTSSr-'LiNT 


In  the  naval  ccntext,  the  atility  nf  a  cc'^mander  tc 
accurately  assess  his  rilitary  situeticr  rfjuire*^  decisions 
about  his  savironr.ent .  While  all  decisions  need,  not  be  rede 
cn  an  inrediate  basis,  certain  cf  the-n,  called  tactical, 


deterrine 

his 

irrediate 

course  of  action. 

In  an  extrere 

exarpl e , 

the 

dec i s i cn 

tc 

launcn  a  defensive 

weaucr.  is  based 

one  Judg 

re  nt 

that  such 

an 

action  is  reauired 

based  on  the 

ccrr ander 

* 

s 

evcluatic 

•  *  4) 

A  stcterent  of 

the  tactical 

si tucticn 

assessrent 

'TS 

A)  orcbler  includes 

c  c  n.  s  i  i  e  r  a  t  i  c  r. 

cf  the  inforration  available  tc  the  decision  ra'^er. 

In  crier  tc  assess  a  rnilitary  prrfclex,  the  evaluator 
draws  upon  experience  and  training,  after  having  considered 
the  situation  presented  tc  nlT.  "he  assess-e.ct  cf  the 
tactical  situation  is,  however,  nighl/  depenaent  urcr. 
factors  asscciated  with  the  decisicn  -naker  hif^self. 

The  experience  upon  which  a  rilitary  decision  raker 
draws  is  uniaue  tc  hi^  alone,  althcus’h  there  is 
certainly  a  sirilarity  of  career  petterns  and  situations 
corron  to  rany  individuals.  Unique  to  that  individual  is 
the  Duality  of  his  recc  I  lect  i  cn  ,  his  e-i^rticnal  or  T’ental 
state,  the  perspective  of  the  individual,  and  the  length 


15 


cf  tiTie  elapsec’  since  t:icse  events  frcm  vnich  the 
experience  was  trained. 

The  actual  aecision  naker  in  the  operations  center 
the  Ccmtat  Inforciaticn  Center  or  CIC)  cf  a  Navy  ship  is 
the  Tactical  Action  Officer  (TaC).  Luring  the  period  cf 

the  Vietnair  conflict,  tne  rcle  cf  the  Captain  cf  a  ship  as 
final  fighting  authority  was  altered  screwhat  frcr  the 
traditional  rcle.  The  Tactical  Acticn  Officer  ccncept  was 
proposed,  irplerented  in  Navy  Regulations,  and  exercised  in 
cc-itat  [Ref.  S]  .  The  ccncept  tasicly  states  that  a  trusted 
sutordinete,  trained  and  drilled  in  defensive  doctrine 
and  procedures,  acts  as  weapons  release  authority  in  the 
ie“ipcrary  aosence  cf  the  Captain. 

The  specialized  forral  training  for  TAOs,  havin2  as 
prerequisites  proven  maturity  and  cperaticnal 

experience,  lasts  approximately  six  weeks.  The  student  is 
exposed  to  infornation  concerning  U.S.  weapons  systems 
end  those  of  ]Otential  enemies.  After  this  is 
committed  to  memory,  ’standard"  tactical  doctrine  is 
exercised  in  a  series  cf  increasingly  ccmplex  scenarios. 
The  scenarios  are  ^resented  in  sequences  allowin^: 
questions  tc  be  answered  based  on  infor^aticn  ncrmally 
available  to  the  TAC  (from  the  training,  experience, 
tactical  publ  icat  ions  .sensors  ,  and  Intelligence  scurces). 


The  TAG  becorres  the  focus  of  the  Combat  Information 
Center.  All  serscr  reports  are  displayed  tc  him,  all 


rissc^es  frcr  external  sources  are  ^'iver.  to  him  directl'-'  or 
ir.  summarized  form.  Ke  cari  stand  alone,  cn  nis  own 
shii-,  or  be  electronically  linkei  by  radio  to  TAGS  on 
otaer  snips,  each  =:cin(e  inrcr y.ri  similar  procedures  and 
actions.  This  defines  a  sphere  of  icnowled^i'e  in  vhich  the 
TAG  operates,  aaa  can  f'eaerally  be  delineated  by  the  ranj^e 
cf  his  senscrs.  A  ccrrelaticn  functicn  is  required  when 
the  TAG  receives  'external'  reports  from  sensors  or 
platforms  ether  than  his  own — in  effect  from  a  sphere  cf 
ler.her  'radius. 

Assumptions  involved  in  reducing  racy  TAG  activities 
to  computer  form  include:  $]  the  casic,  repetitive  mass 
of  information  can  be  reducea  to  a  computerized  catabase; 
b)  standardized  procedures  for  data  retrieval  and 
correlation  can  be  sirilarly  reduced;  c)the 
sensor/ ir.tellifTenct  information  can  be  presented  ir.  a 
standard  ferrat;  and  d)  the  tneur-ht  process  by  which  the 
TAG  functions  ray  be  artificially  reprcduced. 

r.  STA(^h:ZE2 

STAI'MEZ  is  a  revised  version  cf  3TA''^Z?.,  a  fyste""  for 
Tactical  Assessment  of  ^ultiscurce  ^essa^;es,  Zver.  Zadar.  It 
was  created  as  cart  cf  an  investi,^:aticn  cf  ccrrelaticn 
r-ethoiolor^ies ,  and  served  as  a  testbed  for  explorations  of 
applications  of  rule-based  inference  systems  to  the  tactical 
situation  assessment  'TSA)  problem.  STA?'l^IR  concentrated  cn 


16 


I'ne  specific  talk  of  rerLhant  shir  dis  or irinaticn  frcr  all 
ccntarts  reported  ly  radar  and  external  ressar’es  ’?.ef .  • 

is  an  organizer  of  information.  It 
collects  i.nfrrT’aticn  cy  receiving:  ’•essa^'es  ar.  i  sensor 
rfcpi'rts  (radar,  electronic  seaport  neasrres,  and  scr.ar', 
and  cr^^aaizes  this  rav.  data  intc  rrarhic  displays  and 
textual  oor.tr.enta  ry  to  aid  in  tactioal  situation 
assessreat.  Thrcu;ia  the  use  of  specified  rules,  the 
system  cc’^'oines  tais  infcrmieticn  to  irav  ccnclusicns 
c'oout  t.ne  situation  in  the  vicinity  of  the  hore  ship.  lacse 
cc.'’nair.aticns  are  reflected  in  both  the  STA^r'‘T?£  display  a"! 
conTentary.  The  system  is  available  fer  me  exarinaiion  of 
rav  data  as  veil  as  infcr'^atica  about  vhy  and  hcv  the 
conclusions  vere  reached. 

STA^’^■:?2  deals  with  iaforratioa  ca  a  real-tire  basis. 
As  5  iTessa&e  is  received  from  a  sensor  or  inferratien 
source  in  3TA^N'“H2-readable  forrat,  it  becomes  part  of 
the  data  base  cti  vhica  the  rules  eperete.  This  process  is 
corp licated  by  the  fact  that  the  information  is  suspect,  and 
its  arrival  ray  net  be  in  chrcnclcsical  order. 

Althour^a  ST.1^■^■ZF2  was  developed  in  response  to 


I.avy- 

spcnscred  investi^aticn  of 

the  TSA  problem,  the 

U  .S  . 

nrry 

nas  conducted  sirilar 

investifpations  in 

the 

field 

of  military  intelli?:en 

ce  analysis  '?.ef . 

le] . 

rasea 

upon  a  detailed  stuuy 

of  the  analysts' 

role , 

-ethcls,  and  thcu^hl  processes  in  in  tel  1  i  .;ence  production, 


it  may  be  : cs. 

•  V  ^  o 

tc  streamline 

intelligence  analysis. 

In  essence, 

t.-ii  s 

c  r  r  c  e  5  s 

us  ed 

by  the  analyst  is  the 

'  ethodolo  '7 

from 

wi.  i  ch 

the 

A I  program  right  be 

developed  af 

ter 

a  d  e  s  c  r  i 

ptive 

mc'^el  is  cr'anized  and 

e  xe  rc i sed  . 

The  manner 

i  a 

which  STA 

functions  may  best  be 

described  by  ar.clo^7y  to  the  relical  iia^’ocsis  system  called 
r-'YCIN  [Ref.  11].  f-YCiN  is  a  irobler  solvia-;  system  by 
wriica  a  rhysiclaa,  res;.cndiro'  tc  aueries  frc'^  the  'prc^Tem, 
receives  assistance  in  identifyi2f<  and  treatia??  bleed 
bacterial  infections.  The  basis  for  the  expertise 
resident  in  '-'YCIh  is  the  knowledge  obtained  frer 
interviewing,  pnysieians  and  experts  and  stored  in  ever  3?? 
"productions".  Productions  are  rremory  structures  or.  which 
the  program  operates  and  are  in  the  following  format. 

If  the  infection  type  is  primary-bacteremia , 

the  suspectea  entry  point  is  tne  gastrointestinal  tract, 
a.nd  the  site  cf  the  culture  is  cne  cf  the  sterile  sites. 

then  tnere  is  evidence  that  the  organism  is  bacteroides. 

Conceptually,  inference  rules  are  very  simiule.  Ivery 
rule  attemjts  to  retrieve  iaformatica  from  memory  and,  if  it 
succeeds,  cccstructs  a  new  assertion  In  re^cry.  If  all  the 
conditions  are  matched,  then  the  rules  are  said  to  'fire". 
That  is,  all  the  acticr.s  which  are  defined  in  the  rule  are 

2e 


men  carried  out.  These  articas  r.ay  ce  roaifications  tc  toe 
cata  base,  assir'uin?  cf  confidences,  and  priniin.'?  of 
forr'etted  descriptions. 

In  a  sinple  rule  interpreter,  the  system  maintains  a 
list  of  rules,  each  witn  ccr.diticns  waicr.  pertain  to  a 
central  data  base,  whicn  is  ccnscantly  upaated.  At 

reiTvlar  intervals  the  system  attempts  tc  fire  each  rule? 
that  is,  it  checks  to  see  if  the  rule  conditions  are 
currently  satisfied  in  the  data  base.  If  ere  cf  many 

conditions  is  not  satisfied,  a  rule  ray  fail  to  fire  and,  in 

this  case,  any  partial  work  dene  in  satisfying?  the  rule  is 
lost.  In  addition,  each  rule  is  retried  at  the  ti'-e 
interval  witnout  regard  tc  the  nature  cf  t.ne  intervenin.-? 
changes  to  the  data  case,  duplica  ing  results  where  no 
changes  to  the  data  base  nave  occurred. 

Because  medical  diagnosis,  even  by  experts,  invclves 
varyi.oj  de^Tees  cf  uncertainty,  MYCIN  is  written  with  a 
so-called  certainty  factor  for  each  ccnclusicn.  The 

physicians  upon  whose  information  the  prcductions  were 
established  were  alsc  asked  to  provide  "strerr'th 
values",  or  probabilities  cf  accuracy  and  confidence, 

for  tiieir  assertions.  This  introduces  the  ability  to 
leal  with  uncertain  evidence  into  the  artificial 
ictelligeacs  system. 

The  prcductions  used  to  reacii  a  conciusicn  are  part  cf 
the  conclusion  set.  ^'YCIN  answers  questions  ebcut  how  and 

cl 


V. r./  c  t'd;t  'acs  establisned  cr  i;sec .  Tbe  rrcdvciicr.  is 
rei'cllei  i  ty  sare  cr  nutter;  tc  s.'cv  an  er.u-^era  ti  cn  cf  tne 
facts  preser.tei  in  the  prenise  set.  ^ereral  facts  can  he 
c.uesticned  v»ithcut  rescrtinc  tc  tae  entire  lia-rncsis  because 
each  proiuction  "starls  clone",  to  be  actively  examir.el  or 
cuestioaec.  la  this  case  tae  steps  ta/en  to  arrive  at  that 
particular  fact  can  also  be  traced.  This  tracir.t:  -ray  act 
as  a  training  aid  fcr  the  user  ia  addition  to  presenting 
alternatives  wnich  can  be  expicrel. 

Tre  critical  aspects  of  STANKSH^ 's  desi.pn  P'ey  be  divided 
into  four  parts.  These  are  T'e'ncry  (the  data  base),  "tie 
i.nterpretction,  explanation,  end  ^rcphics. 

The  rules  cf  STA^l^ERE  consist  cf  conditions,  actions  and 
confidences,  with  conditions  and  actions  in  the  sere 
structure  as  assertions  with  allowances  race  for  variables 
which  are  "bound"  tc  a  rule  by  a  binding?  function  in  LISP, 
the  language  in  which  STArHZF.2  is  written  [Pef.  12],  Those 
variables  which  are  applied  tc  the  rule  ccciiticns  will  be 
evaluated  to  see  whether  t.ne  condition  succeeds  or  fails. 
If  it  fails,  a  "suspensicn"  is  created  which  corresponds  tc 
the  remainder  of  the  rule.  As  rore  iaforretion  is  added  to 
the  date  base ,  these  suspe "s i ens  which  ran  use  the  new  data 
are  revived  and  continue  as  before  (either  corrletinc'  or 
suspending  again;.  A  suspensicn  contains  not  only  tne 
renaining  part  of  the  rule,  but  also  the  bindings 
establisned  by  already  satisfied  cenditien s,  if  any.  Zven 


22 


■A'-ie”  c  cc  r:d  i  t  ior  succeeds,  there  rney  be  other  ve/s  for  it  tc 
be  satisfied,  so  a  sustensica  is  left  behind. 

The  individual  rules  are  expressed  in  the  fcllcwinr 
f  orr . 


RLTjl-N  aM 
(CONDITICtiS 
((  <ccndition  ) 
'  <ccnditicn  2y  ; 


[  <ccnditicn  nb  ;) 
ACTICKS 

U  <actior.  1>  ) 

(  <action  2>  ] 


(  baction  rv  ) 

CONr  <a  runter  between  -1  and  +1' 

FHiN'FCHt' 

"This  is  a  sentence  describing  the  ruie.") 

STAbfSP.F  deals  witn  infcrmaticn  cn  a  real-ti^e 
basis.  However,  this  process  is  complicated  by  tne  fact 
that  the  arrival  cf  reports  may  net  be  in  chrcnclcgical 
order,  with  later  inforraticn  superseding  or  nerrating 
earlier  reports.  A  'data  strear"  is  used  to  bind 
infcrTaticr.  as  it  is  received  to  t.ne  rule  ccr.liticn  whicn 
i t  satisfies . 

A  data  stream  ray  be  defined  as  a  secuence  rf 
values,  existin,-,  over  time  in  a  ^-emputation.  If  a  program  is 
executed  in  a  ccr.venticnal  lar.gua^je,  then  the  history  of 
successive  values  of  a  variable  forms  a  stream.  Thus,  in 


contrast  to  static  data  structures  such 


5  lists  and  arrays 


-.vhere  ell  the  eler.er.ts  exist  et  cne  tire.  strea.'-^s  -re 
c,/::arir  aaia  structures,  ara  are  addressacle  c'cjects  ir. 
LISF.  Inly  the  rev*  data  received  need  he  rc-^parei  tc  the 

rules.  hew  .matches  are  added  to  tee  end  cf  the  strear.  r. 

terperary  ''freezing’"  cf  the  action  specified  hy  an  assert  icn 
occurs  until  after  the  ne.^  data  is  read  onto  the  appropriate 
strears.  -he  strear,  then,  allots  the  rapid  review  cf  stored 
inferratien  v/ithout  the  penalty  cf  co^'plete  reviev*  cf 

pctentially  irrelevant  data. 

I  r.  STA‘"'M?2,  confidence  is  trcvidec  in  the  rules  'ey  the 
creator  of  the  rule.  It  is  calculated  dynamically  on 
re.^uest  at  the  tire  when  it  is  cisplayed  to  the  operator 
fcllcwir?  a  rule  rate:;  and  is  net  stored.  Zach  assertion 
will  have  as  its  confidence  the  corbination  of  the 

•'crfiier.ces  of  the  rules  and  assertims  v^h. ich  offer  evidence 
for  it.  A  confidence  calculation  is  hifhly  dependent  upon 
tie  connective  tnrouth  whica  the  rules  and  assertions  are 
cc-’tir.  ed.  An  A 'OF  connective  will,  fer  example,  display  the 
confidence  of  the  snallest  value  of  all  the  rules  cerbined. 
lhat  is,  the  ccnclusicn  nay  never  be  strcn=ser  taan  the 
weakest  piece  of  suppo r t i r.s  evidence. 

Turin.^  executicn  of  ST.-idriiltS ,  the  user  will  see 
the  followir.fp  cycle  repeated  as  lony;  as  ressarres  end  reports 
are  received  into  the  message  input  file; 

1.  A  messcti’e  report  is  received,  the  user  is  informed, 
and  the  critical  infcrratlon  in  the  ressa.--e  is  printed 
fer  reference. 


24 


\ 


1 


.  A  iisplc.v  ,  S'.cwir.,-  the  area  situatlor.  with  the  rew 
i  r:i' :  rrat  ic  n  .  ie  u.ra’*n.  The  '„ser  ra/  r  er.i  ii,  ia  te  tnie 
i-a..e . 

The  epster’  na>es  sore  cor, rente  ry  or.  the  ccr.  lu  s  i  o  os  it 
fan  reaoa,  or.  the  tasis  of  the  new  i  r.  f  o  rr  at  i  o  n  . 

4.  If  a.-y  ccnclusicr.s  were  reacnei,  tne  user  is  'iven  the 
core  r  t  un  i  ty  to  juery  the  syster.  about  the  arotents  of 
its  hata  base. 

The  roesscue  text  is  in  the  basic  ferret  cf  the  reeeiveh 
ressc^e.  A  contact  nare  (if  available',  is  displayed, 
f  el  1  cw  el  by  Ic  ca  t  i  r  o  and  tire  cf  ressax;e  .  The  user  "ay  pause 
to  exarine  tnis  ressaye  or  select  the  graphic  display  rode. 

Sraphical  suppert  fer  tjTAr-'rhH^  is  prcviiel  by 
T3PTA,  a  software  package  developed  at  the  .'.aval  Ocean 
Syste"^  Center  specifically  fer  tactical  situaticr. 

assessrer.t  [Ref.  13].  The  OSPLA  system  is  a  ccllecticr.  of 
ICRTRAf.  subroutines  tnat  allow  stcra-'e,  retrieval,  and 
cisplay  of  ship  and  aircraft  tracks.  This  display,  with  The 
capability  tc  shew  -aps  with  latitude  and  lrn?ituds,  -ay 
be  r pc.  la  ted  by  the  user  tc  vary  the  scale  as  desired.  As 
scer  as  a  "essa^e  is  received  which  ''cntair.s  a 
aeronstrable  assertion  (such  as  a  contact  a  specific 
1 0  cat  i  c  a t  ne  cisplay  will  appear  on  the  di  s  p  1  ay  screen 
■if  a  display  is  available  and  selected  in  the 
initialization  process).  liarrples  cf  basic  function  keys  are 
are  listed  below. 

h'  raynify  about  the  cursor  by  a  factor  of  0 


reauce  about  the  cursor  by  a  factor  cf 


c  e  r.  t  a  r 


center 

tne  view  atrut  tne  cv. 

r  s  0  r 

p  c  s  i  t  i  c 

set  typ 

e  site  to  smallest  on 

T  he 

TlHTRCf:!;:  -fid 

return 

tc  cemrani  -ncie 

ietailei 

funclior.s  exist,  with 

the 

full  1 i s  t i nr  in 

»  n  c  ^ 

"e;nni~ci  recurrent  252.  T  ns  user  re,/  return  to  the 
cc-rend  level  to  tecin  tue  exj-lanetion  end  y.er:,'  Procedure. 

The  extlanaticn  s/ster  ..  rovides  tve  crirar/ 
carat  i  1  it  ies  :  retrieval  cf  re'^cr,/  and  irference  tracir.,.-. 
c.lth'^u^h  there  would  appear  to  be  little  difficulty  in 
retrieving-  rercry  contents  and  tracings  derivations,  the 
uisplay  of  this  i n f o rra t i on  in  a  hur.an  readable  forrat  is  a 
rajrr  cons idera t i cn  .  To  maxe  the  user  Interface  as  natural 
as  possible,  the  explanation  system  provMes  a  juery 
laasuafte  that  is  '  Zr.o'iish-ii>e'' .  This  lan,;ua£e  is  an 
extrerely  lirnited  version  of  Zn.^^lish,  which  includes  crly 
certain  types  of  cuestions  and  rethods  cf  phrasinH.’  those 
M.uestirns.  However,  the  lan^-uase  was  desir^ned  sc  that, 
while  lirited,  it  is  sutficient  to  cover  the  user's  needs 
without  .-^ahin^’  its  shcrtccminys  apparent.  The  LIS?  fincticr 
.-.SHL'SIP,  which  features  recognition  and  pr''r,pTinc,  is 
co-rbined  witn  a  "p  rettypri  nter”  vtc  add  wor'^s  liice  'is”  and 
"of"  to  nerrory  contents)  to  simplify  the  user  interaction. 

A  surrary  cf  the  queries  which  t.ne  STAyhZPE  user  can 
ask,  with  -general  examples,  follows.  followin:?  the 
initial  query  word,  only  these  inputs  sho-*n  will  be  allowed 
by  tne  ASKUSIR  function.  The  connective  words  (in  lower 


case'/  will  lie  proviaed  1)/  the  "prettyprinter"  [Hef.  14]. 
Ihe  words  ir.  parentr.eses  T-ay  te  inserted  ty  the  user  as 
desired  . 

'^HAT  forrat:  aHAT  is  iTHI  AN  A)  <?.ZLATICN'  (CF) 

<  ITZh> 

Ixarple:'*Hi.T  is  the  CCUPSE  of  Si:iHTING3 
This  every  prevides  one  cf  several  Question 
formats  for  asrcirg  about  entries  in  the  data 
bass. 

13  Fcr-nat;  IS  ^THE]  ,A  AN  THE  ]  <RSLATI0N> 

(OF) 

Example: IS  HAEAR  the  SOURCE  cf  SIGFTING3 
This  question  ferr  allows  the  user  to  eslc 
about  specific  entries  in  the  data  base. 

TELL  re  about  Format:  TELL  ne  about  <Ai;YTHI\G> 

Exa'^ple:  TELL  me  about  SIOHTINOh 
This  is  the  most  flexible  luery,  and  allows 
the  user  to  asA  rules,  caterccries, 
relations,  or  specific  facts. 

VHEEE  Jor’^at:  #HrR£  is  <.CBJECT>  cr  *Hi?Z  was 

^CBJZCT>  at  <;TirEl 
Example:  AHERE  is  CONTACT? 

With  this  cerrand  the  user  can  ash  about  the 
pcsiticn  cf  a  platfcrm,  frerchant  lane,  cr 


£7 


aH 


V 


EC'* 


h?.CSl 


■*HC 


storn  et  the  presert  tire,  or  in  the  future 
or  ccst. 

rcrrat:  *HY  is  <ASSE?.TICN> 

IXcPpLs:  *EY  is  A2034C 

'*ith  this  ccrmand  the  user  car.  find  cut  the 
primary  or  immediate  reasons  that  STA^'^'IE2 
used  tc  conclude  any  asserticn.  All  the 
rules  Involved  in  the  decision  will  be 
displayed  . 

Format:  KCW  does  rule  <RULF>  apply  to 
<ASSiRTICN> 

Ziarple:  HOV  does  rule  ID-LANS  apply  to  A234 
This  query  allows  the  user  to  find  out  what 
assertions  cr  facts  were  involved  in 
permitting  the  rule  to  help  conclude  the 
given  asserticn. 

Fermat:  aHOSF  sHELATION>  is  cITF*^/ 

Example:  WHCSE  TYPE  is  MPCHANT 

This  query  acts  as  a  partial  inverse  tc  the 

*’EAT  iuery. 

Fermat;  '*EC  is  \TiiZ  AN  A'  <-RELATICNl  (CF' 
<ITEM> 

Example:  'VEC  is  INS  ICE  IAN  El 


26 


iXPir.IMMA 


MIHCrCLCGY 


n . 

This  section  presents  a  discrssirn  c:'  exper  i’^er  ta  1 
rethclo lo^y  which  rrey  be  applied  in  the  evel’jation  of 
STAhMRS.  rollcwiCf,  an  overview  of  general  issues,  and  a 
discussion  of  general  levels  cr’  exper  i'"entat  icn ,  three 
specific  stages  of  experirrent  are  presented.  Prcr  these,  one 
has  been  chcsen  to  be  carried  cut  as  a  serple  experi'^ent. 

The  design  of  an  experirent  is  based  on  the  v^uesticn  to 
be  addressed.  An  experiment  to  co-^pare  systems  with 
different  speeds  of  message  receipt,  for  example,  will 
include  a  message  generator,  an  interval  for  testing,  and 
the  m.eans  to  measure  differences  in  total  messages 
received.  The  criteria  for  "better”  may  te  the  higher  number 
of  messages  received  in  a  certain  time  or  the  shorter  tine 
needed  tc  receive  a  certain  number  of  messages.  These 
cbjective  measures  cf  performance  are  established  prior 
to  the  experiment,  with  sufficient  flexibilit./  to  present 
the  data  tc  satisfy  tx^e  question. 

In  more  complex  evalt;ation,  the  iresticr.s  tc  be 
answered  ray  be  difficult  to  define.  If  the  goal  of  the 
experiment  is  to  find  the  number  of  messages  received  and 
understood  during  a  definite  lime  interval,  me  criteria  for 
understanding  must  also  become  a  part  of  the  experimental 
procedure.  Interpretation  of  the  results  of  such  an 


experirre’:t  taer  teccTes  de^-erident  cr.  ar.  'accei, ta tie "  le’^el 
rf  I  rde  rs  tc  rd  in.-,  er.  acceptable  ri.rber  of  ressa-'es,  or  a 
cop-t  inaticn  of  the  tvo.  Tnis  ra/  then  be  ar.  area  where  the 
cb.iective  r.easures  .jive  wap  to  less  precise  but  eicallp 
i.sei'i;l  subjective  evaluation. 

In  order  tc  test  the  suitability  cf  an 
crtificiel  inte  1 1  i^-ence  systerr,  reasures  of  perforrarce 
-ray  be  difficult  tc  establish.  Tne  ccTpcrents  cf  the 
proirrem  rap  be  i.ndividuallp  exanined  (the  structure, 
eiecution,  results),  or  the  overall  irp reverent"  in  a 
parcreter  of  the  function  which  the  pro^ran  is  desijnel  to 
assist  rap  be  tested.  However,  tc  show  that  tne  spster 
world  respond  tc  a  euesticn  cr  situation  as  uriolcly  as 
a  huran  aecision  raP-er,  siven  that  the  situation  were 
constrained  tc  wuat  the  prorrar  and  the  r.uran  knew  and  t.n6 
inferratior.  flow  was  at  "norrar’  speed,  rep  prove 
nothing  rcre  than  that  certuters  are  faster  than  hurans. 
Considering  the  difficult;/  in  e  stabli  shin*-' 

reanitgful  reasures  of  effectiveness,  subjective  evaluation 
cf  the  capability  and  the  utility  cf  by  tactically 

crientea  Individuals,  ray  show  the  greatest  prerise  as  an 
evaluation  technique. 

Ixperirentatior.  ray  be  perfcrr.ed  in  ste-jes  r.an.ji.ng  fror 
sirple  static  debug/valiaatioc  experirents,  whicn 
c  oncer. tra te  on  tne  capabilities  cf  the  lecnncl c.-'p  a'-d 
require  few  resources,  tc  rore  extensive  technical 


evc  iucl  i  c '.s  cf  SIAf-'^ZK2  wior. 


;y'a'"ic5lly  data 


tase  in  a  controlled  e nvi rcnrent .  This  could  include 
c/neric  ojeraticnai  evaluations  in  simulated  ccnrana  and 
ccntrcl  er.vircnrents  pitting-  ccpcsir.f-  fences  against  eacn 
other  under  various  scenarios  uslr.«-  one  of  the  warfare 
enviroarent  sirulator  (>.’ES)  war  prc=?rars  [?.ef.  15]. 

following  an  overview  of  three  possible  levels  of 
testic.^,  rore  detailed  prccedures  for  these  levels  will  be 
presented . 

The  basic  level  of  experiment  consists  of  inputinr  into 
a  data  base  various  static  threat  scenarios  (a  snapshot 
view  of  tne  situation}  concern  in.-*  the  status  of 


rlue  aaa  Cranee 


task  forces. 


The  test  objective 


is  to  evaluate  the  capabilities  of  3TA^^'E?.2  to  read  the  data 
base,  si-dnal  the  existence  of  the  threats,  and  forr 
cpir:icns  based  cn  specific  rules  selected  ty  the  test 
conductor}  coacerr.ia<  other  infornation  in  the  forr  of 
sensor  and  i^'^llipence  reports. 


core  realistic  ccrrrrand  and  control  environment  with 


dynamically  chan.-'iny  data  base.  A  detailed  scenario  is 
presented  via  *15  (or  its  variants),  presenting  a  vide 
ranre  cf  inputs  to  STAi'“r'.i;?.2  under  chan(=;ir:;£  circumstances 
to  probe  the  limits  of  its  capabilities ,  e.r;.,  wnat  tnreat 
intensity  is  ’•e'juired  to  "cverlcad"  STA'-MRl  ,  or  wnat  is 


I 


I 

I 


fne  len.’i;'.  of  .lire  i'rop  liie  itstact  tne  rercrt  is  reoeived 
ur.til  STA^^£H2  si.?cal5  a  ccnclusicp. 

Ip.  the  rosT  conplex  level  of  testir.,^f  V.'iS  is  a^air.  used 
wit..  Crar.re  and  rlue  task  forces.  T.nese  forces  are 
:  on^pcsea  as  closely  as  possible,  wi  t  ni  n  the  capabilities 
of  available  test  resources,  with  eaui^-rent  isenscrs, 
weapons,  etc)  and  platforr.s  tnat  represe.nt  current  militar;.'’ 
inventories.  Zxper  i'^ental  erp-iasis  is  shifted  frc^  a 
technical  evaluation  to  an  operational  evaluation  of  the 
value  cf  STA^'^'Z?.h  to  tne  decision  Taker.  The  objective 
is  to  determine  if  STAKMr.Z  irprcves  the  ccrrmanle  r '  s  ability 
to  tnaie  rapid  and  accurate  decisions.  Cperaticnally 
realistic  scenarios  are  the  desired  norm.  lach  scenario 
sucul.'"  be  replicated  with  different  players  with  sc-'e 
trials  having  the  rlue  forces  operatin.-,-  with  STA^:^T?.2  and 
sene  without.  Gperaticnal  measures  cf  effectiveness, 
which  depend  on  the  scenarios  under  pla.v,  are  selected  to 
assess  the  operational  utility  of  3T.“^■Mk?.  In  adaitioc,  the 
players  and  the  umpire  team  are  subjected  to  pest -exercise 
interviews  and  questionnaires  to  «:et  subje'^tive  evaluations 
cf  r.he  worth  of  STAM^IPS. 

While  there  are  no  definitive  boundaries  between  tae 
levels  cf  the  fcr-^al  experiments,  the  rar.-^e  cf  renditions 
.oust  be  designed  for  scenarios  that  are  oerr  realistic  and 
informative.  The  actual  analysis  at  each  level  of  experiment 
Tust  take  into  account  the  Il.Titaticns  of  the  scenario 


-T  *7 


-enpretor  ''P.ef  .  It].  'The  three  i.rcpcsei  levels  of  experirent 
'*ill  new  oe  presented  in  aetaii. 

A.  STAGZ-Cf.’Z  EXPERIMENTS 

1 .  Cojec live 

Sta^e-cne  experinects  evali,ate  the  capatility  cf 
STAMMEHP  to  identify,  in  a  static  en  vi  ronrr'en  t ,  the  tactical 
situation  that  confronts  an  af’.oat  task  force  and  to 
iescrihe  the  sitvation  setr.cnticaliy  and  ,:raphi  ca  1  ly  .  This 
t/re  cf  experirent  establishes  tne  t/pe  cf  threats  that 
STAMMEH2  car.  evaluate  ard  assesses  the  t  i  rre  1  i  ne  ss  of  the 
warr!in«?s.  The  experirents  rra/  also  serve  to  provide  ^  edbach 
throutjh  which  STAMhERP  ray  be  refined. 

2 .  Resources  Recuired 

a.  Technical 

The  STAMMER2  prOe,rcn  and  associated  corputer 
.-.ardware  are  required  for  this  experirent.  At  present, 
STA[-rE.R2  is  resident  on  the  TOPS 22  syster  at  NCSC,  San 
Tieec,  Califcrr.ia. 

b.  Eisplay 

An  alphanureric  disilay  syster  will  be  required 
for  players  a.nd  the  r.Tpire  tear.  In  additicn,  a  i^raphioal 
display  of  the  situation,  as  is  ncrrally  venerated  by 
V ES  rust  be  available  tr  compare  it  with  that  presented  by 
STA^'MR2. 


34 


c.  icenaric 

The  tactical  scenario  is  presented  as  a  series 
cf  otereiionall./  realistic  "aata  plates’  ccnstructei  in 
advance  of  the  experi-er. t .  Each  data  i-late  is  a  iata 
snapshot  describia-'  a  tactical  situation  at  a  ?iven  tire. 

4 

The  plate  snculd  include  varicus  infcr'^aticn  ^  course,  speed, 
sensor  reports,  intelligence)  available  to  a  Tactical  action 
Officer  tc  describe  tne  siluaticr.  fully. 

d.  Personnel 

iiie  personnel  required  for  the  experi'^er.t 
include  observers  of  the  output  (threat  assessors),  a 
scenario  controller,  and  a  test  director. 

€.  Support  Prcgra.'T 

Ic  addition  tc  scenario  generating  rsquirerents , 
software  tc  rreasure  and  record  the  ti~es  at  which  the 
ressages  are  output  and  the  tires  designated  by  the 
observers  is  required.  This  prcsraT,  based  on  tne 
ivHFxiMT  TYPZSCHIPT  feature,  records  ail  inputs  and 
outputs  tc  selected  ter'^irals. 

3  .  G-er  eral  Context 

a.  Concept  and  Need 

STAM^IF.2  is  being  developed  to  interact  with  a 
.^rapnics  display  syster  to  support  the  corrander's  decision 
processes.  In  order  tc  assess  the  value  cf  the  tec.nnc  1  c,'y 
MB  rust  deternine  its  capabilities  and  shcrtcorings  .  '^nr 
STAd'^IP.Z  to  be  useful  tc  a  decision  va>er  it  -ust  be  able  tc 


*7  C 
V  w 


evrlvcte  threats  c,:  a  cci-^pari  sor.  and  ccllati:;''.  cf  all-s".  rea¬ 
rer  or  ts  ar.l  oi splay  the  situatiens  in  a  lirely  rar.ner. 


h.  General  Sitraticn  cnl  Sceneries 

A  st-i  table  nurber  cf  data  7letes  snov.  In  be 
.-‘evelcrel  tc  vary  the  tactical  sitraticr  sieni:  icar.tly  ir 
both  the  compl  eii  t,.'  of  the  situations  and  the  nature  ari 
nurber  of  the  platforrs  involved.  A  data  plate  should  be 
selectel  at  randcr,  its  nurber  recorded  and  the 
ap:  rop  ria  tely  storea  data  input  to  tne  file  vhirh  STA'-riP.Z 
«ill  read.  An  observer,  unaware  cf  the  contents  of  the  data 
plate,  renitors  the  contents  of  the  display  terriaal, 
evaluates  the  irfcr'riaticn  received,  and  describes  the 


situations  as  he  sees  then.. 

4 .  Ivaluaticn 

a .  Data  collection 

The  following  data  shoula  be 
each  trial:  the  lata  plate  iientificatio 

situation  assessrent  cf  tne  evaiuatcr, 
situation  assessment  ilven  by  ST.AI^MR2. 

b.  Analysis 

The  prirary  areas  of  concern  for 
experirents  are:  a  cerparisou  cf  the  STA.''h'~H2 
tne  human  assessments  of  the  threats,  end  a 
cf  the  tires  re^puired  for  STAbblPZ 
different  types  of  situatiors. 


collected  for 
n  nurber,  The 
and  the 

the  5ta.pt-cr.e 
output  vitn 
df  terri  r.at  ion 
tc  process 


ip 


?cst-tesl  ar-ci/sis  *ill  exariae  tr.e  ^ata  sr.aat 
Tc  ascertain  if  accarctel.;  f-Vcli:^tei  or  iescrifei 

aai  disrla/ed  all  :liase-o.os  siluaticas.  T'ais  is  ccrpareo 
•  ith  the  ev.=  lvator5'  ecility  tc  io  the  sere  easel  or  the 
sare  late. 

c.  An tiripatea  P.esv. Its 

It  is  er.  ti  ci  pe  ted  that  jiA'‘'e'2P2  will  si-T.el  the 
existence  cf  threats  with  very  little  tine  delay  and  tr.at 
the  situation  end  display  will  be  presented  accurately.  'or 
tnese  cases  where  ccrplex  rultiple  situatiens  are  present 
sirultenecrsly  ,  the  tests  ray  indicate  an  c  ve  rc  rowi  i  r..;  of 
tne  aisplay  and  a  lac-t  cf  tire  tc  exercise  the  Icc-ic  trace 
capability  cf  STAfihSHt. 

c  .  Cornents  and  Sreciai  I  nstrv.ct  iens 

Each  experirental  subject  will  t.nrrv^n  a  shrrt 
STAhh'EH2  indo  ct  ri  r.a  t  i  on  session  li;rir.«'  which  ne  is  .riven  a 
surrary  cf  tne  theory  and  irplerer.tation  cf  STA'>f^~22,  a 
threat"  briefing  tc  explain  the  scenario,  end  an  overview 
cf  what  is  expectec  of  hir.  Care  should  he  taken  tc  include 
in  the  lata  plates  as  ran/  situatiens  as  possible  that 
STAbhlPS  has  been  designed  to  handle  in  realist!" 
situatiens.  It  is  recc^rnendel  that  several  different 
operators  be  subjected  to  tne  corplete  set  of  plates  and  be 
asked  tc  subjectively  evaluate  the  displayed  i  nf  erra  1 1  cn.  tc 


provide  inforratior  whicn  ray  be  useful  in  the 
follow-on  display  experirents. 


of 


ie  s  i»T. 


The  stat^e-cr.e  experi  eniaticr  aLcve  will 


need  to  be 

carried  out  in  the 

course  of 

a  full  a 

nd  ca  r‘=  f  u  1 

evaluation  of 

STArMR2  as  a  tocl 

in  tacti 

cal  asses 

c p-o  p  ^  ^  -'or 

the  purpose 

cf  this  thesis, 

howe ve  r , 

0  ’1 1  y  The 

stc ^e*twc 

eiyerirrent  (as  dis:i;ssed  belcw;  ’*as  actiall/  rerfcraed. 

r.  STAG2-T'*C  E>:?FAI^’^^;TS 

1 .  Ob  lect ive 

The  cbjecbives  cf  sta^e-lwr,  experi-^ents  are;  tc 
assess  the  technical  ('cpability  of  STn^l^JrO  actions  on  a 
iytamically  chanj^in?  data  base  a'er.erater  by  creating' 
threat  situations  throu-h  the  exercise  of  ’4IS  (or  its 
variants')  tc  deter"- ire  t.ne  'lirits'  cf  the  capability 
cf  STA^MRt?  and  to  obtain  subjective  opinions  about 
STAi'-r'IR2. 

2 .  Pescurces  Reauired 
a  .  Techai cal 

The  STAt'’^.i?.2  prc^ra-n  ar.i  asscciaieh  cc-^puter 
hardware  are  required  for  this  experif-f  nt .  "’he  Warfare 
Znvironrent  Sirrulator  (WIS)  pro^rar  is  available  on  the 
TZNEX  system  at  NOSC. 
b.  Display 

An  alpnanurerir  display  syste-n  is  reuv.lred  -'‘or 
players  and  the  umpire  team.  The  GZMSCC  system,  a  color 
graphic  display,  may  be  used  tc  presert  the  siturtirn 
geaerateu  by  WZS  . 


w h i c h  Is 


c  .  ;  c  ena  :■  1  c 

An  orera  ti  cr.dl  I7  rfclistic  scfnario  :s 
^eneraied  t,c  test  STA.'-Mr.S  in  a  tactital  sitLSticr.  a:  a 
.'i7er  tire.  The  scenario  should  include  various 
inforration  (course,  sueed,  senscr  reports,  Intel  1  i-jence ) 
available  tc  a  Tactical  Action  Officer  tc  describe  the 
situation  as  it  is  corn-ally  presented  by  aTS  ,  via 

visual  display  and  status  boards.  The  evaluator  will  be 
allowed  to  interact  with  units  under  his  ''or.trcl"  by 
crderins  ccurse  and  speed  changes,  and  enablinr  vari^'us 
sensors  available  to  hirr..  The  te  =  t  director  ray  insert 
various  elerents  of  i”  telli=jerce  as  desired. 

d.  Person. '.el 

The  personnel  required  for  the  eiperirent 
include  observers  cf  t.ne  output  'threat  assessors',  a 
scenario  controller,  end  a  test  director. 

e.  Support  Prosran 

In  addition  to  scenario  c-en  era  tiny  re  up;  i  renpr  t  c  ^ 
software  to  reasure  and  reccrc  t.ne  tires  at  which  t.ie 
ressa^es  are  output  and  the  tires  desiy'ated  c.,-  the 
observers  is  desirable.  This  crcyrar,  baseu  on  the 


AHPAF 


TYPESCRIPT  feature,  reccrds  all  in-^uts 


outruts  tc  selected  temlnals. 


Zvclucticr.  j  u  e  s  t  i  cr.na i  re 


?ollO’»ins'  8  study  cf  t  r.e  reesures  cf  creretior.al 
effectiveness  which  nay  he  acnieved  ir  this  interactive 
exre  ri  rer.  t ,  =n  evelucticn  re  shocli  :e 

ccustructed  tc  estatlisn  the  level  tc  which  these  reesures 
.nave  teer.  satisfied. 

3 .  jer.eral  Context 

a.  Concert  and  Need 

k  corulete  techr.oio^icel  ass^ssTer  t  of  the 
carability  cf  ST.4^.'IR2  includes  an  evaluaticn  i  r.  a  realistic 
e.nv  i  rcr.pent  with  a  dynariCclly  chen.'in?  data  tase.  '^h? 
e.xrerirent  rust  subject  ST.^.hM?.2  tc  a  wide  cf  situaticns 
under  varying  levels  of  senscr  activity  in  ar.  effort  tc 

exercise  all  carabilities  of  end  try  tc  .rcbe  the 

"lt"'its"  of  those  capabi  1:  t  i  e  s  .  These  limits  could  he  ths 
size  of  data  base,  nurber  cf  reports,  or  freu.uency  cf 
reports  . 

^  b.  der.erai  Situation  and  Scenarios 

'a IS  scenarios  will  te  .generated  tc  present  a 

variety  of  sensor  reports  and  levels  of  a^tivit;"  h;.- 
platforjs.  An  evaluator  fariliar  witn  ta.cli":al  war  rrariny 
will  observe  the  play  cf  the  'a-'.e  wnile  exercisir-:  3TAl-'M?.Z 
tc  the  Pcxirur  extent  possible. 

Zac.n  experimental  subject  will  =?c  tnrcu.ah  a 

short  ST.4hMR2  indoctrination  session  during  which  he  will 
he  a-iven  a  suprary  cf  the  tnscry  and  i-^p  1  e~en  ta  t  i  r  r.  cf 


STA^^ZR£,  e  threat'  triefir..^  to  explain  the  srenaric,  -r.i 
an  cverviev  of  wnat  is  exnented  cf  hir. 

r\:rir.=?  the  course  cf  the  actual  ex  per  i  Ter  ta  1 
run,  the  evaluator  ma;;  be  assisted  by  the  VIS  operators  anl 
test  direotcr  in  the  Techanism  cf  input,  output,  and  display 
to  rerove  extraneous  or  list  racl  in,-'  details  of  the  e-are. 

4  .  Zv  a  1  ua  t  i  c  r. 

a.  fata  Collection 

The  folio  win,?  data  should  be  collected  for  each 
scenario:  the  times  at  which  the  date  case  is 

updated,  the  situation  analysis  by  STAM^IPc,  and  the 
sitvatior.  analysis  oy  the  operator. 

These  data  will  be  auAmented  by  the  situation 
assessments  Tade  by  tne  test  director  who,  havin,?  tecc-^e 
familiar  with  the  full  scenario,  can  assess  the  "prrcu.nd 
truth"  by  having  Kr.owied^;e  cf  the  actions  cf  all  platfcr’^s 
throughout  the  scenario.  Tht  questionnaire  'iven  to 

each  operator  should  consist  of  .iuesticns  aesifined  to  assess 
tne  real  is c  f  the  s  cenaric  and  the  utility  cf 

STA^■^'^?.2  as  objectively  as  possible. 

b.  Analysis 

Corpariscn  is  made  between  '■he  siti'.ation 
descriptions  by  STA^:yI.n2,  the  evaluators,  ana  srrcund  truth 
to  assess  the  fpenerel  accuracy  of  these  descriptions.  The 

questionnaire  results  may  be  presented  in  tabular  form  and 
t.ne  objective  ccmments  discussed  in  the  ccnclusLcns. 

41 


ir. tiri.atei  -esvlts 


'.vnile  it  tra/  be  rc-ssible  to  venerate  ^oluratior. 
tcirts  fcr  S'rAKr'Z"! ,  "-arifest  ir  ti-e  w.iere:-!  tr.e 

STA'  ^7H2  disriay  s  i  fi  can  1 1/  lass  behind  the  >TS  scenario, 
the  serial  ratnre  cf  rei-crt  ^rccessln?  wrull  see-  tc 
ireclule  this  nossibllity,  providirs  the  ouery  fvroticr  cf 
STAI'NIR  2  is  not  extensivaly  usea. 

t .  Cc''^Tents  ai.d  Sreclal  Ins  trt:  c  t  i  c*' s 

The  scenario  tare  should  be  r.aintained  sc  that  a 
siven  ga^e  nay  be  replicated  exactly  fcitn  zero  variance  :':t 
different  operators  and  so  that  the  test  director  can 
thcrcugaly  deterrice  the  situations  as  they  exist  (or  ere 
about  tc  exist (.  Havins  tne  sanes  cr  tare  vruld  allow  trials 
w i thcut  *  IS -t  rained  operators  t c  input  the  i ns  true t ions 
required  by  a  detailed  script.  In  addition,  a-'  observer 
could  rrenitor  the  Plue  forces  in  one  or  rore  cf  the 
scenarios  in  a  run  without  STAMdIRA  and  -laAe  cc-parisens 
with  the  exact  run  without  ST.-iyb'ZHc .  Finally,  if  the  runs 
were  net  available  on  tape,  very  detailed  scripts  descritlng 
all  of  the  actions  of  both  the  Blue  ard  Crange  forces  ri.-'ht 
be  written  fcr  each  of  the  scenarios  t  c  accc"!- 1  i  s  h  i  he 
objectives  of  this  test. 


42 


j 


C.  rT.Ui-TH?.ZI  iXPZRI"  Z.\"S 

1 .  Objectives 

Tne  sta^e-three  exrerireat  rics  as  its  objectives  to 
^-rrvioe  an  operational  evaluat  i  or  c:’  the  ■nilitary  utility  of 
ST/i.’-MRZ  to  a  .iecisior  raker  at  ar.  afloat  task  force  corrand 
and  control  center  in  a  sirulated  envir?n'’ent  and  to 
evaluate  whether  i'rAi''MR2  ir^^roves  the  decision  reiver's 
atility  to  rake  rapid  and  accurate  decisions.  As  in  the 
case  of  the  star'e-cne  experirent,  this  level  of 
exp er irer. ta t io n  are  ciscussed  ners  cut  were  net  perferred  as 
part  of  this  research. 

2 .  Resources  .Zeiuired 
a .  Techni cal 

The  STAf'b'IRl  and  'j»ES  pro.prars  and  associated 
corputer  hareware  are  re'-^uirea  for  this  ex’erirent. 
b  .  r  i  s  0 1  a  y 

An  al jhanureri''  display  syster  is  re.uired  for 
ea'^h  tea-^  of  players  and  the  u-npire  tea-”.  The  GlklSCT 
syster,  a  odor  graphic  display,  ray  be  used  to  present  the 
situation  which  Is  venerated  by  VES  . 
c .  Scenario 

An  operatic  rally  realistic  scenario  is 
rvenereted  to  test  STAiVMRZ  in  a  controllable  t-ctical 
situaticr. .  The  scenario  snculd  include  variers 
inferratior.  icourse,  speed,  sensor  rt  ports,  i  r.  t  >-1 1  i  ^.-e  r.ce  1 
available  to  a  Tactical  Action  Officer  to  describe  the 


40 


situation 

as  it  is  norrally 

presented  b/  '.vIS  . 

Y  • 

visual  disc 

la/  and  status  boards.  The 

tears  will  be  all 

c  V.  d 

tc  interact 

with  units  under  their 

ccvrar.  d  by  rr^e 

riff’ 

course  and 

speed  chan^-es,  enatlin,-: 

various  sensors, 

?  n  d 

execut  i  n.? 

tactical  crders  a.cainst 

a  n  0  p  I  c  n  e  n  t . 

p 

urpire  ray 

insert  various  elenents 

of  i  n  t  e  1 1  i  ='e nee 

c  5 

desired . 

d  . 

Personnel 

The  personnel  required 

for  the  expi^ri 

rent 

iacluQS  observer  tears  to  act  as  rlue  and  Crcn«?e 
lorces,  a  scenario  ccr.lrciler,  an  '-rr.pire  tear,  and  a  t^st 
airectcr. 

e.  Support  Program 

In  addition  to  scenario  <eneratinr:  re  rere  n  t  s  , 
scftuare  tc  reasure  and  reccrd  tne  tires  at  which  the 
ressages  are  output  and  the  tires  iesior.ated  by  the 
vC servers  is  required.  This  prCf-rar,  based  on  the 

APPANET  T^PISCPIFT  feature,  recrrds  all  irputs  and 
outputs  to  selected  terri.nals. 

f,  Evaluaticn  quest  ionr.aire 

Following  a  study  cf  the  "'easures  of  operational 
effectiveness  whicr.  ray  be  achieved  in  t.nis  ir.terartive 
experlrent,  an  evalucti''n  questionnaire  should  be 
constructed  tc  establish  the  level  tc  which  these  reasures 
..ave  t'”‘ ;i  satisfied. 


44 


3 .  aer.ei-cl  Context 

a.  Ccr^cept  and  .\eed 

It  is  pcssitle  that  iha  value  cf  STA:M?.2  as  a 
cecision  aid  ray  only  he  assessed  in  an  cjeraticnal 
scenario.  ?cr  exarule,  it  ray  enable  a  decision  •^aker  to 
oetter  understand  the  threat  situation  which  faces  his 
forces  and  tc  •^ake  -^cre  accurate  aad  tirely  decisicns. 
These  experiner.ts  would  pit  two  o^posirg  decision  rakers 
against  each  other  in  a  simulated  cc^Tand  and  control 
environrert  and  seek  to  reasure  the  valire  of  ?TA^M?.2  hy 
conparir.r  the  dccisicn  rakers'  perfcrrance  operating  with 
end  without  STA^'MI?.2. 

t.  aeneral  Eituaticr.  ard  Scenarios 

The  operaticnal  evaluation  of  STAf-MF.2  resvires 
cnenat icna lly  realistic  scenarios  consisting  cf  Blue  and 
Crer.fe  task  forces,  whicu  w'uld  be  acted  out  with  each  tear 
piven  the  fiexitilit./  cf  exercising  ccrplete  centre!  over 
their  forces  as  Icnp  as  they  do  not  oovn terra nd  their 
ordered  rissions.  Fcr  each  scenario,  an  oreratioaal  reasure 
cf  ef  feet  ive’i ess  thCZ)  cr  rultipie  NOZs  shc\;ld  he  selected 
and  used  tc  assess  the  oreraticaal  utility  of  STA’^rifk. 

Because  cf  the  free-^l-y  flexibility  -jiven  tc 
the  Blue  and  Cranpe  force  corranders,  the  war  wares  and  the 
resulting  outcomes  ray  vary  s iwnif icantly  from  trial  to 
trial.  Consequently,  each  scenario  snould  he  replicated  in 
such  3  way  as  tc  avoid  f o r ekncwled .,e  by  a  piayinp  tea"-.  This 


45 


be  done  by  usint*  e  nurber  of  teers  '.based  on  t'ne 
availability  cf  assets),  with  r-uiiiple  srenarirs.  Tv/  varyin* 
tne  use  and  non-use  of  STA^'’''ir.2  by  a  tear.  ( consideri  n*^  t  nat 
a  tear  is  expected  tc  play  rcre  than  one  .ya'-^e),  a  rcrrariscn 
of  performance  based  o.n  the  t^CZs  may  be  made. 

Earn  tea^  snculi  pc  thmuph  a  brief 
i  nice  t  r  i  na  t  ic  n  session  durir.j;  which  the  fcllcwir.p  loints 
will  be  discussed:  the  theory  and  irj lerentation  of 
STAhf^EH2,  a  threat”  triefin?  tc  explain  the  scenario  and  an 
cverview  of  the  mission,  and  an  overview  of  the  measures  of 
effectiveness. 

4 .  Zva lua  t  ion 

a.  Data  Ccilection 

The  fcilcwinp  data  should  be  collected  for 
each  scenaric:  times  at  wnich  the  data  base  is 
updated,  situaticn  assessf^erts  by  STAYKIRt,  sit'.aticn 
assessments  by  the  teams,  actions  tahen  by  the  decision 
m.a>er ,  an-'  data  reoulred  tc  determ’  the  selected 

operational  measures  of  effectiveness. 

These  data  ray  be  ausmented  by  the  situation 
assessments  male  by  the  test  director  who,  havirp  becert 
familiar  with  the  full  s''er.arlc,  can  assess  the  '^rcund 
truth"  by  hevin.-.-  ,cr.owledpe  cf  the  actions  cf  all  pl-tfor's 
threuphout  the  scenario.  Tie  questionnaire  piven  to 
each  eperater  should  censist  of  cuesticr.s  ■’esipned  tc  assess 


the  realiST  of  the  srenaric  and  the  mi  lit;;  of 
SIA^^Z?-2  as  ob  jec  livel;/  as  rossiMe. 
b.  Analysis 

Data  st,Traries  ray  te  r.ade  for  saj.-i  scenario  end 
tabular  displays  should  te  i^ade  cf  tr.e  fCIs. 


A  ccrrelatica  analysis  should  be  rade  with  the 
tire  seauence  cf  actions  taker,  by  the  decision  raker 
based  on  the  situation  assessments  made  by  STAb'M??  to  try 
tc  determine  hew  ruch  the  rc’^Tan.''^  ers  utilize 
STAibiP.2  and  what  information  is  most  useful  to  tht”^  a 
cemparisen  cf  the  ?are  cutccres ,  as  reflected  by  the 
bOIs,  nay  be  made  usir.e.'  analysis  of  variance  tc  see  if 
there  is  any  significant  difference  due  to  STA:-'b7P.2. 

A  comparison  may  be  male  of  the  «:amt  c\-.tccr‘es 
and  the  subjective  appraisals  cf  STAr-..*^DB2  to  see  if  there 
was  a  relationship  between  how  well  the  forces  performed  and 
hew  much  they  liked  STA^MR2. 

c.  Anticipated  Results 

It  is  anticipated  tnat  there  cculd  be  a  lar=re 
variance  in  the  cverall  end-  cf-came  cperaticnal  measures  cf 
effectiveness.  The  possioillty  exists  that  the  ^CFs  will  be 
sufficiently  amblrucus  that  any  si.cnal  d\;e  tc  S"'AkM'R2  -ay 
not  be  discernible.  Thus,  the  subjective  ev.=  luation5  of  the 
teams  may  provide  t.ne  cnly  disc  rim.inat  Icn  in  the  test,  with 
no  «uantitative  assessment  of  the  value  of 
possible. 


47 


Zte  correlation  cnclysis  of  the  iecisior.  reker's 
ecticLS  and  the  dTA.t-’^IH2  assessreni  should  reveal  the  l/j  ? 
cf  i  r.f  or  na  t  ion  that  is  to  s  t  useful  to  a  decision  r,a  >e  r  end 
nov  rush  he  jay  grow  to  rely  cc  STAi'^f  iE2.  Cverall,  these 
exrerijents  should  yield  irporter.t  inforJaticn  aoout  the 
docertafcilit/  of  STA^'^Z?.2  to  the  decision  jaker  and  its 
utility  to  h i r. . 

n .  Ccjpeats  and  Special  Instructions 

The  usefulness  cf  STA^lMH2  to  a  decision  jaker  •nay 
strongly  depend  on  the  janner  in  which  STA^MZH2  outputs  are 
displayed  to  the  Blue  forces.  This  '•’ighi  he  especially  true 
in  high  density  situations  with  a  backlc,'  of  'unprccessed 
sensor  reports.  Tne  nature  cf  the  dis’^^lay  dedicated  to 
STAr-N.I?.2  should  be  considered  prior  to  stage  three 
experlrents.  The  use  of  a  terrinal  ether  than  the  .-'raphic 
display  terminal  for  auery  and  response  artiens  allows  the 
picture  to  remain  undisturbed  until  refinerent  of  scale  or 
sequential  processing  is  requested,  'i'he  •'isplay  syste-  is 
an  integral  part  of  STAhh:r?.2  so  the  evaluation  should  be 
tased  cn  the  most  flexible  display  available. 

A  tape  record  of  the  game  should  be  rale  of  the 
inputs  ana  outputs  of  each  gare  so  that  evaluation  personnel 
can  reproduce  a  giver,  trial  and  conduct  a  review  of  any 
point  to  assist  in  "what  if"  types  cf  analysis. 


ic 


T^ie  scenarics  used  shciili  te  crerat  i  c  r.a  1  ly 
realistic,  anl  tr.e  starting*  cor.liticr. s  and  peascres  of 
effectiveness  ri;st  ce  selectee  to  exercise  the  full  ranye  of 
STA^"'.E?.2  capafciiitipc  i^.d  tc  yield  useful  in  f  c  r-^at  i  c  r  .  The 


scenarios  reed 

not  be 

develcpec 

just 

for  the 

purpose 

of 

exercising  ST 

Instead  , 

tr.e 

I'lue  and 

Grange 

t  a  s  h 

forces  shculd 

refl e  ct 

as  close ly 

3  C 

p  c  s  s  i  b  1  e  , 

V  i  t  h  i  n 

the 

constraints  cf  rescurces,  the  cc"'pcsiticn  of  forces 
currently  available  or  projected,  as  desired  and  the  types  of 
rissions  norrrally  uadertahen  by  each. 

The  subjects  used  in  the  experi'^e’'. ts  nay  be  very 
irportaat.  For  purposes  cf  scientific  credibility,  the 
subjects  "ust  nave  cen^-and  and  contrei  experience  at  hi,-;h 
levels,  preferably  l^avy  Captains  (C-c'  or  Adrirals.  A 
potential  criticis'^s  cf  experiments  which  attef^pt  tc 
determine  the  operational  utility  of  a  s/sten  is  that  the 
' operators'  aid  not  reflect  the  potential  user  rcrulation. 
This  would  seen  especially  true  when  the  evaluations  depend 
heavily  on  subjective  appraisals.  There  are  practical 
difficulties  in  cbtainir.e,  suer,  test  subjects.  However,  the 
issue  is  whether  tnese  tests  can  be  viewea  as  scientific 
experiments  or  'demonstrations  without  tne  fperational 
realism  engendered  by  their  presence. 


:ISCF.TPTICN 

A  sarple  experi-nert  was  selected  froT  tr.e 
precedinc'  discussion  tc  illuslrete  both  the  cepcbillt7  of 
STArKPHS  and  and  t ne  practical  application  of  these  rethcds. 

The  stare-two  experirental  riethcdclcry  was  selected  for 
this  thesis.  Selection  criteria  included  the  expertise  cf 
the  test  subjects  available  and  the  availability  cf  the 
facilities  at  the  Naval  Post^pradve  te  School.  The  test 
subjects  selected  were  Tilitary  cfficers  with  bacA-TCund  in 
co’^rand  and  control  concepts  rained  through  fnrrnal  education 
and  a  wide  ranre  of  rilitary  experience.  The  Ccrrar.d, 
Control,  and  Coer  v  r.i  ca  t  i  or.s  Laboratory  contains  extensive 
rratnic  and  text  capability,  and  the  STA^^T?c  and  '‘'IS 
software  are  available  at  the  Naval  Ccean  Systers  '''^nter 
INCSC',  San  I}le,po,  California. 

The  '*arfcre  Lnvi  rcr.'-e  r  t  Si'^ulator  (>IS,  war  .-■a’^e 
procedure  involves  the  construction  of  a  corputer  file  >nicn 
cental  ns  identific  alien  cf  ail  ■'esired  players,  initial 
positions,  co’.;rses,  ar.i  5pe‘=as.  Flatforrs  ray  be  selec’ei 
frrr"  a  resident  data  base  whicn  assirns  senscr  and 
weapons  renf  Icpura  t  ion  s  tc  the  units.  "cllcvlr.,:  r’are 
initialization,  the  u"its  ray  be  -’areuvered  cr  cc—ar.d  ''“c- 
the  player  throurh  a  corputer  terminal,  with  display 


cf  exact  ceorfra:  ni  c  loceticc  oi  ur.its  availaMe  c  n 

selected  -crarr.ic  disilay  reciters.  Ir.  teracticr  cf  tr.e 
ir.its  ra/  de  ordered  b/  the  clayers  (as  in  attae'es),  cut 
sensor  renerts  are  denendent  e""  ietectirr.  al  c  r  r :  t  n'^s  in 


V.zS.  For  exarple,  detections 


surface  searcr. 


radar  a-'ainst  another  surface  vessel  cc-urs  at  2?  rili 


rinirur  senaretion 


er.sor  rc-rorts  are  =,iven  to  the  nle:'E 


via  a  status  heard  text  aisplav  and  on  the  aeo^rraphic 
display  whic.n  is  updated  every  :jdTe  rinute. 

This  experirent  was  not  interactive  in  that  the 
eperat cr  did  net  influence  the  s er I es  c f  events  which 
were  hein^r  fvenereted  hy  '.VIS.  It  was,  however,  interactive 
ir.  the  sense  that  the  eperater  aad  t.ne  carahility  te  select 
different  status  hoard  disi'.lavs  and  change  ran^e  scales 
as  dssirea.  The  fully  interactive  war  £&re  as  su=rested  in 
the  third  level  cf  experirent  wcvld  allow  eperater 
influence  of  the  event  strear.  The  prepare-*  scenario 
used  in  this  exrerinent,  wnicn  included  initial 
pcsitiens,  initial  courses  end  speeds,  a  o'-*  rr-’ers  tc 
the  various  units  ere  included  in  Apoer.dix  F. 


The  scenari 


this  experi-^ent,  ^'enerated  i 


*IS,  consisted  cf  three  U.3.  warships  cc  ndu  ct  i  .■'r;  a 
surface  surveillance  of  a  n-erenant  lane  in  the  vi.'init./  cf 
the  i'erth  Atlantic,  wltx.  neutral  ard  •  pc  t  e""  t  la  i  ly  !  hi^stilc 
platforps  in  the  area.  The  warships,  assisted  hy  patrol 
aircraft  cendretinr  sinilar  surveillance,  were  tc  locate, 


trjck,  end  iier.tify  ctr.er  ur.iTS  in  the  fre?.  "re 
exT5  r  irer.La  1  subje;t,  ercarked’  cn  t  ne  cruiser  Belknar  ,  ned 
STA^^E?.Z  cveileblf  to  assist  in  that  mission .  The  STAM^TitA 
stertup  rrcceaure  is  ?ivea  in  Ai^endix  A. 

The  s  cenar  io  vics  chosen  based  on  the  ran  of  s  1  tua  t  ions 
available  and  the  relative  realism  of  a  no n-corbat i ve 
ccnfrcntaticn.  The  scenario,  tactics,  sensor',  a'"!  sensor 
c.iaracteris t ics  are  purely  nypoihetical .  The  uata  base 
’’Appendix  B]  and  rules  .Appendix  C]  are  a.ssurpticns  tailored 
to  this  scenario,  but  are  easily  translatable  to  those  vhich 
a  Tactical  A.cticn  Officer  would  recognize  as  havir.  c 
potential  applications.  The  triefir.,?  cf  the  sub:e''t5 
included  an  explanatlcn  cf  the  artificialities. 

A  difficulty  in  the  actual  conduct  of  the  experirent 
existed  due  tc  t.ne  nature  of  the  reports  on  which  STA:-mE?.£ 
operates.  The  sensor  rercris  received  by  an  operator  cf  'VI 
are  bcth  visual  cues  or.  a  mrapnics  display  'lines  cf  Learir.y 
cr  new  platform  symbolocj-),  ana  in  a  table  of  ..detections 
(the  Zlectronic  'warfare  Status  Beard,  the  Surface  Status 
Board,  or  the  Air  Status  Board).  The  form  the  tabular 

report  is  formatted  as  tc  its  numerical  secuenoe, 
idertificaticn,  and  location  tif  epplioeble,.  The  reports  es 
.-enerated  by  VIS  are  act  readable  by  STA^MH?.  One  e.xcrrle 
cf  the  disparity  is  that  STAb’MRl  reoc--nizes  latitude  and 
longitude  in  decrees  and  tenths  rather  man  de^-'rees  and 
'inutes.  The  LIS?  version  cf  VIS,  L/IS,  does  report  in  the 


w  C 


r'> 


ci.xrccricte  forret,  cvt  the  difficult;/  i"  ’j?ir.,;  ,  ''jcr. 

cs  ccr.iLex  scenaric  veneration  and  limited  c’.  tyut 
capability,  -'a  r  c’- twei .’h  this  ad vant a  ve  . 

The  solution  to  tie  fcrrat  lisparit./  lies  in  the 
nature  of  ’.vZS.  ‘*ith  duplicate  p  la  tfo  r’^s  ,  startin.-  at  e.Tdct 
locations,  jiven  preciselv*  the  same  order  cf  instructions 
I  such  as  course  cnanges  or  sensor  status',  sensor  :e:orts 
are  also  duplicated.  That  i5>.  the  detections  are  based  cn 
raxirT-ur  ranges  of  detection  v^nich  are  unchanvei  and 
v.nich  are  ccTtined  in  the  '»ZS  detection  al -;*c  r  i  tn-is  ir  the 
same  way,  to  produce  duplicate  reports  at  tne  same 
_-a""e  ti'^e.  This  characteristic  was  exploited  by  rvnninv  a 
-pare  to  a  suitable  point  ir.  tire  usir.v  the  ATraMT 
typescript  feature  wnich  copies  ail  ter^inai 
interact iO"S  as  they  occur.  This  typescript  shows  the 
various  rep.crts  received  duricv  a  .vare,  complete  with  the 
ti-^6  cf  receipt.  Synthesizing  vare  reports,  a  cc"'plete 
file  of  reports  [Appencix  Dj  was  built,  in  the  forrat 
frc”  which  STAi'''MZ?.2  could  read  its  input  "'ata.  '■'herefcre, 
STA^^£?.2  was  not  receivin.?  direct  output  frcr  the  sensors, 
but  via  an  intermediate  process  net  part  cf  eitner  iVTS  cr 
STA^^“^.2. 

STAr'MRE,  usinv  the  TTuTHCiMlX  4Z14-1  ter-^inal  for  both 
text  and  vrauhic  display,  ves,  in  effect,  a.  separate  entity 
running  coccurrentiy  wltn  the  gare.  The  corparison  of  the 
subject's  perspective  of  the  situation  and  that  cf  STAhhF^T 


a  T 


is  still  Vclid  ocl^'  as  lon=  as  s  ir 'l-I  tar.eous  retcrtirtt:  is 
caret'vlly  -^a  inta  ine-^  . 

The  artificiality  of  the  yessa^.e  iryct  f'C’jll  nave  hiasei 


the 

experirent 

tc 

a  rerarioacle 

C. c^r  6  0 

bu 

t  STAhUZRZ  has 

0  ne 

feature  which  a 

pe 1 i ora  te  s  this 

..ro  bl  er 

• 

.TTANUER  2,  dP«^S 

not 

process 

the 

next  sequential 

report 

in 

the  file  until 

the 

s  e  r  j  u  i  t  s 

the 

query  rode  of 

ope  ra  t i 

c  n 

"hat  is. 

unti 

1  the 

quit 

ccrrand  is 

-q  i  V  e  n 

there  is  nc 

srocessi  r.^^-  of  the  next  seauentiel  report.  Teceuse  the 
experiTental  sutjert  is  r.ct  expected  to  te  the  artnal 
operator  of  the  hardware,  the  operator  car.  he 

instructed  not  to  leave  the  euery  mcde  until  the  appropriate 
.,ane  tio’e  (which  is  displayed  on  the  input/output  ternir.al 
for  '*ZS  )  . 

icllcwin?  a  suitable  period  of  rerrie  tiTe  where  the 
subject  is  encouraged  to  exercise  STAh>'iE2  a  questionnaire 
was  presented  to  gather  the  irpressions  and  appraisal  of  the 
experirent  ia  general  aaa  STA.hihZHS  in  particular. 

P.  RESULTS  ANL  CONCLUSIONS 

The  pues t icanai re  supplied  to  test  subjects,  with  a 
suTrary  of  results,  is  listed  below.  The  intent  of  the 
questions  was  to  verify  the  "realisri"  of  the  scenario  -r.-j 
to  gather  a  subjective  evaluation  of  STAN'UZRil.  Tne  scorinr 
sca.le  of  1  to  10  was  arbitrarily  chosen,  with  10  the 

rost  positive  or  rost  favorable  response.  The  test 


54 


sutject' 


:cr.s  is  ted 


c:'  e i\avy  and  Air 


rar.r'ir.-i  in 
tr.e  Cc-nrand 


v^rede  frcr.  C-3  to  C-n  ,  who 
,  Ccntrcl  and  Ccmir,ur.i nations 


Force  officers  , 
are  rer.bers  cf 
curriculum  at  the 


iavcl  ?ost.crad’ja  te  Schccl,  ^c^terey,  California.  A:ll  have 
beer  exocsed  tc  decision  theory  ard  to  an  o'/’erview  of  the 
naval  tactical  en  vi  rcnmer.  t .  The  Navy  participants  included 
t.aree  C-4s  and  one  0-3.  All  but  one  the  hav,/  C-4S  nad 

Tactical  Action  Officer  training. 


STA^^ER2  OuZSTIGhhAIP-I 


1.  Prior  to  the  scenario  presentation,  was  the  purpose  of 
STAhhFRS  adequately  explained?' 

10340e7S910 


.“.esponses  1  1  3  Z  1 

Average  6.125 

2.  Was  the  scenario  representative  cf  your  previous 
exrerience  with  WFS  or  LWTS? 


F.esponses 
.“.vera^e  6.375 


it 


3.  Was  the  scenario  realistic? 

1  2  3  4  5 
F.esponses  1 
Average  6.375 


6  9  1” 

1  3  P 


,ere  ;;ie  '^is'^lays  ccr.sister.t  wit::  the  eersc"  rercrt«7 


Respcr.ses  2  2  3  1 

;.verej,e  ?.37h 

i.  >'as  sufficient  tire  availdble  to  uaderstanc  the  sense 


reperts  ? 


r.espcnses 
Average  7.3 


7 

2 


12 


.  Were  the  STA^'^^H2  .graphics  clear? 

1  A  >-  «-■ 


12 


F.espcases  1  13  2  1 

.Wera^e  4.5 

7.  Was  the  STAMM52  cor.rentary  cnlerstandable? 


Responses 
Average  c.s7! 


o 

■X 


ir 


0.  Were  the  5TA.'"^:iR2  ccnclusicr.s  consistent  with  you 
conclusions? 


ir 


Responses  2 

Average  7.25 

3.  "id  you  use  t.ne  explanat icr.  trace? 

1  2  3  4  5  c 

Responses  1 

Average  ? .375 


55 


13.  If  the  exrlar.aticn  trace  vias  used,  vere  the  esserticns 
rcr?istert  with  the  crnclusirrs? 


P.espcnses  2  -3  1 

Average  7.37h 

11.  >as  the  presence  of  ST'AM"ZP2  distractine? 


1 

c  3 

4  t  6 

7  E  9 

1£ 

Pesrcnses  1 

'7 

£ 

1 

Average  4.75 

12.  V-ould  an 

STAhM?.2  to  the 

assistant  who  would  filter  inforration  fror 
rir. irurr  essential  level  be  useful? 

1 

2  3 

4  f-  C 

7  2  9 

13 

responses 

1  1 

2 

n 

Average  5.5 

13,  Is  STAI^'^ZPS 

useful ? 

1  2 

■7 

4  5  6 

7  8  9 

17 

Responses 

1  1 

4  2 

Average  7.75 

The  results 

show  an 

overall  trend 

towards  an 

average 

response  which 

could 

be  ronside  re! 

favorable , 

in  the 

vi-inlty  of  £. 

The  exc 

eptions  prcvld 

e  a  clear  c 

0  n  t  r  a  s  t 

ccr.sister.t  with  co.-.di  tl  o.ns  notice!  luring  the  experirer.t. 

Question  5  ha!  the  lowest  average  ran/ring.  ""he 
iifflctlty  encountered  with  the  lisplay  nay  he'^t  he 
descrited  by  shovin.-;  the  alsrlay  at  three  selected  irare 
"inutes.  Jigtre  1  is  the  last  display  without  Zh 

Figure  2 


bearing  lines,  which  occurs  at  rinute 


•7 


is  the 


r.iST'lay  at  'are  T'i-’.ute  14.  wr.icn  lri’lv.'’es  i  r.  tel  1  i  .'e*'.ce  -iata 
^M?.l  ar.l  MPl;),  s’.’rfcce  cortact  r<=’port5,  I'-  bearlr:  linea 
and  tne  Iccaticn  cf  friendly  units.  Ji.-'ure  ?  is  tne  display 
ct  i^cre  minute  4-  and  is  a  conpendism  cf  all  reprrts 
recsivea  to  that  point.  Close  observation  of  the  screen  as 
the  graphics  were  belni  drawn  shewed  a  sequential  enterinr 
cf  the  information  as  it  was  being  drawn.  Sere  measure  of 
order  was  discernitle  if  tuis  process  was  carefully 
followed ,  now  ever  the  display  is  un r ea  da  ble  after  it  is 
c  o-^pleted  . 

Jl  rolification  to  the  display  padca^e  is  reeuired.  Cr.e 
sui?mestion  from  the  test  subjects  was  that  only  the  last  two 
occurrences  cf  a  contact  be  displayed,  with  earlier  reports 
available  for  historical  review  as  directed  by  function  ioey 
selection. 

A  benefit  of  STA^;^:I?2  was  demonstrated  i'-riog  the 
experiment.  In  every  iteration  of  the  display,  intelligence 
information  in  the  form  of  contact  reports  received  from 
external  sources  was  present  cn  the  screen  as  a  reminder 
tc  the  decision  maioer.  Eecause  a  suspenslcn  rencernin-r 
this  information  is  created  in  nenory,  this  inf  o  r'^at  i  or.  was 
available  at  all  ti-^es  for  review  an"  explanaticn  as 
desired.  This  information  was  not  subject  to  update  in  this 
scenario  and  did  not  seem  to  contribute  to  tne  r.-eneral 


5e 


clutter  discussed  above. 


06<4-91N 


064-74N 


064-57H 


e64-39N 


1 

~l  ^ - 

(^ERa 

GflERl 

1 

K^( 

1  1 

064-aaN  1 _ I _ 

<».‘^0-37U  0P9-<J7U 


Apg.qAU  PPR-74U 


ii'.  1  ST.-.f-rr?.2  Sr3T,n,ics  ?i«rl3y. 


urn 


There  eppeerei  to  te  e  iisperity  between  the  STA^hTP? 
conclusions  end  tness  of  the  test  subjects  (cuestiens  t  end 
IT;.  The  difficult/  wes  .rest  apparent  in  cases  where  the 
test  subjects  were  able  to  cross-fix  passive  detecticn 
tearing  lines  tc  a  ^s'eosraphic  pcsiticn.  Rather  than  ccnclv'^e 
that  an  erittiu^:  platfortr:  exists  at  that  point  of 
intersect  icn,  STAt't^ER?  wculc  ccnti''ue  tc  rahe  ccr.clnsicns 
based  only  on  the  individual  ?'a‘  retorts.  Here  the  ra jor 
difficulty  appeared  tc  be  in  the  ccrstructicr.  rf  STAKMP.2 
rules  rather  than  the  functioning  of  the  rules  that  exist. 
A  rule  ccrrelati  r:.c  cr  pcsitlon-f  ixin^  rul  title  passive 
detections  of  the  sare  erritter  woulo  appear  to  be  a 
relatively  sltiple  matter. 

The  explanation  trace  feature  cf  proved  to  be 

.aluable  as  teth  a  decision  aid  and  as  a  t raisin-;  tori. 
While  the  users  cortnented  (question  9)  that  the  trace 
included  extraneous  inferration,  the  level  cf  uncors  la  nd  i 
cf  the  scenario  increased  markedly  due  to  the  increased 
appreciation  cf  what  rules  were  bein^?  applied  and  hew 
STAhMPt  applied  them. 

The  lew  average  score  for  question  11  does  not  fit 
the  general  pattern  cf  t.ue  c  ues  l  ienna  i  "e  due  tc  the 
wordin.;  of  the  question  .  The  negative  response  in.d'cate' 
taat  STAttMRS  was  not  distracting  to  the  user.  The  potential 
exists  for  the  test  subjects  to  became  enr-rossed  i the 
execution  cf  STAh.''-R2  and  the  explanation  trace  tc  the  point 


where  the  ccnduct  cf  the  ^ja^'e  teccrries  a  ri'^rr  rcrsiieraticn . 
This  apparently  was  not  the  case  here. 

The  rere icder  of  the  averages  appear  to  ce  generally 
consistent  with  favorable  response  to  both  the  scenario  in 
general  and  to  STA^!^ZR2  in  particular. 

This  experivient  depends  heavily  on  subjective 
evaluation.  'j.'hile  the  scenario  and  operation  of  STA^'’I^ER2 
appear  to  have  been  convincing  to  the  test  subjects,  there 
are  no  clear  measures  cf  operational  effectiveness  which  can 
be  Quantified  or  analyzed.  Given  that  the  computer  capacity 
is  available  to  the  location  of  the  decision  maker,  STA^^'^52 
would  appear  tc  be  a  welcome  addition  to  the  repertoire  cf 
decision  aids  available  to  a  commander.  While  this 
addresses  the  original  objective  namely  the 
demonstration  and  evaluation  of  ST£h'KEP.2,  it  cannot 
full/  answer  the  question  of  overall  utility  of  the  system 
to  a  decision  rnieker  in  a  real  military  environment. 

Due  to  the  experimental  nature  of  S TA^TE?.? ,  operator 
action  was  required  for  the  message  input  procedure. 
The  requirement  tc  leave  the  explanation  trace  before  the 
next  message  can  be  read  is  p\:rely  artificial  and  an 
accepted  penalty  in  order  to  run  the  program  simultaneously 
with  WES.  In  an  cperaticnal  system,  the  ’mechanism  for  the 
transfer  of  data  between  a  sensor  ana  the  decision  raker 
shcvli  be  under  steed  and  dutcT-atic.  The  addition  of 
procedural  steps  such  as  function  key  or  tfrminal  inputs  in 


1 


crier  ic  receive  a  ser.scr  report  may  te*-d  tc  te 
i^jnored  I'^rino  tires  of  stress.  In  cllitior,  this  entoratin 
transfer  ""ust  te  re^vlated  tc  a  suitable  tine  period  between 
reports.  Reports  fror  multiple  sensors  at  short  intervals 
would  rapidly  overload  an  operator  required  tc  view  every 
report  . 

STAhMiRS,  as  an  investigation  into  the  utility  of 
artificial  intelligence  as  applied  to  corrand  and  control, 
has  progressed  beyond  the  concept  and  technology 
deronstra t ion  phase  of  its  existence.  The  screwhat 
artificial  nature  of  the  message  transfer  procedures  is 
capable  of  approaching  a  "real  world’  condition  in  mat 
macnine  and  human  readable  formatted  '"essa?es  are  in  ccmmon 
use  as  in  the  P.AIKFCRM  reporting  system.  "^he 


production 

rul  es 

are  similarly  close  tc  ccrditicns 

which  "^a  y 

in  fact 

exist 

in  an 

operational  environment. 

a  1  though 

as  agency. 

such 

as  the 

Office  of  the  Chief 

of  Naval 

Opera  t i ons 

,  operating 

through  the  Surface 

Va  rf  are 

ant  ower 

and 

Training 

F.es^ulrerents  Division 

(  OF -92  )  , 

who  could 

tasA 

the  Fleet  Training  Cer.t'^rs  (Atl 

antic  and 

Pacific^ , 

could 

further 

refine  them  to  refle 

ct  more 

realistic  decision  conditions. 

A  decision  aid,  even  one  directed  toward  a  unique 
user  ve.g.,  the  Tactical  Action  Officer),  Tay  need  tc  be 
distributed  througnout  a  corrana  center.  The  mass  of  data 
presented  may  require  the  decentralization  of  control  tc  the 


64 


poirt  where  the  lAC  cr  staff  watch  officer  function  ray  te 
rsle=ateci  to  relaiivel/  discrete  a  re  as  of 
respcns i b i  1  i ty .  ’Ahile  the  reuuirerent  for  a  urire  decision 
palter  exists,  this  role  pay  well  be  one  of  coppani  by 
negation.  There  is  a  tire  penalty  for  reevalua  t  itiA' 
previously  screened  inforration  in  ?  hlr^’h  density 
environrent .  Each  decision  paker  would  then  require  his  own 
version  of  STAM.MP2  that  contains  a  tailcrei  rule  set. 
The  present  ipplepentat ion  of  STAb'MF2  already  contains 
rules  which  pay  be  useful  and  transportaole  to  this 
practical  application. 

The  benefit  of  this  prc^rap  aboard  a  ship,  cr  at  a  rnajcr 
Fleet  coppand  center,  for  exapple,  could  be  that  a  "super 
agency",  ccnsisiln,,'  of  intelligence  and  warfare  specialists 
could  provide  a  realistic  assessrent  of  situations  which 
right  be  encountered  and  tailor  r roiosi tiers  to  reflect 
standardized  intelligence,  doctrine,  and  tactics  in  a  pre- 
loaded  database  and  syster  that  woula,  in  real  tire,  be  an 
"oracle"  wnich  would  provide  assistance  and  guidance  to  the 
decision  re  her.  In  case  of  juestionable  date  the  review 
capability  of  the  process  by  which  a  decision  was  reached 
would  assist  the  decision  paher  in  logically  anelyrinr  his 
cwn  thought  process.  The  training  benefit  of  the 
preposition  review  cculd  increase  the  ccppetence  of  tr.e  TAG 
who  could  see  hew  the  '  panel  of  experts’  ctprcachec.  the 


problep . 


In  summery,  this  thesis  has  presented  heckgrov m 
iafcrration  concerniLr*  artificial  ir.tslli^ence  end 
STAf'MH2.  Varicus  testin?  methods  were  jsresented  tc 
evalccte  the  usel'ulness  of  5TAPiyiB2  and  an  experiment  was 
conducted  and  examined  which  used  cne  cf  these  methods. 
STA^IdIE2  appears  tc  he  a  useful  decision  aid  concept  with 
dreat  potential  for  further  research  and  testiCr?. 


A?P5:r.rix  a 

STANCE?.!  GUILE 

The  follo’«in^  is  a  rrcceaural  ^-uihe  tc  he.^ianiar 
tae  STA^.f^ERt  prc^ran  for  tnis  exper  irren  t .  After  i^tc 

the  Naval  Po  stgrad’jate  School  Con-iraac.,  Ccntrcl, 

aad  CoT'Tiur, icatioas  Latcratcry  UNIX  systeT  .  Lvc  FI? 
ll/'fZ)  ,  a  TELNET  link  Is  established  to  the  TCFS2?  syster 
at  Naval  Cceaa  Systems  Center,  San  LiegO,  Calif crrla,  under 
account  nare  NPS2.  Following  the  prorrpt,  the  entries 
with  asterisks  are  entered.  Carriage  returns  '<cr>;  are 
only  required  as  indicated. 


G  stammerL  <cr> 

_LOAD(TEr*PEAK  ,CCM  -• 

corpiled  on  24-Feb-&l  ie:29:29 
FILE  CREATE!  24-reb-bl  12:2b:5h 
(LISFLCE  redefined) 

(IN'LANE  redefined) 

. RZSULTPRINTER  redefined, 

TI^PHAXCCr:S 
(SENSORANGE  reset) 

<NPS2>TEr'PFAK  .COM  .1 

_(SETC  ECMISHIP  (SETC  CWNSEIP  "PELKUAP))  - 

(CWNSEI?  reset) 

'HOKiSEIP  reset) 

EELKNAP 

_(3TAN‘hEH) 

i^elco-ne  to  version  2.h  of  the  STAFFER  TSA  syster. 
herrory  file?  ^Default  is  N'l'-'ORY  .  ) :  N’Ef.JE  <cr> 
Nemcry  initialized. 

Rulefile?  (Lefault  is  RULES  .)  :P.ULES.Jj  <;rr>  " 

Rules  loaded 

»hat  file  would  you  lixe  to  take  messages  frcr? 
(Lefault  is  SCENE. ICE,:  SCENE. JB  <''r> 

Are  you  running  on  a  Tektronix?no 

Do  you  nave  a  Tektronix  available  for  display?  no  * 


67 


Fcssive  delect’Or..  heard  SFS4tJ  at  bearing*  "^ire 

Associated  with  track  EiRiFIF: 

P.ZFOP.T :  3ERPZLEY  was  sir'htel  in  the  mfrchant  lane  L 
Cuestion?  Cuit 
Leavir.s:  EXPLAIN 

Passive  detection.  Heard  SPS3»  at  bearing:  FhE.ct)  Tirne 
Associated  with  track  BiRSSLIY 

REPORT:  PIRXELIY  was  sighted  in  the  nerchant  lane  L 
Cuestion?  FREAK 
(Explain  broken) 
tdribbie] 


A??5NriX 


DATA  3ASi 

This  is  the  data  base  frcrr  which  STaNMIAD  will  draw 
its  first  asserticr.s.  It  has  been  specifically  tailored  tc 
the  experiment  scenario  ana  dees  net  reflect  real- 
wcrld  cenditiens.  STA^^:I;R2  will  undate  its  data  base  as 
messages  are  received. 


(t'ERCHANTLANE  LAMEl) 

lICCATIC^  LAN£l  ((63.23  -33.1) (cb. 9  -27.26)') 
(C»NSHI?  BilENAP) 

> ID  BELKNAP  FRIEND) 

(:^-A^PLIF’f  BELKNAP  r- IL-BATTLE  ) 

(ID  3ERKELIT  FRIEND) 

I  ID-AhPLIFY  BERKELEY  ML-BATTLE) 

(ID  KNCX  FP.IEND) 

(ID-AMPLIFY  KNCX  I'^IL-BATTLi ) 

(  ID  U221  HOSTILE) 

(ID-Af^PLIEY  UD'Dl  riL-BATTLE) 

(ID  $004  FP.IEND) 
vID-AN’PLIFY  S024  ML-AUXIL, 

(ID  S006  FRIEND) 

{in-ktviiix  sees  mil-auxil) 

.ID  rZRl  FRIEND) 

(ID-ANPLIFY  riEl  rlL-AUXIL) 

(ID  MERl  FRIEND) 

(ID-ANiPLIFY  MERl  ML-AUXIL, 
tlD  MERl  FRIEND) 

(ID-AM.PLIFY  MERl  MI-AUXIL) 
aD  MERE  FRIEND) 

(ID-AMFLIFY  MFE2  MIL-AUXIL) 

(ID  MER3  FRIEND) 

\ID-AM?LIFY  MER3  MIL-AUXIL/ 

(ID  S00S  HOSTILE) 

(ID-AMPLIFY  $005  MII-BATTLD) 

(ID  5006  HOSTILE) 

(ID-AMPLIFY  $006  MIL-EATILE) 

(ID  S007  HCSIILE) 
lID-AMFLIFY  S007  MIL-SATTLE) 

(ID  aCST4  HOSTILE) 


69 


A?Pi*M;IX  c 


RULIS 


The  followU,^  are  t.ie  ircduction  rules  uron  vaich 
STAhrER2  operates.  As  lata  frcTi  tne  data  tase  or  Tessa?es 
satisfy  the  conditions  in  each  of  the  rules  (labelled 

the  data  stream  is  built.  *hen  sufficient  data 
exists,  the  rules  fire  and  the  appropriate  actions  are 
carried  out.  The  plain  text  PRINECHf-!  stater^ent  is  the  n-an- 
readable  explanation  of  the  assertion  which  has  been  built 
in  STAM(^Eii2. 


INHERIT 

(CONDITIONS  ((ALIAS  #PLAT  «UNKNC'*N ) 

(TYPE  *PLAT  *TY?) 

(ID  *PLAT  *ID1) 

(ID-AN'PLI?Y  ’i'PLAT  ’S'lDi^P} 

(CLASS  *P1AT  ’!‘CLS) 

(rELIU.V  *PLAT 

ACTIONS 

((TYPE  *UNKNC*N  ’==TY?) 

(ID  *IjNKNOWN  *ID1) 

(ID-ANPLIEY  >!‘UNKNC*;v  ■^i'f'P) 

(CLASS  *UNXNC'*N  *CL5) 

^rEDIU^i  ''‘UNKNOWN  '"N^ED  ) 

CONE  1.3  PRINECHr' 

’if  an  unknown  is  identified,  it  inherits  the  prcrerties  cf 

its  identification.") 

^ncwn-plat 

i  CONDITIONS  ((SIGHTING  ’•'‘S  , 

(^UNLESS*  (OwNSHIF  ’'‘F  - ) 

(EULLY-KNOWN  '"P) 

(ID-AN'PLIEY  ■'‘P  *I  ; ; 

ACTIONS 

(  (  IDENTlEIir-  ♦?) 

CONE  1.0  FRINEOPf' 


71 


'^ark  as  identified  if  >covr.  wita  certa int,/" ) 

NCT-IAST-S  IGH':ii\G-VER2 
ICCNDITICNS  ((SIGHTING  *PLAT  -Si) 

^PRZEECESSCH  *S1  *S^) 

(’i'NOT*  tSAM-AS  ^'‘SZ  nil;; 

(“^UNLISS*  (NCT-LAST  ^SZ))^ 

ACTIONS 

( INOT-LAST  #SZ; ) 

CCNF  1.0  PRINFCEK 

If  a  si.^htin^  has  a  predecess or ,  tnen  that  predecessor  is 
not  the  last  sighting'."') 

NCT-FIRST-SIGHTING 

■CONLITIONS  (^SIGHTING  *PLAT  *S1) 

(♦UNLESS*  (NCT-FIRST  *51)) 

(PREDZCFSSOa  *51  *52) 

(♦NOT*  *SA^E-AS  *32  NIi;): 

ACTIONS 

{ (NOT-FIRST  ♦SI) ) 

CONE  1.0  PRINEOH^: 

"if  an  earlier  sighting  occurs  ,__record  that  the  previous 
sighting  is  not  the  first  sighting.", 

LAST-VIFV 

(CONDITIONS  ((SIGHTING  ♦PLAT  ♦Si) 

(♦UNLESS*  iNOT-LAST  *31)); 

ACT  ICN  S 

((LAST-SIGHTING  ♦PLAT  *31)) 

CONF  .99  PRINFORr^ 

"if  the  sighting  is  not  followed,  it  is  the  last  sighting. 
(  .99,  "  ) 

FIRST-VIIV 

(CONDITIONS  ((SIGHTING  ♦PLAT  *51) 

(♦UNLESS*  (NOT-FIRST  *51)); 

ACTIONS 

('(HRST-SIGHTING  ♦PLAT  *S1)) 

CONF  .s»9  FRINFORI^ 

"if  the  sighting  is  not  preceaea,  it  is  the  first  sighting. 

I .99;"; 

SIVPLY-REACHAELE 
(CONDITIONS  ((CONTACT  ♦CONT) 

(FIRST-SIGHTING  ♦CCNT  *51) 

(SIGHTING  ♦PLaT  *32) 

(ID-AhPLIFY  ♦PLAT  r'lI-EATTLE) 


72 


I’i'iMCT’^  (SAM -AS  ’'‘PLAT)) 

I  ’^UN  L  L'SS *  (  C> KS H I ?  «F LA T  }  ) 

( PC Sri  I C^  «S1  ’^Fl) 

(PCSICICN  *S2 
ITOS  >1^51  =*"11) 

(TOS  *S2  *T2) 

(S’*R  *P1  >i‘P2  *T2}/ 

actions 

{  (SINPLY-WITEIN-aZACH  «S1  ’''S2)) 

CCNF  .96  PRINFORh 

"if  e  contact's  sishting  could  travel  to  a/'IL-BATTLP's 
sighting,  then  they  are  sir.ply  reachable.  (.96)') 


RFACEA5LE 

(CONDITIONS  ((contact  >!‘C0NT) 

(SIOKTING  *CONT  *S1} 

^SIGHTING  =«'PLAT  #S2) 

(^NCT*  (SAr'I-AS  *FLAT  *CCNT)) 
(^UNLESS*  (C!»NSHIP  '«'PLAT)) 
(SINtpLY-WITHIN-PFACH  #S1  *52) 
(*UNLISS«  (BLCCKID-FSON*  ’*‘51  *52))) 
ACTIONS 

(  (’#ITEIN-R2ACE  *S1  «S2  '  ) 

CONF  .97  PRIMFCF.N' 


If  twc  sightings  are  vithir.  reaca  cf  each  ether,  ard  are 
.not  blocked  by  patrol  overflights,  then  ere  reachable  from 
each  other .  ( .97 ) " ) 

CCULD-BF-CCMBATANT 
(CCNCITICNS  ((CONTaCT  ’*‘C0NT) 

(FIRST-SIGHTING  ’-CONT  *Sl) 

(lE-AMPLIFY  «PLAT  ML-PATTLE) 

(‘f'UNLISS*  (C’^NSEIP  ’i'PLAT)) 

(LAST-SIGHTING  *?LAT  ’«‘S2) 

(WITKIN-RFACE  ’"SI  ’!‘S2  ) ) 

ACTIONS 

(  (KNO^^N-CC^'EATANT  ’«‘CON'T)} 

CONF  .15  PRiNrORM 

'If  a  contact's  position  could  be  reached  by  a  knevn 
combatant,  then  the  contact  might  be  a  cc'^batant  (.15).") 

NOT-KNCVN-CON'EATANT 
(CONDITIONS  ((CONTACT  *CONT) 

(♦UNLESS*  KNCVN-COMBATANT  ♦CCNT))) 

ACTIONS 

( (TYPE  *CCNT  MERCHANT)  ) 

CONF  .45  PRINFOP.M 


73 


If  a  contact  cocli  not  be  any  known  cornbatar.t  as 
aeteririnec.  by  rule  CCULD-i  i-CCi‘''EArAN'r ) ,  then  it  ya/  be  a 
Ter chant  ( .45 } .  ”  ) 

FOSf-F.PT 

(CONDITICNS  ((PATROL  *FTL) 

\  CONTACT  ’i'CCNT) 

(3IGH1IN5  *CCNT  ^si) 

(SIGHTING  *?LAT  *S2 j 
ilD-AhPLIFT  *PLAT  hlL-iATTLZ) 

(#UNLZSS’*‘  (CVfiSHIP  *PLAT)) 

(SOURCE  *S2  *ptl; 

v=*‘NCT*  vSA^'E-AS  *S1  *S2;) 

(^UNLESS*  (DISSIMLAR  -COM  =!‘PLAT)); 

ACTIONS 

( 'vPOSSIELi-REPORT  #CONT  ’S'PTL)) 

CON?  .95  PRINFORr 

If  a  patrol  si^’hts  a  'III-BAT'TLI  platforr,  and  a  contact  is 
similar  to  the _ pla tf orr ,  then  the  petrol  report  concerns  the 
contact .  ( .95 ) '  ) 

ELCCKER 

^CONDITIONS  ((CCNTiiCT  *CCNT) 

(SIGHTING  *CCNT  *S 1 ) 

V  SIGHTING  ♦PLAT  ’S2) 

(ID-AMPLIFY  ’i'PlAT  MI-PaTTLI) 
l*NCT’«‘  (SAMS-AS  «CCNT  ^PLAT)) 
i*UNLISS*  (CkNSHIP  *PLAT)) 

(PATROL  *?TL) 

l*UNLZSS*  (POSSIBLE-REPORT  ««'C0NT  ’<'PTL); 
iSIGHTING  *FTL  *53} 

(NCT-LAST  *S3) 

(SUCCESSOR  *S3  *S4) 

'POSITION  *S1  *P1/ 

(POSITION  *S2  *P2) 

(POSITION  *53  *?3} 
iPCSITICN  *S4  *P4, 

CCS  *S1  *T1) 

(TCS  *S2  *T2) 

(TOS  *S3  *T3: 

(TOS  *S4  *T4) 

COR*  (CRCSSPATHS  *P1  *P2  *P3  *P4) 

(GRAZE  *P1  *P2  *P3  *P4) } 

(>!‘NOT*  (wINT-EIFORE  *P1  *T1  *P2  *T2  *F3  C3  *P4 
*T4:  ) 

CMOT*  (*EN’T-AFTER  *P1  *T1  *Fr,  *T2  *F3  *T3  *?<i 

*T4) ) ) 

ACTIONS 

(  ;3L0CKED-FRCN’  *S1  *52;} 

CCNF  .9  PPINFCRr 


74 


'  If  a  path  betweea  two  si^htiiift  has  sot  been  detected  by  a 

patrol,  and  it  vcuid  have  if  tney  were  sishtin^s  cf  tne  sa:^e 

vessel,  then  they  ere  different  vessels.  (.9)") 

CRZATEDITZCT 

■  COf^ZniO^'S  ({SIGEIINC-  *?LAT  ^SGT) 

(*UNLISS’!‘  (IBZMIFIZD  *PLAT  ) ) 

(*UNLiS£*  (DETZCTICN  -PLAT)) 

(SOURCE  *SGT  EW)) 

ACTIONS 

((D.'^ZCTION  *PLAT)) 

CONF  1.2  PRlNEOP-f^ 

"if  the  sotree  of  a  sifChting  is  EW ,  then  rark  it  detected.") 

CRZATECONTACT 

^CONDITIONS  {(SIGHTING  “'‘FLAT  >‘=SGT) 

(’i'UNLESS*  (IDENTIFIED  *PLAT  )  ) 

(*UNLESS=*‘  iCCNTACT  ^i'FLAT)) 

(SOURCE  »SGT  RADAR)) 

ACTIONS 

UCONTACT  *PLAT} ) 

CONE  1.2  PRINFCRN' 

'if  radar  is  the  source  of  a  platfcrT's  sishtin^,  then  the 

platform  is  a  contact.") 

CREATE PLAT 

■CONDITIONS  ((SIGHTING  *?LAT  *SGT) 

(♦UNLESS*  (CVNSKIF  ♦PLAT)) 

(♦UNLESS*  (PLATFCRN;  ♦PLAT))) 

ACTIONS 

((PLATEOHN  ♦PLAT)) 

CONF  l.Z  PRINFCRI" 

"Every  siF^htinifi'  is  a  platform,  except  the  ownship.") 

SN'ALL-CRAFT9 

(C0NDITIOMS  ;  i  CONTACT  *Wr:0; 

(EIRSI-SIGHTING  ♦WHO  *51) 

(SOURCE  *51  RADAR; 

(RANGE  *31  ♦P.l) 

(LESS-THAN  ♦R1  c) 

(STRENGTH  *S 1  STRONG) ) 

ACTIONS 

(  (TYPE  ♦WHO  SUE) 

(r.ODE  *WHO  SURFACE)) 

CONF  .L  PP.INiCRr^ 

"If  the  ranze  of  a  strong  radar  si,<htin^  is  less  mar.  D  nr, 


75 


and  it  is  tne  first  sisntir.e,  trier,  tiie  contact  is  ocssitly  a 
su rf cce  sub  .  [  .t)  ]■ 

S^'A!  I~CRArT5 

"ccrriTiONS  contact 

iSIGETINC  ^SIGHT) 

(NOT-EIRST  *SIGHT) 

(RANGE  *SIGHT'*H) 

{LZSS-THAN  *R  16) 

(GREATIR-THAM  *?  9) 

(STRENGTH  ’»‘SIGET  ’lilkT.] 

(SFIIL  *SIGHT  *SPB) 

(*N0T*  (GREATIR-THAN  ’<‘S?I)  22)  >) 

ACTIONS 

(v*Ofi*  (TYPE  FISHING) 

(TYPE  n  PATRCI) 

(T'^PE  *X  SUB)  )  ) 

CON?  .15  PRINFORI^ 

If  tne  rac^e  cf  a  weak  sightic.?  is  between  9  and  16,  and 
the  speed  is  less  than  22,  then,  the  contact  is  possibly  e 
sub  or  a  patrol  or  a  fishing  vessel.  (.15)’) 


Sf^ALL-CRAETc 

(CONDITIONS  ((CONTACT  ’i'WKC) 

(SIGHTING  **H0  «S1) 

(MOT-EIP.ST  '*‘51) 

(SOURCE  ■f'Sl  RADAR) 

(RANGE  '“SI  ’*‘?.ANGS) 

(LESS -TEAM  '“RANGE  16) 

(GREATEP.-THAN  ’“RANGE  9) 

(STRENGTH  '“SI  WEAR) 

(SPEED  '“SI  ’“SPEED) 

(GREATER-THAN  ’“SPEED  22)) 

ACTIONS 

(('“OR’“  ^TYFE  ’“V.'HC  SUE) 

(TYPE  ’“’»HC  PATRCL))) 

CON?  .3  PHI Nf CRN 

"if  the  renege  of  a  week  radar  sighting  is  between  9  and  15, 
and  the  speed  is  ^^reater  than  ,,22,  then  the  contact  is 
tcssibl,7  a  sub  cr  a  patrcl.  (.3)"} 

SrALI-CRAET4 

(CONDITIONS  ((CONTACT  ’“UNiNCVN) 

(SIGHTING  “UNKNCW!.  ‘“SIGHTlNGl! 

(LAND-DIST  ’“SIGHTlNGl  ’“DIST) 

(SOURCE  ’“SIGHTlNGl  RADAR) 

(RANGE  '“SIGHTlNGl  ’“RANGE) 

(LESS-THAN  ’“RANGE  9) 

(GREATER-THAN  ’“RANGE  3) 


75 


{STREr,3TH  >!‘SIGHTInG1  '*ZAK) 
aESS-TRAN  «LIST  52)) 

ACTION  S 

((*5?*  (TYPE  *UNLNC¥N  SUB) 

(TYPE  ^UNKNOWN  SKORE-PAI ROL ) 

(TYPE  ^UNKNOWN  PLEASURE) 

(TYPE  *UNENC'*N  CO^'^'ERCIAI) 

(TYPE  ^UNKNOWN  LANDING)); 

CONE  .1  PRINECP.f' 

‘if  the  range  cf  a  weaic  sighting  is  tetiiieen  3  and  9,  and  tne 
distance  from  land  of  the  sighting  is  less  than  50,  then  the 
vessel  may  he  a  suh,  a  patrol,  displeasure  craft,  a  landing 
craft,  or  a  commercial  craft.  (.1)*’) 

SN' ALL  "GRAFTS 

(CONDITIONS  ((CONTACT  ^UNKNOWN) 

(SIGETING  ^UNKNOWN  ^SIGHTING) 

(LAND-DIST  *SIGETING  *DIST) 

(SOURCE  ^SIGHTING  RADAR) 

(RANGE  ^SIGHTING  =*RANGE ) 

(LESS-THAN  GRANGE  9) 

(GREATER-THAN  GRANGE  3) 

(STRENGTH  *SI&ETING  WEAK) 

(GREATER-THAN  *DIST  50)) 

ACTIONS 

(ITYPE  ’^UNKNOWN  SUB}) 

CONE  .55  PRlNEORt^ 

'if  the  range  cf  a  weas  radar  sighting  is  tetveen  3  and  9, 
and  the  sighting  is  furthers  than  miles  from  lend,  then 
the  contact  is  a  suh.  (.35)’) 

S^^  ALL*"C  RA  F^2 

(CONDITIONS  ((CONTACT  ^UNKNOWN) 

(SIGHTING  ♦UNiNCinN  ’''SIGHTING) 

(NOT-EIRST  ^SIGHTING) 

(SOURCE  ’"SIGHTING  HaDAR) 

(RANGE  ""SIGHTING  ""RANGE) 

(LESS-TEAN  ""RANGE  3) 

(STRENGTH  ""SIGHTING  WEAK) 

(SPEED  ""SIGHTING  ""SPEED) 

(""NOT""  'GREATER-THAN  ""SPEED  3,., 

ACTIONS 

((""OR’"  (TYPE  ""UNKNOWN  DEBRIS) 

(TYPE  ^UNKNOWN  SUB) 

(TYPE  ""UNKNOWN  BUOY))) 

CON?  .12  PRINEORN 

"if  the  week  radar  sighting  is  not  known  to  be  moving  faster 
than  3  knots,  then  the  contact  is  either  a  buo/,  a  sub,  or 


77 


letris  .  (  .12  ; " ) 

S;- ALL-CRAiTl 

'CCKDITICfsS  UCC.'-TiiCT  ^UNiLNCWN) 

(SIGHTING  =^Ui\iKCiiN  IGrTING  } 

(N'CT-HRST  '^SIGHTING) 

(SQUHCI  ^SIGHTING  RaEA?.  ! 
iP.ANGI  ^SIGHTING  ’I'P-ANGE) 

(LZSS-TKAN  GRANGE  3) 

(STPINGTH  ^SIGHTING  WEAK) 
tSPZIE  ^SIGHTING  ^SFEIE} 

(GHEATER-TH/iN  ’•^SPIZE  3)) 

ACTIONS 

(ITYPZ  ^UNKNOWN  SUB) 

(^CEI  *UNKNCWN  PIRISCCPI'^  CR^  SNCP.KEL)) 

CCNF  .€  ?RIN^CR^ 

"if  the  weaA  radar  si^htin^:  is  rrovinc  at  treater  than  3 
>nots,  then  tne  coiitact  is  a  su'd  in  either  reriscope  or 
s  ncrkel  nicie  .  (.€)’} 

ID-EAM 

(CCNDITIOMS  ((SIGHTING  *SHIF  ^SIGHTING) 

(f^ERChAN'TLANE  *LANE) 

(PLaTFCF.^’  *SHIP) 

(ICCATICN  *LAUZ  *LANIL0C) 

(POSITION  ^SIGHTING  #PCS ) 

(IN-LANE  *LANEL0C  #P0S ) ) 

ACTIONS 

(  (  INSIEZ-A-N'ERCEANTLANS  ^SIGHTING, 

(^REPORT*  *SHI?  ”  was  si^rhted  in  the  merchant  lane 
CCNF  l.C  PRINFCPM 

"if  a  ship  is  si^^hted  within  some  me  rchen  tlane ,  then  record 
that  it  is  inside  that  lane."; 

I N'  3  ^  D  ^  *“  A— S  T  0  P. 

(CCNEITIONS  ((STCRN.  *STCRP) 

(PLATJCRh  ’i'SHI?) 

(^UNLESS’"  iIEENTlxIEr  ^SHIP}) 

(lOCATICN  *STCRr  #STrLCC) 

(SIGHTING  *5HIP  ^SIGHTING) 

(POSITION  *SIGETING  *PCS; 

(IN  SI  EE  #?OS  >i‘STr'LCC); 

ACT  I C  N  S 

('iTY?z'’*SEIP  MERCHANT) 

(^REPORT*  *SHIP  "  was  sirhted  inside  "  *STCRN)' 
CCNF  -.25  PPINFCRN 

’if  a  ship  is  sighted  inside  a  storm,  then  the  ship  na;.’-  rot 
be  a  merchant.  (.25)') 


7fc 


“^LAN 


c  ICS  I- PC?;;? 

(COMITICNS  (  (CONTACT  ’i'SLlP) 

(  7IRST-SISHTIN3  *SHI?  ’^^SIGHTIKC) 

(PAMGi,  ^SIGHTING  ^HANGp; 

(LISS-THAK  *RANGI  12)) 

ACTIONS 

(  vTYPe"’*‘SEIP  ^:EF.CHANT;, 

CON?  -.2  PHINFCP.K 

'if  tne  first  si’iitir.^  cf  a  ship  is  within  12  nn ,  then  it 
ray  not  be  a  merchant.  (.2)") 

CIS iANT-POPUP 

ICONCITICNS  (CONTACT  *ShIP) 

(FIRST-SIGHTING  *SHIP  ^SIGHTING) 

(P.ANGF  >*=SIGHTING  GRANGE) 

IGREATER-TFAN  ’^‘P.ANGE  20}) 

ACTIONS 

((TYPE  =*“55 IP  ('EHCHANT)) 

CONE  -  .2  PRINFCR^' 

"If  the  range  of  the  first  sigating  is  greater  than  20  nr, 
then  the  ship  might  not  he  a  merchant.  (.2)") 

COURSE-CHANGED 
(CONDITIONS  ((CONTACT  »SHIP} 

(SIGHTING  “S'SEIP  *SIGETING1) 

(NOT-FIRST  ^SIGETINGl) 

(NOT-LAST  *5IGHTING1) 

(SUCCESSOR  ^SIGETINGl  ’^‘S  IGFTI NG2  , 

(COURSE  *SIGHTING1  *COUHSIl) 

(COURSE  ’'‘SIGHTING2  *C0URSE2) 

(’^‘UNLESS*  (ROUGELY-TEE-SANE-COURSE-AS  -COURSE! 

*CCURSZ2))) 

ACTIONS 

((TYPE  *SHIP  NSRCHANT)} 

CONF  -.2  PRINFCRN* 

If  t.ae  course  has  changed.,slgr.if icantly,  then  the  sighting 
ra;/  not  be  a  merchant.  (.3)*') 

S  P  ^  £  r  “C  H  N  G  F  D 

. CONDITIONS '(( CONTACT  *SEIP: 

(SIGHTING  *SHIP  ’^SIGHTING) 

(NOT-iIRST  ^SIGHTING) 

(NOT-LAST  ^sighting; 

(SUCCESSOR  ^SIGHTING  ’^‘S  IGHTING2 ) 

(SPEED  ♦SIGHTING  ♦SPEZDl) 

^SPEED  ♦SIGETING2  ♦SPEEDZ) 

(♦UNLESS*  (RCUGHLY-THE-SAUE-SPEZD-AS  ♦SFEEDl 


79 


) ; 

ACTIONS 

(iTYFZ  *SHIP  KIRCEANT,: 

CCN7  -.3  PRINFCRM 

If  tl’e  speed  has  changed^signif lean tly ,  then  the  si<?htiht 
rray  not  he  a  merchant.  {.3)"' 

J  A  S  T  E  R  'T  H  A  -  A~h  PP.  C  H  AN  T 
(COf'DITIONS  ((CONTACT  *SEIP) 

(SIGHTING  *SHIP  ^SIGHTING) 

(NCT-PIRST  ^SIGHTING) 

(SPEED  'i'SIGETiNG  *SPEZD) 

(GREiiTIR-TSAN  *SPEID  2t)) 

ACTIONS 

((TYPE  ^SHIP  MERCEANT)) 

CONE  -.25  PPINFCRt^ 

'If  the  speed, _  is  greater  than  25  knets,  then  it  is  net  a 
merchant.  (.25)") 

slc'ver-than-a-n;erchant 
.conditions  (vCONTACT  ’i'SEIP) 

(SIGHTING  *SHIF  ^SIGHTING) 

(NOT-PIRST  ^SIGHTING) 

(SPEED  ^SIGHTING  'I'SPEEDy 
(LPSS-THAN  *SPEED  9)) 

ACTIONS 

((TYPE  *SEIP  rSRCEANT)) 

CONE  -.15  PRINECRN 

'if  the  speed,,  is  less  than  9  knots,  then  it  ^a/  net  he  a 
merchant .  ( . 15  )  "  ) 

MATCH -PLAT 

CONDITIONS  (  (PIRST-SIGETING  *?1A71  -i^S&Ti; 

(NCT-LAST  #SGT1) 

(SUCCESSOR  >!‘S&T1  ’S'SGTIS) 

(LAST-SIGHTING  ^FLATP  «SGT2} 

(^UNLESS*  (OWNSHIP  ^PLATl)) 

(^UNLESS*  (C'jtNSHI?  >i‘PLAT2  )  ) 
l#NOT=e  (SAME-AS  *PLAT1  '*'PLAT2  )  ) 

(POSITION  *SGT1S  *PCS1S) 

(SPEED  ’i'SGTlS  *SPD1) 

(POSITION  *SGT1  «POSi; 

(COURSIPROM  *POSl  *PCS1S  ’“C.RSl) 

(Tos  *sg:i  *T1) 

(POSITION  *SGT2  ’^POSZ  ; 

(TOS  '<‘SGT2  ’i'TP) 

(LESS-THAN  *T2  m) 

(COURSSFRCM  «P0S2  *POSl  «CRS2: 


a2 


(SPZZDFRCr'  *PCS2  #T2  ’^'PCSl  *T1  “^SPSP) 
{RCUGH1Y-THZ-SA(“'S-CCU?-SZ-AS  *C?.S1  #CRS2) 
(P.OUGHLY-TEZ-SAME-SPZZE-AS  ’•'‘SPZl  *sf:2.') 

ACTIONS 

(UAL  I  AS  ’!'?1AT2  *PIATl): 

CON?  .t  PPINiORN 

"if  t ne  course  and  speed  of  two  sightings  are  roughly  the 
sane,  and  if  one  sighting's  pcsiticn  would  he  the  ether 
sighting's  extrapolated  uosition,  then  the  two  sightings  ere 
of  the  sane  vessel.  (.5)  ) 

CUTSILZ-ALL-LAKZS 

(CCNCITICNS  ((SIGHTING  *SHIP  *SIGHTING) 

(^'UNLESS*  (IPZMTHIZD  -SHI?)) 

^PLATiOPh!  ’^SEIF) 

(*UNLZSS*  (h'ZDIUK  ’i'SHIF  AIH)) 

(*UNLZSS*  ( INSIDZ-A-h'ZP.CHANTLANZ  «'S  I GHTI  NG  )  )  ) 
ACTIONS 

(  (TYPE  *SHIP  NZRCHANT) ) 

CCNF  -.ee  PRINFCRh 

"If  a  sighting  is  outside  all  trenchant  lanes,  then  the 
vessel  might  not  be  a  merchant.  (.08)") 

STOP 


81 


A  ??  r,  JL  I A 


is  the  ressarje 

file 

which  STAN'YERZ 

will 

read,  ir. 

se«uential  order 

(vice 

tine  order),  during; 

the 

execution 

of  the  scenario. 

It  was 

built  b/  puttiScJ 

>ES 

^cer.ereted  reports  into  STA^.^'ER2  reelable  forr. 


(BELKNA?  64.316  -26.97  2) 

(BIREELEY  RALAP.  64.3  -29.266  03) 

(KNOX  RADAR  64.3  -26.615  23) 

(i'”ERl  RADAR  64.3  -30.3  2  } 
l^iZR2  RAL.AR  64.632  -29.157  0) 

(1001  IV  270.0  K57  04) 

(1001  IXTIRNAL  274.0  BIRKILIT  54.3  -29.10  05) 
(1202  EW  92.0  K3  12) 

(E002  EXTERNAL  90.0  BERKELEY  64.350  -29.15  14) 
(1001  EXTERNAL  26-7.0  BERKELEY  64.333  -29.133  13) 
(BELKNAP  64.4  -26.97  20) 

(KNOX  RADAR  64.36?  -26.734  20) 

(E001  EXTERNAL  263.2  BERKELEY  54.367  -29.167  20' 
iE022  EXTERNAL  92.0  BERKELEY  64.367  -29.157  20) 
(S204  external  64  7lc  -29.333  26) 

(S004  external  54.560  -29.435  35) 

(U001  EXTERNAL  64.350  -26.333  30' 

(BELKNAr  64.4=5  -26.97  40) 

(BERKELEY  RADAR  54.4  -29.267  40) 

(KNOX  RADAR  64.433  -26.632  40) 

(3005  EXTERNAL  64.433  -30.05  40) 

(S004  EXTERNAL  64.667  -29.433  40) 

"-■^33  EV  342.0  DCNKA  41) 

(  '1  EXTERNAL  236.0  BERKELEY  64.433  -29.267  40' 

(',.cl  EXTERNAL  64.316  -26.50  40) 

.E003  EXTERNAL  359.0  BERKELEY  64.467  -29.30  46) 
(3005  EXTERNAL  64.467  -30.016  45) 

(3004  EXTERNAL  54.532  -29.457  45) 

(3005  EXTERNAL  64.465  -29.964  50) 

(3204  EXTERNAL  64.616  -29.50  50) 

(U2ei  EXTERNAL  64.350  -26.646  50) 

(U001  EXTERNAL  €4.350  -26.646  50' 

(E004  EXTERNAL  47.0  KNOX  64.5  -26.550  57' 

(3005  EXTERNAL  54.646  -29.333  59) 

'E004  EXTERNAL  47.0  KNOX  64.5  -26.534  59) 


62 


'BELKNAI  64. £70  -26.^7  60; 

(ilHKZLZY  RADAR  c4.£  -29.367  60) 

(iNOX  RADAR  64.5  -26.534  60) 

(R003  EXTERNAL  005.0  2EHKILEY  64.534  -29.363  c£ 
(S005  EXTERNAL  64.53^  -29.63?  65) 

(S004  EXTERNAL  54.570  -29.60  55} 

(S226  EXTERNAL  64.632  -29.333  65 } 

(E004  external  46.0  KNCX  64.551  -26.465  70' 
(S003  EXTERNAL  000.0  BERKELEY  64.570  -29.433  75 

(Uaei  EXTERNAL  64.367  -26.750  75} 

(5007  EXTERNAL  64.766  -27.666  74) 

(5005  EXTERNAL  64.570  -29.616  75) 

1 5  006  EXTERNAL  64.267  -29.649  75} 

(BELKNAP  64.632  -26.97  60^ 

(BERKELEY  RAEAR  64.57  -29.333  60; 

;KN0X  radar  64.566  -26.433  60) 


r 


APPENDIX  P 
SCINARIC 


This  is  t.ne  scenario  whic 

h  will  be 

icenerat 

ec.  by  the 

'».arf 

are  Erviron'ner 

cal  SiHiulatcr  i'iZS',  p 

rCf^ran , 

resident  in 

t.ae 

TIMX  systerr.  at 

NCSC,  San 

Die^c,  California. 

This  file 

sets 

initial  ship 

identity , 

pcs  it icn , 

course 

and  speed. 

and 

c  basic  file  of 

orders  to 

be  carried 

out  by  each  sice. 

I'iie  criers,  waLch  represent  cent  ingencv  plans,  are 


executed  irnediately  following  the  ini  tisliteticn  of  'iin?.Zk^' 
dr.  i  the  entry  cf  PLAYS?,  tunica  is  the  user/iateract  i ve 
rrcrran  for  *Z2. 


IvOELH 
YSS 
TSS 
S  .a  I  ? 

1.1  SSaKL  ESPY 

AaAA  5^J 

54- lSN  c9-?5*  ZZ?  15 
Shir 

l.c  KNCX  KNCX 
hZ2ZZ2  EBE3  921 
C4-1EN  L£-5e»  2ZZ  It 
SHIP 

1.2  PSLiA  EPIiA 

N^2^S3  CCCC  9Z2 
£4~19N  E.£~55'*  222  15 

SHIP 

7.1  VOROS  YPSSL 
Mill!  Sill  »Z4 

55- etN  29-ZZ-Ji  245  17 

SKIP 

7.2  SHORT  KASH 

N11112  FSFP  925 
55-12N  29-20'*  180  2£ 

SHIP 


64 


7.3  3uRL  KCTLI 

M1113  CwGS  926 
6c-c6(^  27-2:2'A  L17  It 

SHIP 

7.4  VAZ:.Y  rrapi 
K11114  hl'.KH  92? 

64-£2N  ZZ-Z^V  142  17 

SHIP 

7.C  CH/i.t*. 

Mil  15  nil  92c 

27-52W  275  25 

SHIP 

7.6  ^ZRl  KAZPK 

^22221  922 

f4-lcN  ZZ-lS'k  222  Ic 
SLIP 

7.7  YEP.2  KAZBH 

N 22222  LLLL  921 
e4-52N  29-12W  215  12 

SHI? 

7.C  MR3  KA2EK 
N22223  £22 

64-ieN  ZZ-2?'»  236  1? 

CRSERS 

:-L3Z  PLAL  iiLPA 

?CR  RZIRL  RZPCRT  ALL  ALL  TI‘Z  1  999 
JCP.  RZRKL  REFOR:  ALL  nLL  TIL'  1  »99 
^C?  KNCX  HEFCRT  aLL  ALL  TIM  1  9&& 

FLAG”  A  i-ARf.'R  54-12N  32-45*  Tm  1  999 
PLACE  A  ^AP.KER  64-36:.  29-3£>'  TI  “ 

PLACE  A  '"AREZF  65-16N  kc-Z^H  I  I 

GRANGE  PLAN  r.LZA 
JO?.  SHORY  REFCRT  ALL  S3RJACE  TI 
JGH  VAZr.Y  CCURSJ  245  TIM  45 
JCR  3URL  SPIEL  -■= 

iCR  YCRC3  ®EFCR 
PCR  E’JRL  REFCRT 
fCR  VACNY  REPCR 
ZC?.  SSGNs  EEFCR 
ECn  "-ERl  REFCRT 


LIST  OF  -,FFIot-cZS 

'AiJistca,  P.  H.,  Artificial  latel  I  i<?er.  :e ,  i.  1, 
Add iscn-'ivesle^  ,  ISV?  . 

roaen,  r.  A.,  Artific-ial  I i^tel  1  i^en ce  ana  ;'.'ctural  ‘‘‘ac, 
z.  4,  Basic  Fecks,  19'^?. 

Seorrei  •  t  ^'cd&ls  cf  Thinking,  p.  2Z,  ZeoT=ze  Allen 

and  Unwin,  19'! 7. 

r Oden  ,  cp  .  c  i  t . , p .  c . 

Winston,  op.cit.,  rp  11,  153,  cZ5 . 

*ebstgr*s  N'ew  '/'crld  Fictiencry,  Vcl.  1,  p.  FU9,  '.vcrli 
F’-bl  isnin/,  TsUT. 

Erlen,  cp.cit.,p.  4t . 

Pobinson,  J.  U.,"A  .‘.ew  Tack  for  Tecticiars”,  Fc  rf  ace 
warfare  ,  Vcl.  5  Nc.  11,  34,  Neverber,  19tr. 


i.eval  Ccean  SysteriS  Center  Tec.bniCcl  Uccurert  2fZ, 

FTA.'- >  ;£y  s  ter  fer  Tactical  Assessrent  cf  iiltisource 

i*-'e  ssa.--ts  ,  Even  -adcr,  c  y  ?. .  J  .  F  e  r  .d  t  e  1  a  n  i  .  1  ■ . 

■•'orris  ,  p  .  4 ,  '•'ay  197»  . 

U.3.  rtr~y  Researef.  Institute  frr  the  Fenavicral  ari 

fnciel  Sciences  Research  .Report  1117,  H':rrc:~  ."recesses 
in  I  r.t  el  1  i.-ea  ce  Analysis:  Phase  !  CverviS'.,  p.  Z-t, 
lece^cer  1979. 

Winston,  op.cit,  p.  341. 

:.aval  Gcear.  Systems  Center  Tecr.nical  !:rcu''ent  233, 

CTA^^'IF■  ;S'/ster7  fer  Tactical  Asstssrtnt  cf  1 1 1  scu  rce 
hessaf-es,  Fven  F.auaTi  by  T'!  j"!  Fecntel  anu  ?.  rT. 

[•  orris,  pi  33 ,  TTy  l;.7y  . 

ibid.,  p.  V.C. 

Naval  Ocean  Fystecs  Center  Technical  Iccu-ent  39h, 

STA^■^'I.R3  Prcductior.  Systerr  for  Tertiral  Slt-:ation 
Assessrent,  Volure  I,  oy  T.  ~  h  cCa  1 1 ,  F!  FT 

Ferris,  3.  F.  hitler,  R.  J.  &ecntel,D.  41.  Cctcter 

1975. 


</3  Cl 


t 


L.ITIAI  riSTRlBUTICiN  LIST 


0  .  C  0  '  i  e  s 


Lefeise  Technical  Inf cr-^a tier.  Center  2 

Ceneror.  Station 
Alexandria,  Virrrinia  22314 

Superintendent  2 

aITN;  Code  2142 

\aval  Postgraduate  School 

Monterey,  California  b394it. 

Professor  John  '*ozencraf t ,  Ccce  74  3 

ChairT.an,  C3  AcadeTic  Group 
Naval  Fcst,.Tadua  te  School 
^OLlte^e/,  California  £3942 

It  Ccl  Jeffrey  .  Johnson,  USA?,  Cede  39  1 

C3  Curricular  Officer 
’.aval  Postgraduate  School 
‘■'entcrey,  California  93942 

Professor  Tcnald  R.  Barr,  Code  h5rn 
Department  of  Operations  Research 
Naval  PosteTcdua te  School 
••Ohtere/,  Caliiornia  £394c 

Trofesscr  G.  T.  Howard,  Cede  LtHx 
De:artrent  of  Operations  Hesearc;. 

Naval  Post-Graduate  Scnccl 
■■cr.terey,  California  ^3942 

Ccrr.ancer  c 

r.’''l\:  Trie  c242  D.C.  McCall 
I.cVcl  Ocean  Systers  Corrani 
San  Die^o,  California  92132 

Cc-fT'anier  ,  C ru I ser-Te s t r cyer  Ircu:  11. -.-.t 
AIT.*.:  ICdr  Jons  P.  Ferra.cii,  Jr. 

Fleet  Pest  Office 

r.ew  Torx,  New  Ycrlc  29321 

Strate-Gic  Air  Cerrrand  /If.XY  1 

ATT.N :  Cant  Gre.r  Jay 
Cff''.tt  Ar3,  f.'eorasko  €2113 


be 


IZ  .  defense  Advanced  Researcn  Projects  Af:eDC7 
Ir.fcr’^aticr.  Processing  I ec.*r; i j ues  Cr'fice 
ATTN:  ICdr  A.  J.  lie  Icier 
l‘i2Z  Vi  Ison  rculevara 
A.rlir.’ton,  iv-.i'n.ia  22.27.9 

11.  Ccn-inenier 

ATTN:  Cede  26221  P.L.  laPue 
Naval  Plectrcnics  S/sier<~s  Cc-^'rar.c 
Vas dir^t on  ,  L. C.  22362 


