AD-A259  511 


RESEARCH  TRIANGLE  INSTITUTE 

ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  FOR 
VHSIC  SYSTEMS  DESIGN  (AIVD) 

FINAL  REPORT 

December  1988 

Prepared  for: 

Department  of  the  Army 
U.S.  Army  Electronics  Research  and  Development  Command 

Fort  Monmouth,  New  Jersey  07703-5000 
Contract  No.  DAAL01-86-C-0040 


OTIC 

e:lecte  ■ 

OEC  3  0  1992 

A 


Prepared  by; 

Center  for  Digital  Systems  Research 
Research  Triangle  Institute 
Research  Triangle  Park,  North  Carolina  27709 

Octy,  Inc. 
10920  Oxford  Court 
Fairfax  Station,  Virginia  22039 


POST  OFFICE  BOX  12194  RESEARCH  TRIANGLE  PARK,  NORTH  CAROLINA  27709-21  94 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

form  Apprawd 
om  No.  OTOutm 

Xianc rwomm «Of «»>« call»ctieii or mlormiuon n urnwna to mnngi  ^ — - ,  i  if^it^na ^wt 

amMmtq  and  iMMnwwwa  tlwdf  miaid.  tod  tomaltmia  ««d  rtwtiwinQ  iiw  colWttiex  ot  MifenmBeii.  t«»<<coiiiii>«Bar»a«idfc>gaMiaiitaiii«m»»nar^oa<»M«etalS 

celiBciioii  at  mtoimMtn.  iwdudHig lugoMUflin  ter  nduotn  ttw tturatw.  r— ■*— -tT  - - p  ***~T*n~inTn — fir  ■flnnflmiHiiiBiiidaMiuni.  ui«  I'iji. . — 

nwtn  tfliihitnir  liittf  Ttftl  Y^^tTWT'm  «~itTff-i~^T-'"r-TiT-‘*‘ "^T-ifOit  *iiii-  n1  ntititrmmrnittrtfltTtmmi.mihlmnun.  OCMSOJ. 

1.  AGENCY  USE  ONiV  (Eaavd  MarWt)  2.  REPORT  DATE  1 3.  REPORT  TYK  AND  OAHS  COVERED  ~ 

Decernber  1988  |  Final  R^)ort  -  Dec  88 

4.  TITLE  AND  SURTITU 

Artificial  Intelligence  for  VHSIC 

Systems  Design  (AIVD)  Final  Report 

S.  FUNDING  NUMBERS 

«.  AUTHOR(S) 

H.  Waters 

7.  PERFORMMG  ORGANIZATION  NAME(si  AND  AOORES$(ES) 

Center  for  Digital  Systems  Research  Octy,  Inc 

Research  Triangle  Institute  10920  Oxford  Couri 

Research  Triangle  Park,  NC  27709  Fairfax  St.,  VA 

22039 

B.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 

«.  SPONSORING /MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  AOORESS{ES) 

ETOL,  LABGOM 

Circuits  &  Subsystems  Design  Branch 

Fort  Monmouth,  NJ  07703-5601 

10.  SPONSORING /MONITORHUG 

AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 

DAAL01-86-C-0040 

11.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

12a.  DISTRIBUTION /AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 

i^roved  for  Public  Release,  Distribution  is  unlimited 

12b.  DISTRIBUTION  CODE 

13.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  wordt) 

The  goal  of  this  program  was  to  develop  prototype  tools  vrfiich  would  use  artificial 
intelligence  techniques  to  extend  the  Architecture  Design  and  Assessment  (ADAS) 
software  c^jabilities.  These  techniques  were  applied  in  a  niznber  of  ways  to 
increase  the  productivity  of  ADAS  users.  ATVD  will  reduce  the  amount  of  time 
users  spend  on  tedious,  negative,  and  eirror-prone  steps.  It  will  also  provide  fomaJ 
documentation  that  will  assist  users  in  v€u:ifying  that  the  models  they  build 
are  correct.  Finally,  AIVD  will  help  make  ADAS  models  more  reusable. 

14.  SUBlEa  TERMS 

VHSIC,  software/hardware  codesign.  Artificial  Intelligence 
graph  tranform,  ADAS 

IS.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

IB.  PRICE  CODE 

17.  SECURITY  CLASSIPKATION 
OF  REPORT 

UNCLAS 

IB.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATtON 
OF  THIS  PAGE 

UNCLAS 

IB.  SECURITY  CLASSmCATNM 
OF  ABSTRAO 

UNCLAS 

20.  LBMTATION  OF  ABSTRACT 

N$N  7S40-01-280-SS00  Standard  Form  29%  (Rav  2-«9) 


r-^naaa  a*  tint  w  wi 


ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  FOR 
VHSIC  SYSTEMS  DESIGN  (AIVD) 
FINAL  REPORT 


December  1988 


Department  of  the  Army 

U.S.  Army  Electronics  Research  and  Development  Command 
Fort  Monmouth,  New  Jersey  07703-5000 
Contract  No.  DAAL01-86-C-0040 

Prepared  by: 

Center  for  Digital  Systems  Research 
Research  Triangle  Institute 
Research  Triangle  Park,  North  Carolina  27709 

Octy,  Inc. 

10920  Oxford  Court 
Fairfax  Station,  Virginia  22039 


DTIC  QUAUii 


Contents 


LIST  OF  FIGURES  .  iii 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  .  iv 

1  INTRODUCTION  1 

1.1  AIVD  Project  Goals .  1 

1.2  Background .  1 

1.2.1  Real-Time  System  Design  Characteristics .  1 

1.2.2  The  ADAS  View  of  Softwawe/Hardware  Codesign .  2 

1.3  AIVD  Requirements .  4 

1.4  The  AIVD  Design  Methodology .  5 

2  AIVD  PROJECT  DELIVERABLES  9 

2.1  The  AIVD  System .  9 

2.2  The  AIVD  Tools  .  9 

2.2.1  The  Intelligent  User  Interface .  9 

2.2.2  The  Graph  Transformation  System .  9 

2.2.3  The  Attribute  Definition  Language  Evaluator .  9 

2.2.4  The  ADAS  Simulators .  11 

2.2.5  The  Allocator  of  Software  to  Hardware  (ASH) .  11 

2.3  The  AIVD  Data  Bases .  11 

2.3.1  The  Application  Domain  Hierarchy .  11 

2.3.2  The  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy .  11 

2.3.3  The  Transformation  Rule  Base  .  12 

2.3.4  Attribute  Definition  Language  Programs .  12 

2.3.5  ADAS  Software  Data  Base .  13 

2.3.6  ADAS  Hardware  Data  Base .  13 

2.4  The  AIVD  Workstation .  13 

2.5  AIVD  Documents .  14 

2.6  The  AIVD  Demonstration .  14 

2.6.1  The  Demonstration  Scenario .  14 


1 


ii 

2.6.2  Demonstration  Data  Bases .  15 

2.6.2. 1  The  Application  Dom«iin  Hierarchy .  15 

2. 6. 2.2  The  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy .  17 

2. 6.2. 3  The  Transformation  Rule  Base .  21 

2.7  AIVD  Reviews  .  22 

3  THE  AIVD  DEVELOPMENT  APPROACH  24 

3.1  Overview  of  Approach .  24 

3.2  An  Application  of  AIVD .  25 

3.2.1  Description  of  Application .  25 

3.2.2  The  High  Level  Model .  26 

3.2.3  The  Detailed  Model .  30 

3.2.4  Software  Partitioning  and  Parallelism .  33 

3.2.5  Communication  and  Fault  Tolerance .  35 

4  FURTHER  WORK  38 

4.1  Further  Application  of  AIVD  Tools .  38 

4.2  Further  Enhancement  of  AIVD  Tools .  38 

4.2.1  Develop  a  System  Experiment  Environment .  38 

4.2.2  Enhance  the  Graph  Transformation  System .  39 

4.2.3  Enhance  the  Software  to  Hardware  Mapping  Program .  40 

4.3  Converting  AIVD  to  Product  Quality .  40 

5  CONCLUSIONS  41 


List  of  Figures 


1.1  The  AIVD  Design  Process .  8 

2.1  AIVD  System  Structure .  10 

2.2  Application  Domain  Hierarchy .  16 

2.3  ADAS  Data  Flow  Graph  for  SAR  Algorithm .  18 

2.4  SAR  Graph  Adapted  to  FTPP  Architecture .  19 

2.5  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy .  20 

3.1  Top  Level  ADAS  Graph  of  WTA/TS  Algorithm .  28 

3.2  WTA/TS  Graph  ADL  Program .  29 

3.3  WTA/TS  Process  Utilization  .  31 

3.4  ADAS  Subgraph  of  Target  Cluster  Definition  Algorithm  .  32 

3.5  GLM  Node  ADL  Program .  33 

3.6  Target  Clustering  Process  Utilization .  34 

3.7  Performance  Costs  of  Fault  Tolerance .  37 


in 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


IV 


This  report  was  prepared  for  the  U.S.  Army  Electronics  Research  and  Development 
Command  under  Contract  N.  DAAL01-86-C-0040.  The  work  was  performed  in  the 
Center  for  Digital  Systems  Research  (CDSR)  of  Research  Triangle  Institute  (RTI)  by 
H.  Waters  (Project  Leader),  L.  Dent,  S.  Duncan,  G.  Frank,  W.  Ingogly,  C.  Scheper, 
W.  K.  Neighbors,  W.  Ransdell,  and  consultant,  D.  Van  Den  Bout,  and  at  Octy,  Inc. 
by  J.  Cuadrado,  B.  Glazer,  and  G.  Linsenmayer. 

We  wish  to  express  our  appreciation  for  the  guidance  and  support  provided  by 
the  project  technical  monitors,  S.  Waldman  and  M.  Coy  of  Army  LABCOM,  Ft. 
Monmouth,  New  Jersey. 

Technical  support  in  preparing  the  AIVD  documentation  and  this  report  was 
provided  by  G.  Grim,  J.  Muller,  P.  Noell,  J.  Sapp,  K.  Simmons,  and  B.  Taylor. 


1.  INTRODUCTION 


1.1  AIVD  Project  Goals 

The  Artificial  Intelligence  for  VHSIC  Systems  Design  (AIVD)  project  was  undertaken 
in  order  to  enhance  the  capabilities  of  the  Architecture  Design  and  Assessment  Sys¬ 
tem  (ADAS),^  and  to  provide  additional  support  for  the  ADAS  software/hardware 
codesign  methodology.  AIVD  supports  software/hardware  codesign  in  several  ways: 

•  AIVD  assists  the  user  in  building  complex  software  system  models  from  libraries 
of  generic  algorithms. 

•  AIVD  assists  the  user  in  transforming  generic  algorithm  descriptions  to  meet 
hardware  resource  constraints  and  interacting  software  subsystem  resource  re¬ 
quirements. 

•  AIVD  assists  the  user  in  defining  software  performance  attributes  in  terms  of 
mission  parameters  and  architecture  parameters. 

•  AIVD  assists  the  user  in  building  experiments  to  explore  trade-offs  across  large 
design  spaces. 

AIVD  uses  artificial  intelligence  techniques  to  implement  these  capabilities: 

•  Rule-based  programs  for  software  to  hardware  allocation  and  for  graph  trans¬ 
formations. 

•  Transformation  rules  (in  the  form  of  context-sensitive  graph  grammar  produc¬ 
tions)  for  modifying  the  structure  and  attributes  of  graphs. 

•  Attribute  grammars  to  define  performance  measures  in  terms  of  mission  and 
hardware  parameters  and  to  back-annotate  models  with  performance  results. 

1.2  Background 

1.2.1  Real-Time  System  Design  Characteristics 

The  types  of  system  design  problems  that  ADAS  was  developed  to  support  share 
several  common  characteristics; 

^ADAS  is  a  registered  trademark  of  the  Research  Triangle  Institute. 


1 


2 


Iterative  Processing  System  design  is  an  iterative  process.  There  are  several  types 
of  cycles  that  can  occur  in  the  design  process.  A  system  design  tool  should  sup¬ 
port  the  process  of  working  through  all  of  those  cycles  efficiently.  The  most 
important  iterative  cycle  to  support  efficiently  is  the  innermost  iteration,  i.e., 
the  cycle  which  is  repeated  most  often.  AIVD  focuses  on  supporting  the  incre¬ 
mental  modifications  to  the  model  based  on  different  system  parameters  that  are 
inherent  in  performing  trade-off  studies.  This  gives  the  system  architect  more 
time  to  focus  on  designing  different  variations  of  the  software  and  the  hardware, 
rather  than  on  building  the  models  required  to  perform  trade-off  analyses. 

Quantitative  Trade-offs  ADAS  was  designed  to  assist  the  system  architect  by  pro¬ 
viding  quantitative  performance  information.  AIVD  extends  that  support  to 
include  the  many  performance  analyses  required  to  make  trade-offs.  Thus  crit¬ 
ical  issues  for  a  system  architect  using  AIVD  are  defining  the  set  of  trade-off 
experiments  to  be  performed,  defining  the  parameters  for  those  experiments, 
and  deciding  how  to  interpret  the  results  of  the  simulations. 

Software  and  Hardware  Interactions  A  basic  tenet  of  the  ADAS  methodology 
is  that  system  performance  is  based  on  the  interaction  between  the  software 
and  the  hardware.  ADAS  models  this  interaction  in  terms  of  the  mapping 
of  software  to  hardware  and  the  contention  of  software  processes  for  shared 
hardware  resources.  AIVD  enhances  the  ADAS  capabilities  for  automatically 
mapping  software  to  hardware. 

Multidimensional  Design  Space  The  need  to  perform  trade-off  studies  across 
many  different  design  options  leads  to  a  multidimensional  design  space.  Typical 
trade-off  studies  must  consider  a  bewildering  number  of  different  design  options 
and  system  parameters.  Each  option  and  parameter  defines  a  different  dimen¬ 
sion  of  the  design  space.  Each  simulation  evaluates  one  point  in  that  design 
space.  Thus  the  system  architect  must  use  the  modeling  resources  wisely  if  a 
large  number  of  options  and  parameter  values  is  to  be  considered.  AIVD  is 
designed  to  allow  the  system  architecture  to  explore  a  wider  range  of  options. 


1.2.2  The  ADAS  View  of  Software /Hardware  Codesign 

The  first  basic  assumption  that  ADAS  makes  is  that  timing  is  a  critical  design  issue. 
ADAS  focuses  on  the  design  and  assessment  of  real-time  computer  systems.  A  real- 
time  system  is  a  system  in  which  there  are  critical  requirements  upon  the  time  at 
which  events  occur.  These  requirements  may  take  several  forms: 

•  The  rate  at  which  an  input  data  stream  is  consumed  and  processed  without  los¬ 
ing  data  may  be  critical.  For  example,  a  sensor  must  be  sampled  at  a  particular 


3 


rate. 

•  The  rate  at  which  an  output  data  stream  is  produced  may  be  critical.  For 
example,  an  image  must  be  outputted  30  times  a  second  in  order  to  be  flicker- 
free. 

•  The  sequence  of  events  may  be  critical.  For  example,  a  parachute  must  be 
deployed  before  the  landing  gear  is  extended. 

•  The  time  between  events  may  be  critical.  For  example,  the  time  between  sight¬ 
ing  a  target  and  launching  a  weapon  must  be  less  than  5  seconds. 

The  second  basic  assumption  that  ADAS  makes  is  that  the  system  software  can 
be  modeled  with  hierarchical  data  flow  graphs.  This  assumption  is  based  on  extensive 
work  on  the  use  of  data  flow  graphs  for  structured  systems  analysis  and  structured 
system  design,  pioneered  by  Tom  DeMarco.^  ADAS  extends  this  model  by  providing 
attributes  for  graphs,  nodes,  and  arcs  which  describe  the  performance  characteristics 
of  the  system.  These  attributes  lead  to  a  capability  to  simulate  the  performance  of 
the  system  using  a  form  of  Petri  Nets  called  marked  graphs. 

The  third  basic  assumption  that  ADAS  makes  is  that  the  system  design  must  take 
into  account  the  interactions  between  software  and  hardware.  ADAS  has  modified  the 
marked  graph  models  in  order  to  account  for  the  contention  for  hardware  resources 
that  are  experienced  when  independent  software  processes  share  hardware  resources. 

The  ADAS  methodology  is  based  on  performing  a  series  of  steps  to  build  a  model 
of  the  system  and  then  evaluate  its  performance; 

•  Building  hierarchical  data  flow  diagrams  which  describe  the  system  software. 

•  Defining  the  performance  attributes  of  the  system  software. 

•  Building  hierarchical  block  diagrams  which  describe  the  structure  of  the  system 
hardwaxe. 

•  Mapping  software  to  hardware. 

•  Simulating  performance  at  the  marked  graph  level. 

•  Evaluating  the  performance  results  produced  by  the  simulation. 

ADAS  provides  mapping  and  simulation  tools  and  a  graphical  user  interface  to 
support  the  construction  of  models.  AIVD  focuses  on  assisting  the  user  in  iteratively 
making  incremental  changes  in  the  models  in  order  to  evaluate  many  trade-off  options. 

^Tom  DeMarco.  Structured  Analysis  and  System  Specification.  Englewood  Cliffs;  Yourdon  Press, 
1979. 


1.3  AIVD  Requirements 


4 


The  AIVD  System  Requirements  Document  describes  the  requirements  for  the  AIVD 

system  in  terms  of: 

•  A  set  of  five  requirements  for  ADAS  which  AIVD  must  support. 

•  A  set  of  four  requirements  for  AIVD  which  enhance  the  capabilities  of  ADAS. 

The  ADAS  system  has  five  major  functions,  all  of  which  are  supported  by  AIVD; 

Construct  System  Data  and  Control  Flow  This  function  is  currently  provided 
in  ADAS  by  the  graph  editor,  EDIGRAF. 

Verify  System  Data  and  Control  Flow  Consistency  This  function  is  currently 
provided  in  ADAS  by  the  consistency  checker,  CONCH,  and  by  the  data  flow 
analyzer,  FLOWBAL. 

Map  System  Data  Flow  Onto  Hardware  Resources  This  function  is  currently 
provided  in  ADAS  by  the  software  to  hardware  mapper,  ASH. 

Evaluate  System  Performance  This  function  is  currently  provided  in  ADAS  by 
the  performance  simulator,  GIPSIM. 

Verify  System  Flinction  This  function  is  currently  provided  in  ADAS  on  software 
graphs  by  the  functional  simulators,  CSIM  and  ADASIM,  and  on  hardware 
graphs  by  the  HDL  interfaces,  VHDLGEN,  HELIXGEN,  and  ISPGEN. 

AIVD  enhances  the  Construct  System  Data  and  Control  Flow  function  with  three 

additional  subfunctions: 

Select  Algorithms  The  Intelligent  User  Interface  (lUI)  allows  the  user  to  build  the 
system  data  flow  by  selecting  algorithms  from  the  Application  Domain  Hierar¬ 
chy  (ADH)  and  connecting  them  to  implement  the  system  functions.  The  ADH 
provides  a  hierarchical  structure  for  a  collection  of  domain-specific  algorithm 
data  bases.  The  lUI  allows  the  user  to  select  algorithms  rapidly  by  moving 
around  the  ADH  and  allows  the  user  to  read  help  files  about  the  algorithms  in 
the  current  application  domain. 

Transform  Algorithms  The  Graph  Transformation  System  (GTS)  supports  both 
interactive  and  automatic  transformation  of  generic  algorithm  descriptions  to 
fit  the  software  environment  and  hardware  resources. 


5 


Instantiate  Algorithms  The  Attribute  Definition  Language  (ADL)  allows  the  al¬ 
gorithm  descriptions  in  the  ADH  to  be  parameterized.  The  Attribute  Definition 
Language  E'  aluator  (ADLEVAL)  program  automatically  instantiates  a  param¬ 
eterized  algoritl  m  description  and  provides  the  specific  attribute  values  required 
for  the  other  ADAS  tools,  such  as  CONCH,  FLOWBAL,  GIPSIM,  CSIM,  and 
ADASIM. 

Map  System  Data  Flow  Onto  Hardware  Resources  AIVD  enhances  the  ADAS 
Allocator  of  Software  to  Hardware  (ASH)  to  increase  compatibility  with  marked 
graph  simulator  GIPSIM,  to  allow  interactive  display  and  control  of  the  mapping 
process,  and  allow  more  general  optimization  rules  and  mapping  constraints. 

1.4  The  AIVD  Design  Methodology 

The  AIVD  design  process  is  shown  in  Figure  1.1. 

The  process  includes  several  types: 

Select  Architecture  from  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy.  The  architecture  is  de¬ 
scribed  by: 

•  A  set  of  component  models  (e.g.,  CPUs,  lOPs,  Memories,  Buses). 

•  A  set  of  basic  models  for  the  interconnection  patterns  (e.g.,  a  hypercube 
would  have  a  2  node  hypercube  as  a  basic  component.). 

•  A  set  of  rewrite  rules  which  would  allow  particular  instances  of  the  archi¬ 
tecture  to  be  built  from  the  basic  models  (e.g.,  a  hypercube  would  have  a 
rewrite  rule  for  building  a  larger  hypercube  from  a  smaller  one  by  copying 
the  existing  hypercube  and  then  connecting  all  the  corresponding  nodes  in 
the  two  copies). 

•  A  set  of  attribute  definitions  which  would  be  used  to  configure  the  algo¬ 
rithms. 

Transform  Architecture  In  order  to  simulate  a  system,  a  specific  instance  of  the 
architecture  must  be  constructed.  This  is  done  by  configuring  an  architecture 
using  the  proper  number  of  each  type  of  component  and  connecting  them  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  connection  patterns  of  the  architecture.  With  .AIVD,  the  system 
architect  uses  the  graph  transformation  system  to  connect  the  components  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  specification  for  the  architecture  as  encapsulated  in  the  graph 
transformation  rules  for  the  architecture.  A  design  trade-off  will  often  exper¬ 
iment  with  different  numbers  of  components.  Figure  1.1  shows  the  change  in 


6 

these  numbers,  Network  Size  Parameters  being  the  middle  loop  for  the  design 
process. 

Modify  Architecture  Attributes  Typical  architecture  attributes  are  processor  speed, 
memory  bandwidth,  interconnect  bandwidth,  and  memory  size.  These  at¬ 
tributes  will  effect  the  mapping  process  and  the  algorithm  node  processing 
times.  A  design  trade-off  will  often  require  experiments  with  different  values 
for  these  attributes.  Figure  1.1  shows  the  change  in  these  attributes.  Module 
Performance  Parameters  being  the  inner  loop  for  the  design  process. 

Select  Algorithm  The  user  selects  appropriate  algorithms  for  each  of  the  system 
functions  from  Application  Domain  Hierarchy.  The  ADH  is  organized  hierarchi¬ 
cally  by  function  in  order  to  make  it  easier  for  the  user  to  determine  which  algo¬ 
rithms  in  the  library  are  appropriate  for  the  particular  function  and  application. 
Furthermore,  the  ADH  may  have  several  variations  on  a  particular  algorithm, 
where  different  variations  are  associated  with  different  hardware  architectures. 
Thus  the  user  may  use  information  about  the  architecture,  as  provided  by  at¬ 
tribute  definitions,  to  select  appropriate  variations  on  the  algorithms  suited  to 
the  functions  of  the  application. 

Transform  Algorithm  The  next  step  is  to  customize  each  of  the  algorithms  in 
the  system  to  fit  the  available  architecture  resources.  This  is  done  in  a  global 
context,  so  that  trade-offs  for  resources  can  be  made  between  algorithms  for 
different  functions  of  the  system.  When  the  algorithms  are  selected  from  the 
ADH,  they  come  equipped  with  different  transformations  which  are  needed  to 
adapt  the  algorithm  to  different  instances  of  architectures.  Once  the  architec¬ 
ture  has  been  defined,  its  characteristics  can  be  used  to  select  the  appropriate 
transformations  for  the  algorithms.  The  architect  uses  the  graph  tremsformation 
system  to  customize  the  algorithm.  Typical  reasons  for  making  architecture- 
specific  transformations  are: 

•  Increase  the  parallelism  of  an  algorithm. 

•  Decrease  the  parallelism  of  an  algorithm. 

•  Model  the  communication  costs  of  an  algorithm  as  distributed  across  the 
architecture. 

•  Provide  the  data  or  processing  redundancy  needed  to  support  system  fault 
tolerance. 

Modify  Algorithm  Attributes  Once  the  algorithm  has  been  transformed,  the  al¬ 
gorithm  attributes  such  as  data  structure  size  and  operation  counts  are  com¬ 
bined  with  the  architecture  attributes  such  as  processor  speed,  memory  band¬ 
width,  and  interconnect  bandwidth  to  define  the  produce  and  consume  rates 


7 


and  firing  delays  of  the  performance  model.  This  process  is  performed  by  ADL- 
EVAL,  using  the  attribute  definition  programs  attached  to  the  algorithm  nodes, 
arcs,  and  graphs,  and  the  ADL  include  files  provided  by  the  architecture  model. 

Map  Software  to  Hardware  The  fully  instantiated  algorithm  is  mapped  to  the 
fully  instantiated  architecture  using  the  Allocator  of  Software  to  Hardware. 

Simulate  System  In  AIVD,  the  user  can  evaluate  performance  by  simulating  the 
system  at  the  marked  graph  level.  Alternatively,  the  user  can  build  a  functional 
model  using  C  or  Ada  ^  code  segments  for  each  leaf  node,  and  then  perform  a 
combined  functional  and  performance  simulation. 

Evaluate  Simulation  Results  This  critical  step  is  performed  manually  by  the  AIVD 
user,  who  must  decide  whether  or  not  to  continue  the  search  through  the  design 
space  and  which  point  in  the  design  space  should  be  evaluated  next.  The  user 
implements  the  decision  by  setting  new  parameter  values  in  ADL  files,  and  by 
invoking  the  appropriate  tool  to  start  the  next  cycle  through  the  process. 


^Ada  is  a  registered  trademark  of  the  U  S.  Government  (Ada  Joint  Program  Office). 


8 


Hardware 

Domain 

Hierarchy 


Application 

Domain 

Hierarchy 


Select 

Select 

Architecture 

Algorithm 

n  ..  .  n 

M^pbing 


Ger  eric  Herd  were 

Archil  ecture 

Get  eric 

Algol  ithm 

Algol  ithm 

Architecture  Trenefo  metioo 

Attri  bute 

Algo:  ithm 

Trenxfo  'motion 

Attr  bute 

Gri  ph  Ru  lee 

Defin  tioae 

Gri  ph 

Ru  le« 

Defin  tione 

Transform 

Architecture 


ArchiUectai  e 
Attribute 


Spe  :ific 
Archit  ecture 
ph  — 


^  ■  Defin  tion; 
Archit  ecture 
Attn  bate 
Defin  tiou* 


Transform 

Algorithm 


Cuetomixed 

Atgoiitbm 


Architecture 
Pec  lily 


Modify 

Architecture 

Attributes 


Neti 

rork 

f 

Si 

le 

u 

Perer 

letere 

Inetos 

lioted 

Mo< 

iule 

Archil 

ecture 

Perfor 

nonce 

Qti 

ph 

Pored 

letere 

Mepping 

Rulec 

Map  Software 
to  Hardware 

Map  ping 

^  Simulate 
System 

AJfo.  ithm  2 
Grepi  with 
ReJ  lltt _ 

Evaluate  * 
Simulation  * 
_  Results 

Simu  etion 
_ ^  lU* _ 

Simulation 

Results 


Algonthm 

Attribute 


Modify 

Algorithm 

Attributes 


Algol  ithm 
Fei  lily 


Ineter  tieted 
"  Algb/ithm 

Greph  Algoi  ithm 
Attr;  bute 
Defin  tione 


Figure  1.1:  The  AIVD  Design  Process 


2.  AIVD  PROJECT  DELIVERABLES 
2.1  The  AIVD  System 

The  AIVD  system  structure  is  shown  in  Figure  2.1.  The  system  consists  of  four  major 
tools  interacting  with  six  major  data  bases  and  the  existing  commercial  ADAS  tool 
set.  The  tools  and  data  bases  are  described  in  the  following  sections. 


2.2  The  AIVD  Tools 

2.2.1  The  Intelligent  User  Interface 

The  Intelligent  User  Interface  (lUI)  guides  the  user  in  selecting  appropriate  algorithms 
from  the  Application  Domain  Hierarchy.  The  lUI  provides  a  browsing  capability  for 
exploring  hierarchical  libraries  of  generic  algorithms.  This  includes  viewing  the  graph 
and  template  hierarchies  associated  with  a  library  and  reading  the  help  files  associated 
with  the  library.  It  also  includes  an  object-oriented  editing  capability  for  hierzjchical 
models,  so  that  the  user  can  point  to  «in  object  and  edit  text  files  associated  with  the 
object,  such  as  an  ADL  program,  Ada  or  C  language  source  code  files,  and  help  files. 


2.2.2  The  Graph  Transformation  System 

The  Graph  Transformation  System  (GTS)  aids  the  user  in  customizing  software  to 
fit  system  constraints,  including  the  capabilities  of  available  hardware  resources  and 
the  processing  requirements  of  other  algorithms  that  are  part  of  the  system  model. 

Transformations  define  how  to  change  an  algorithm  to  improve  its  fit  with  the 
system  constraints  without  changing  its  function.  Transformations  can  be  used  to 
increase  or  decrease  paxallelism,  to  insert  fault-tolerajit  features  into  an  algorithm,  to 
represent  the  cost  of  communications  delays,  or  to  eliminate  unnecessarily  redundant 
operations  from  an  algorithm’s  description. 


2.2.3  The  Attribute  Definition  Language  Evaluator 

ADLEVAL  translates  ADL  programs  into  script  files  which  can  be  read  by  the  other 
AIVD  tools,  including  the  ADAS  editor  and  simulator.  The  script  files  set  the  perfor¬ 
mance  attributes  of  the  ADAS  models,  including  node  firing-delay  and  module-class, 
inport  token-consume-rate  and  firing-threshold,  and  outport  token-produce-rate. 


9 


10 


Intelligent 

User 

Interface 


11 

2.2.4  The  ADAS  Simulators 

The  AIVD  tool  set  is  compatible  with  the  three  ADAS  simulators;  GIPSIM,  CSIM, 
and  ADASIM.  GIPSIM  is  a  directed  graph  simulator,  while  CSIM  and  ADASIM  are 
functional  simulators  using  C  and  Ada,  respectively.  The  AIVD  tool  set  creates  a 
loosely-coupled  interface  with  the  ADAS  simulators  through  the  generation  of  ADAS 
script  files. 

2.2.5  The  Allocator  of  Software  to  Hardware  (ASH) 

The  Allocator  of  Software  to  Hardware  (ASH)  has  been  enhanced  in  the  AIVD  pro¬ 
gram  to  employ  simulated  annealing  methodology  in  assigning  software  functions  to 
hardware  resources.  These  functions  and  resources  are  represented  in  ADAS  software 
graphs  and  hardware  graphs,  respectively.  The  allocations  are  made  in  an  effort  to 
minimize  the  maximum  utilizations  of  given  hardware  resources. 

2.3  The  AIVD  Data  Bases 

2.3.1  The  Application  Domain  Hierarchy 

The  Application  Domain  Hierarchy  (ADH)  organizes  the  descriptions  of  generic  algo¬ 
rithms  by  application.  Each  level  of  the  hierarchy  has  a  template  file  associated  with 
it  containing  the  templates  for  all  the  lower  level  algorithms.  With  each  level  may  be 
associated  transformation  rules  that  can  be  applied  to  any  of  the  graphs  in  the  lower 
levels  of  the  ADH.  At  the  lowest  level,  there  are  several  types  of  information: 

•  A  set  of  node  and  arc  templates  which  refer  to  common  libraries  of  b«isic  cilgo- 
rithms,  such  as  sort  algorithms  or  Fourier  transform  algorithms. 

•  The  ADL  programs  for  each  of  the  algorithms  describing  the  performance  char¬ 
acteristics  of  the  algorithm,  typically  in  terms  of  the  number  of  instructions 
executed  or  in  terms  of  the  number  of  operations  required. 

•  Ada  program  fragments  for  the  primitive  algorithms  which  are  developed  to  the 
level  needed  to  support  functional  simulation  of  the  algorithm. 

2.3.2  The  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy 

The  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy  (HDH)  contains  the  descriptions  of  potential  archi¬ 
tectures.  For  each  architecture,  there  are  several  types  of  information: 


12 


•  A  set  of  node  and  arc  templates  which  refer  to  common  libraries  of  components, 
such  as  1750A  or  32020  processors,  PI-Bus  or  TMDE  interconnections,  and 
different  memory  architectures. 

•  A  set  of  transformation  rules  for  building  an  instance  of  the  architecture  from 
the  components. 

•  A  set  of  transformation  rules  for  adapting  a  software  algorithm  to  the  architec¬ 
ture. 

•  A  set  of  ADL  descriptions  of  the  performance  characteristics  of  the  components 
of  the  architecture  and  information  about  the  operating  system  for  the  archi¬ 
tecture,  such  as  compilation  rates  for  estimating  machine  code  size  from  source 
code. 


2.3.3  The  Transformation  Rule  Base 

The  transformation  rule  base  is  a  set  of  ADAS  graphs,  each  of  which  describes  the 
patterns  and  transforms  of  a  consistent  set  of  rules  designed  to  transform  a  software 
data  flow  graph  in  order  to  achieve  a  specific  purpose.  Trcinsformation  rule  beises  may 
be  developed  for  a  specific  application  by  the  user  or  may  be  constructed  by  selecting 
and  then  merging  rules  that  are  distributed  throughout  the  ADH  and  the  HDH. 

2.3.4  Attribute  Definition  Language  Programs 

ADL  programs  describe  the  ADAS  node,  graph,  and  arc  attributes  in  terms  of  for¬ 
mulae  which  use  system  parameters  defined  by  the  user.  These  parameters  typically 
consist  of: 

•  Mission  parameters. 

•  Hardware  performance  parameters. 

•  Parameters  used  for  back  annotation. 

The  ADL  supports  two  types  of  communication;  inheritance  and  synthesis.  Inheri¬ 
tance  allows  parameters  to  be  defined  at  a  global  level  (such  as  the  root  graph  of  the 
system  software  hierarchy)  and  inherited  into  all  nodes  and  arcs  in  the  subgraph  below 
the  graph  where  they  are  defined.  Inheritance  is  appropriate  for  distributing  mission 
parameters  to  all  the  software  nodes.  Synthesis  allows  parameters  to  be  computed 
by  aggregating  the  values  of  ADAS  attributes  in  a  subgraph  to  define  the  value  of  an 
attribute  in  the  parent  node  or  graph.  Synthesis  is  appropriate  for  back-annotating 
either  software  or  hardware  graph  hierarchies. 


13 

2.3.5  ADAS  Software  Data  Base 

The  ADAS  software  data  base  is  a  hierarchy  of  data  flow  graphs.  It  serves  as  the 
central  working  data  base  during  an  AIVD  session,  which  typically  involves  multiple 
trade-off  experiments.  At  the  top  levels  of  the  hierarchy,  it  describes  the  functions  of 
the  system.  At  the  middle  levels  of  the  hierarchy,  it  describes  the  algorithms  and  data 
structures  that  provide  the  functions  required  of  the  system.  At  the  lowest  levels  of 
the  hierarchy,  it  describes  the  partitioning  of  the  algorithms  and  data  structures  to 
fit  onto  the  system  hardware  architecture. 

The  attributes  of  the  ADAS  software  graph  hierarchy  describe  the  performance 
characteristics  of  the  system,  including  the  amount  of  time  it  takes  to  perform  each 
atomic  action  of  each  algorithm  and  how  much  input  and  output  data  is  required  for 
each  atomic  action. 

2.3.6  ADAS  Hardware  Data  Base 

The  ADAS  hardware  data  base  is  a  hierarchy  of  graphs  which  describe  the  structure 
and  components  of  the  system  hardware  architecture. 

The  ADAS  hardware  graph  hierarchy  constrains  the  possible  mappings  performed 
by  ASH.  Each  component  of  the  architecture  belongs  to  a  module.class  and  each 
atomic  action  of  each  algorithm  must  be  mapped  to  a  hardware  component  with  the 
same  modnle.class.  Each  arc  of  the  software  data  flow  graph  must  map  onto  a  node 
or  arc  of  the  hardware  graph.  During  simulation,  atomic  actions  of  algorithms  must 
contend  for  the  shared  resources  of  the  hardwtire  components. 

The  attributes  of  the  ADAS  hardware  graph  hierarchy  describe  the  performance 
characteristics  of  the  components  of  the  architecture,  such  as  sensors,  processors, 
memories,  and  interconnections. 

2.4  The  AIVD  Workstation 

As  part  of  the  AIVD  project,  RTI  installed  an  AIVD  workstation  at  the  Army  LAB- 
COM,  Electronic  Technology  and  Devices  Laboratory,  Ft.  Monmouth,  NJ.  This 
workstation  consisted  of  a  VaxStation  II/GPX  with  19  inch  color  monitor,  4  mil¬ 
lion  bytes  of  fast  storage,  and  70  million  bytes  of  disk  storage.  The  workstation  was 
equipped  with  the  VMS  Version  4.5  operating  system.  Languages  supported  by  the 
workstation  included  DEC  Ada,  DEC  C,  and  Quintus  Prolog  Version  2.0.  Applica¬ 
tion  tools  provided  with  the  workstation  included  RTFs  ADAS  Version  2.5  and  the 
AIVD  tools. 


2.5  AIVD  Documents 


14 


In  parallel  with  the  sequence  of  reviews  for  this  project,  RTI  and  Octy,  Inc.  produced 
and  delivered  a  series  of  documents  describing  the  system  as  it  went  through  its 
development  cycle.  The  documents  included; 

The  AIVD  System  Requirements  This  document  describes  the  system  require¬ 
ments,  the  relationship  between  ADAS  and  AIVD,  and  describes  some  scenarios 
for  the  use  of  the  AIVD  tools. 

The  AIVD  User  Reference  Manual  RTI  and  Octy  developed  two  different  ver¬ 
sions  of  the  reference  manual.  The  draft  version  was  used  8is  an  aid  in  developing 
the  specifications  of  the  tools  that  were  implemented.  The  final  version  describes 
the  tools  which  were  actually  delivered. 

The  AIVD  Tool  Specifications  RTI  and  Octy  developed  two  different  versions  of 
the  specification  document.  The  draft  version  describes  the  Intelligent  User  In¬ 
terface  commands,  the  Attribute  Definition  Leinguage,  and  the  Transformation 
Rule  Base  format.  The  final  version  describes  the  lUI  commands,  a  revised  def¬ 
inition  of  the  Attribute  Definition  Language,  the  Graph  Transformation  System 
and  the  Transformation  Rule  Base,  and  the  Allocator  of  Software  to  Hardware. 

The  AIVD  Demonstration  Plan  The  AIVD  Demonstration  Plan  describes  the 
example  that  was  used  for  demonstrating  the  power  of  the  tools  and  the  inte¬ 
gration  of  the  tools.  The  example  is  based  on  the  Synthetic  Aperture  Radar 
(SAR)  example  described  in  Bowen  and  Brown,  “Systems  Design,”  Volume  II 
of  VLSI  Systems  Design  for  Digital  Signal  Processing. 


2.6  The  AIVD  Demonstration 

2.6.1  The  Demonstration  Scenario 

The  AIVD  demonstration  has  the  following  steps: 

Select  a  Design  Domain  Use  the  lUI  to  access  the  Application  Domain  Hierar¬ 
chy.  Demonstrate  the  capability  to  review  the  various  application  subdomains. 
Select  the  SAR  subdomain  to  develop  the  demonstration  application  design. 

Create  a  Generic  Software  Graph  Demonstrate  the  use  of  the  lUI  to  create  a 
top-level  application  SAR  design  as  shown  in  Figure  2.3.  Use  ADLEVAL  to 
instantiate  all  graph,  node,  and  arc  attribute  values  which  are  needed  by  the 
GTS  to  select  rules,  evaluate  matches,  and  choose  transformations. 


15 


Transform  the  Generic  Software  Graph  Use  GTS  to  complete  the  design  by  ap¬ 
plying  appropriate  graph  transformations  and  instantiating  the  attribute  values 
dependent  upon  hardware  operating  characteristics.  Demonstrate  the  control 
mode  capabilities  of  GTS. 

Map  the  Transformed  Software  Graph  to  the  Hardware  Use  ASH  to  map  the 
resulting  designs  to  a  hardware  configuration. 

Compute  the  Performance  Attribute  Values  Use  ADLEVAL  to  instantiate  at¬ 
tribute  values  dependent  upon  hardware  operating  characteristics. 

Simulate  and  Evaluate  the  Designs  Use  GIPSIM  to  simulate  the  performance  of 
the  designs  as  mapped  to  the  hardware  configurations. 


2.6.2  Demonstration  Data  Bases 

2. 6. 2.1  The  Application  Domain  Hierarchy 

The  Application  Domain  Hierarchy  (ADH)  developed  for  the  demonstration  consists 
of  a  four  level  taxonomy  of  application-specific  functions.  The  structure  of  the  ADH 
is  not  necessarily  a  tree,  but  rather  a  DAG,  since  several  functions  may  be  shared 
across  different  domains  or  subdomains  (such  as  Fourier  transforms).  This  hierarchy 
is  implemented  by  parallel  ADAS  graph  hierarchies  and  directory  structures.  The 
first  level  of  the  hierarchy  defines  three  major  application  domains; 

•  Radar  processing. 

•  Image  processing. 

•  Sonar  processing. 

The  radar  processing  domain  is  divided  into  two  specific  project  areas:  Synthetic 
Aperture  Radar  (SAR)  and  AWACS.  Subdomains  of  the  SAR  domain  may  be  shared 
among  other  radar  processing  domains.  Two  such  potential  subdomains  would  be  a 
doppler  processing  domain  and  a  range  processing  domain. 

Each  ADH  domain  may  contain  software  graph  files,  template  files,  Attribute 
Definition  Language  (ADL)  files,  transformation  rule  bases,  and  help  files  pertinent 
to  that  domain.  Figure  2.2  depicts  a  portion  of  the  ADH  tree  structure  created  for 
the  demonstration. 

Figure  2.3  shows  the  ADAS  data  flow  graph  of  a  synthetic  aperture  radar  algo¬ 
rithm.  The  purpose  of  a  SAR  is  to  obtain  high  resolution  two-dimensional  ground 
images  from  air-to-ground  or  satellite-to-ground  radar  data.  The  input  range  data 


radar 


image 


sonar 


Figure  2.2:  Application  Domain  Hierarchy 


17 


consists  of  vectors  of  complex  data  values;  each  vector  contains  9978  data  points  and 
the  frequency  of  generation  of  data  vectors  is  1418  Hz,  for  a  total  input  data  rate  of 
about  14  million  complex  values  per  second. 

The  basic  processing  algorithm  is  a  two-dimensional  filtering  operation  on  a  data 
array  of  2048  range  vectors  to  achieve  high  radar  resolution  in  both  range  and  az¬ 
imuth.  The  filter  is  implemented  as  two  one-dimensional  filters,  one  in  range  (“range 
compression”)  and  one  in  azimuth  (“azimuth  compression”). 

The  first  filter  operation  is  done  on  individual  range  vectors.  The  output  range 
vectors  are  stored  in  a  “corner  turn”  memory  to  form  azimuth  frames,  which  consist 
of  a  total  of  2048  range  vectors.  (This  process  actually  stores  only  1732  new  vectors 
each  frame;  a  316  vector  overlap  completes  the  2048  vector  frame.)  Azimuth  vectors 
are  read  out  in  a  sequence  of  9978  vectors,  each  a  length  of  2048  complex  numbers. 
The  azimuth  vectors  are  filtered  to  achieve  an  azimuth  compression  and  high  azimuth 
output  resolution. 

Figure  2.4  shows  the  transformed  version  of  the  SAR  data  flow  graph  after  it  has 
been  adapted  to  the  FTPP  architecture.  Each  of  the  processing  and  memory  nodes 
has  a  subgraph  representing  a  Triple  Modular  Redundant  (TMR)  implementation  for 
fault  tolerance.  Each  arc  in  the  original  data  flow  graph  now  has  an  associated  com¬ 
munications  node.  Each  communications  node  has  a  subgraph  showing  the  various 
hardware  resources  required  to  transmit  the  message  from  its  source  to  its  sink. 

2. 6. 2. 2  The  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy 

The  demonstration  data  bases  include  a  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy  (HDH)  which 
serves  the  function  of  collecting  the  information  on  the  architecture  models.  This 
is  parallel  to  the  function  that  the  ADH  serves  in  collecting  information  about  the 
algorithm  models.  In  the  HDH  delivered  as  part  of  the  demonstration  system,  two 
candidate  architectures  are  included:  the  Common  Signal  Processor  (CSP),  and  the 
Fault-Tolerant  Parallel  Processor  (FTPP).  Each  of  the  two  candidate  architectures, 
CSP  and  FTPP,  are  stored  in  separate  subdomains.  Both  of  these  have  subdomains 
for  each  of  their  components  a.s  described  below. 

Within  each  HDH  domain  lie  hardware  graph  files,  ADL  files,  and  help  files  per¬ 
tinent  to  that  domain.  The  top  level  domain  for  each  architecture  also  contains  the 
hardware  template  file  for  that  architecture.  Figure  2.5  depicts  a  portion  of  the  HDH 
tree  structure  created  for  this  demonstration. 

The  candidate  hardware  designs  are  the  CSP  of  IBM  and  the  FTPP  of  Charles 
Stark  Draper  Laboratories.  Both  architectures  are  modular  in  design,  and  both  em¬ 
phasize  high  performance  processing.  The  latter  design  includes  high-reliability  pro¬ 
cessing  features. 


19 


Figure  2.4:  SAR  Graph  Adapted  to  FTPP  Architecture 


20 


Figure  2.5:  Hardware  Domain  Hierarchy 


21 


The  modules  of  the  CSP  considered  in  this  demonstration  are  the  Floating  Point 
Processing  Element  (FPPE),  the  Global  Memory  (GM),  the  Sensor  Interface  (SI), 
the  Element  Supervisory  Unit  (ESU),  the  TM  and  PI  Bus,  and  the  Data  Network 
Element  (DNE). 

The  components  of  the  FTPP  are  the  Processing  Element  (PE),  the  Input/Output 
Element  (lOE),  the  Network  Element  (NE),  and  the  Memory  Element  (ME).  All 
components  are  grouped  into  clusters  which  consists  of  Fault-Masking  Groups  (FMG) 
which  are  elements  tightly-coupled  to  preserve  highly-reliable  characteristics. 

For  the  demonstration,  the  hardware  modules  onto  which  the  SAR  functions  are 
mapped  fall  into  four  classes:  processing  element,  memory  element,  input/output 
element  and  bus.  Table  2.1  contains  the  architecture  modules  and  their  classifications. 


Hardware  Classification 

(module.class) 

Architecture 

CSP 

FTPP 

Processing  Element  (PE) 

FPPE 

PE 

Memory  Element  (ME) 

GM 

ME 

I/O  Element  (lOE) 

SI 

lOE 

Bus  (BUS) 

DNE 

NE 

Table  2.1:  Architecture  Hardwaie  Module  Classifications 


2. 6. 2. 3  The  Transformation  Rule  Base 

This  section  describes  the  graph  transformation  rules  which  are  used  to  demonstrate 
the  capability  of  GTS  to  complete  the  design  of  the  system  initially  defined  by  Fig¬ 
ure  2.3.  Two  sets  of  transformation  rules  were  developed  for  the  demonstration. 

The  first  set  is  designed  to  optimize  the  performance  of  any  algorithm  graph  buiit 
from  filters  for  a  generic  multiprocessor  architecture.  This  set  of  rules  is  used  to 
customize  the  SAR  graph  by; 

•  Implementing  the  filters  eis  a  pipeline  with  an  FFT,  a  vector  multiply,  and  an 
inverse  FFT. 

•  Partitioning  the  FFT  operations  into  smaller  parallel  FFTs  which  can  be  dis¬ 
tributed  on  multiple  processors. 


•  Segmenting  the  corner-turning  memories  to  allow  parallel  access. 


22 

The  second  set  is  designed  to  adapt  a  generic  tilgorithm  to  the  FTPP  architecture. 
This  set  of  rules  is  used  to  customize  the  SAR  graph  by: 

•  Implementing  each  processing  function  with  Triple  Modular  Redundancy  (TMR). 

•  Including  the  communications  costs  for  transmission  of  the  data  both  between 
fault  containment  regions  and  between  FTPP  processor  clusters. 

GTS  selects  and  applies  a  sequence  of  graph  transformations  to  the  algorithm  data 
flow  graph  in  order  to  develop  a  final  design  which  is  specialized  for  the  input  goals 
and/or  hardware  constraints  that  have  been  specified.  GTS  transform  rules  include 
evaluation  rules  which  evaluate  the  filter  process  and  determine  what  transform  to 
select  to  implement  it. 

2.7  AIVD  Reviews 

The  AIVD  project  was  punctuated  by  a  series  of  project  reviews.  The  AIVD  project 
was  unusual  in  that  each  review  included  one  or  more  prototype  demonstrations. 
These  demonstrations  allowed  the  project  reviewers  to  get  a  hands-on  feel  for  the 
system  that  was  evolving  and  to  provide  real-time  direction  in  the  design  of  the 
system. 

The  reviews  were: 

Kickoff  Meeting  At  the  kickoff  meeting,  an  initial  version  of  the  Graph  Transforma¬ 
tion  System  was  demonstrated  by  Octy.  In  this  version,  the  rules  were  encoded 
in  Prolog,  and  only  a  single  rule  and  a  single  match  location  could  be  processed. 
At  this  review,  the  plans  for  the  proposed  AIVD  development  were  presented 
and  discussed. 

Preliminary  Design  Review  The  major  focus  of  the  Preliminary  Design  Review 
was  to  present  the  design  of  AIVD.  Two  documents  were  presented:  a  draft  User 
Manual  and  a  System  Requirements  document.  The  User’s  Manual  focused  on 
the  issues  of  the  user  interface  for  the  system.  The  design  of  the  Attribute 
Definition  Language  was  presented  in  detail,  and  the  relationship  between  the 
ADL  and  the  VHDL  was  discussed. 

Critical  Design  Review  At  the  Critical  Design  Review,  three  tools  were  demon¬ 
strated:  a  new  version  of  the  Graph  Transformation  System,  an  initial  version 
of  the  Attribute  Definition  Language  Evaluator,  and  an  initial  version  of  the 
Intelligent  User  Interface.  These  tools  were  demonstrated  in  concert  with  the 
ADAS  tools  processing  a  model  of  the  AWACS  Track  While  Scan  algorithm. 


23 


The  Graph  Transformation  System  was  shown  reading  the  ADAS  graph  version 
of  the  Transformation  Rule  Base.  A  first  iteration  of  the  AIVD  specifications 
was  presented. 

Test  Plan  Review  At  the  Test  Plan  Review,  an  initial  version  of  the  enhanced  Soft¬ 
ware  to  Hardware  Mapper  was  demonstrated,  along  with  revised  implementa¬ 
tions  of  the  Attribute  Definition  Language  Evaluator  and  the  Graph  Transfor¬ 
mation  System.  The  revised  AIVD  specification  document  was  presented  and 
discussed,  and  plans  for  testing  AIVD  were  described. 

Final  Review  At  the  Final  Review,  the  AIVD  workstation  was  installed  at  Army 
LABCOM,  and  all  of  the  tools  were  shown  working  together  to  perform  the 
system  demonstration. 


3.  THE  AIVD  DEVELOPMENT  APPROACH 
3.1  Overview  of  Approach 

The  AIVD  development  approach  is  based  on  four  novel  principles: 

Parallel  ConEtruction  of  Prototypes  and  Specifications  At  each  review  of  the 
AIVD  project,  different  versions  of  the  prototype  tools  were  demonstrated.  At 
the  same  time,  each  of  the  two  major  documents  (the  User’s  Manual  and  the 
System  Specifications)  went  through  two  major  revisions.  This  parallel  de¬ 
velopment  of  prototypes  and  specifications  ensured  that  the  documents  were 
consistent  with  the  final  delivered  product,  and  that  the  review  teams  (and 
the  tool  developers)  could  effectively  guide  the  design  through  feedback  based 
on  hands-on  experience  with  the  prototypes.  This  approach  was  particularly 
valuable  given  the  geographic  distribution  of  the  development  team.  Defining  a 
series  of  versions  of  the  tools,  so  that  the  system  could  be  “grown”  rather  than 
“built,”  required  more  design  effort  at  the  beginning,  but  ensured  a  product 
that  met  expectations  at  the  end  of  the  project. 

Loosely  Coupled  Design  In  order  to  foster  parallel  development  of  different  tools, 
and  to  reduce  the  effort  required  for  integration  of  the  tools,  two  decisions  were 
made  early  in  the  project  that  defined  the  interfaces  between  the  tools.  All 
the  tools  would  communicate  through  two  mechanisms:  the  commercial  ADAS 
data  base  files  and  commercial  ADAS  script  files.  These  interfaces  remained 
both  simple  and  stable  for  the  life  of  the  project,  and  made  integration  of  the 
tools  relatively  easy. 

Based  on  Commercial  ADAS  The  AIVD  system  was  built  around  the  latest  com¬ 
mercial  version  of  ADAS.  Two  of  the  ADAS  tools  were  replaced.  The  Intelligent 
User  Interface  replaced  the  ADAS  graph  editor  EDIGRAF.  The  enhanced  Al¬ 
locator  of  Software  to  Hardware  replaced  the  commercial  version  of  ASH.  As  a 
result  of  this  development,  all  of  the  other  commercial  ADAS  tools  can  be  used 
with  the  AIVD  tools.  Either  EDIGRAF  or  the  lUI  can  be  used  to  build  the 
software  graphs  and  the  transformation  rule  base. 

Application  of  ATVD  on  a  Parallel  Project  An  important  resource  for  any  tool 
builder  is  a  set  of  tool  users  who  are  willing  to  work  with  prototype  versions 
of  the  tools.  The  AIVD  development  team  was  fortunate  to  have  application 
projects  available  which  needed  the  capabilities  of  the  AIVD  tools  even  in  pro¬ 
totype  form.  The  results  of  using  one  of  the  AIVD  tools  is  described  below. 


24 


3.2  An  Application  of  AIVD 


25 


During  the  development  of  the  AIVD  tools,  a  parallel  project  was  started  at  RTI 
called  “The  Design  and  Assessment  of  High  Performance,  High  Reliability  Systems” 
(DAHPHRS).  This  project  was  done  under  NASA  contract  NASl-17964,  Task  20. 
The  contract  monitors  were  Lt.  Gale  Pamper  from  RADC  and  Wayne  Bryant  from 
NASA/LaRC.  The  RTI  project  leader  was  Charlotte  Scheper.  There  were  two  sub¬ 
contractors:  Honeywell  SRC  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Sudah  Yalamanchili  and 
Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Gail  Gray. 

DAHPHRS  involved  the  evaluation  of  the  performance  and  reliability  of  two  al¬ 
gorithms  on  three  different  architectures.  The  Attribute  Definition  Language  was 
used  to  capture  the  performance  effects  of  the  mission  parameters.  The  fault- tolerant 
transformations  and  communications  transformations  developed  for  the  AIVD  final 
demonstration  were  based  on  the  needs  of  this  project. 

3.2.1  Description  of  Application 

The  DAHPHRS  application  consisted  of  two  battle  management  C^I  ^dgo^ithms.  The 
algorithm  described  below  is  used  to  manage  Directed  Energy  Weapons  (DEWs).  The 
processing  is  designed  to  allocate  DEWs  to  targets  (which  are  enemy  ICBMs).  The 
processing  will  be  done  in  space  and  on  a  battle  management  platform,  which  will  be 
communicating  with  multiple  sensor  platforms  and  weapons  platforms.  The  sensor 
platforms  (the  BSTS’s)  will  be  acquiring  amd  tracking  the  teurgets  while  they  are  in 
boost  phase.  Thus  the  information  available  to  the  battle  management  algorithm 
will  be  information  on  the  expected  position  of  the  targets,  the  target  values,  and 
information  about  the  status  and  characteristics  of  the  weapons. 

The  performance  requirements  of  this  system  were  determined  by  response  time 
requirements.  In  general,  5  seconds  would  be  allowed  for  the  system  to  respond  to 
a  request  for  target  sequencing  instructions.  A  fall-back  requirement  was  a  response 
time  of  30  seconds. 

There  were  four  major  mission  parameters  defined  for  the  problem: 

The  Number  of  Targets  The  number  of  targets  ranged  over  the  values  of  25,  50, 
100,  and  200. 

The  Number  of  Weapons  The  number  of  weapons  ranged  over  the  values  of  5  and 

10. 

The  Number  of  Clusters  The  number  of  clusters  Wcis  fixed  at  10. 


26 


The  Redundancy  Level  The  redundancy  level  is  the  number  of  shots  that  must 
be  tcdcen  at  each  target  to  ensure  a  kill.  For  this  study,  the  redundancy  level 
Weis  fixed  at  3. 

These  parameters  were  used  to  determine  processing  times  and  data  structure  sizes. 
In  turn,  the  data  structure  sizes  were  used  to  determine  communication  costs. 


3.2.2  The  High  Level  Model 

The  top  level  data  flow  model  of  the  Weapons  to  Targets  Assignment  and  Target  Se¬ 
quencing  (WTA/TS)  algorithm  is  shown  in  Figure  3.1.  There  are  four  major  functions 

shown: 

Target  Cluster  Definition  This  function  groups  the  targets  into  clusters  based  on 
the  distance  between  the  targets.  The  DEW’s  cannot  be  aimed  rapidly  in  widely 
divergent  directions.  In  order  to  minimize  the  time  between  shots  and  thus 
majcimize  the  number  of  shots  taken  by  each  DEW,  the  targets  are  clustered, 
and  then  weapons  are  assigned  to  targets  within  a  cluster. 

Weapon  to  Cluster  Assignment  This  function  assigns  the  weapons  to  the  clus¬ 
ters.  In  order  to  achieve  the  required  level  of  redundancy,  each  cluster  must  be 
assigned  multiple  weapons.  The  number  of  weapons  depends  upon  the  number 
of  targets  in  the  cluster  and  on  the  level  of  redundancy.  No  weapon  is  assigned 
to  more  than  one  cluster. 

Weapon  Assignment  This  function  assigns  the  targets  in  the  cluster  to  the  weapons 
committed  to  the  cluster.  This  function  can  be  performed  in  parallel,  with  the 
assignments  for  each  cluster  proceeding  independently. 

Target  Sequencing  This  function  determines  the  sequence  of  shots  for  each  weapon 
to  ensure  that  each  target  assigned  to  the  weapon  is  shot  at  the  best  time  to 
eliminate  the  target.  This  is  a  complex  problem,  since  both  the  targets  and  the 
weapons  are  moving  independently,  and  the  weapon  will  have  a  limited  time 
for  firing.  This  function  can  be  performed  in  parallel,  with  the  assignments  for 
each  weapon  proceeding  independently. 

These  functions  work  on  seven  major  data  structures: 

Interdistance  Matrix  The  interdistance  matrix  describes  the  distances  between 
the  targets. 


27 

Target  Processing  Time  The  target  processing  time  matrix  describes  how  long 
the  directed  energy  beam  from  each  weapon  must  dwell  on  each  target  in  order 
to  disable  the  target. 

Weapon  Slew  Time  The  weapon  slew  time  matrix  describes  how  long  it  will  take 
to  shift  each  weapon  to  point  at  each  target. 

Kill  Probability  Matrix  The  kill  probability  matrix  describes  the  probability  that 
each  weapon  will  destroy  each  target. 

Utilization  Matrix  This  matrix  describes  how  much  energy  each  weapon  must  ex¬ 
pend  to  destroy  each  target. 

Target  Due  Date  Vector  This  vector  describes  the  time  when  this  target  will  be 
out  of  range,  hidden,  or  will  complete  boost  phase  (and  hence  be  much  more 
difficult  to  detect). 

Target  Value  Vector  This  vector  describes  the  priority  for  destroying  each  target. 

Figure  3.2  shows  the  Attribute  Definition  Language  program  for  the  WTA/TS 
graph.  This  program  defines  the  values  of  the  mission  parameters,  collects  the  hard¬ 
ware  parameters,  and  defines  the  data  structure  sizes  in  terms  of  the  mission  param¬ 
eters.  The  variables  defined  in  the  graph  program  are  inherited  into  any  node  or 
arc  ADL  file  in  the  hierarchy  that  Weints  to  use  this  information.  Figure  3.5  shows 
the  ADL  program  for  a  node  in  the  Target  Cluster  Definition  subgraph.  This  ADL 
program  uses  the  variables  which  it  has  inherited  from  the  WTA/TS  graph  ADL 
program. 

The  first  step  was  to  build  an  ADAS  simulation  of  the  WTA/TS  graph  assuming 
a  single  1  MIPS  processor.  This  configuration  clearly  did  not  meet  the  performance 
requirements.  With  25  targets  and  10  weapons,  execution  time  exceeded  10  seconds. 
With  25  targets  and  20  weapons,  execution  time  approached  40  seconds.  With  200 
targets  and  10  weapons,  execution  time  exceeded  340  seconds.  With  200  targets  and 
20  weapons,  execution  time  exceeded  360  seconds.  This  study  also  pointed  out  the 
relative  dependence  of  the  model  on  different  parameters.  Changes  in  the  number  of 
weapons  affected  the  response  time  linearly,  while  changes  in  the  number  of  targets 
affected  the  response  time  exponentially. 

The  second  step  was  to  analyze  the  utilization  of  the  processing  resources  to  deter¬ 
mine  the  bottlenecks  and  see  if  a  parallel  implementation  could  improve  performance 
sufficiently  to  meet  the  requirements.  Figure  3.3  shows  the  distribution  of  resource 
utilization  by  the  different  major  functions  at  different  numbers  of  targets.  An  inter¬ 
esting  phenomenon  shows  up.  For  small  numbers  of  targets  (e.g.,  25)  the  Weapons 
to  Target  Cluster  Assignment  Function  uses  most  of  the  single  processor’s  time,  but 


29 


int :  —  Key  Input  Parameter  Declaration 
nbr.targets,  —  The  number  of  targets  (N) . 
nbr.clusters,  —  The  number  of  clusters  (C) 
nbr_ weapons ,  —  The  number  of  weapons  (W) . 
redundancy,  —  Weapon  assignment  redundamcy  (R) . 

—  Hardware  Parameter  Declaration 

fpt.mult,  —  Floating  point  MPYs  per  millisecond 
mips,  —  Instructions  per  millisecond 
io_rate,  —  Flea* -ng  point  I/Os  per  millisecond 
read.fpt;  —  Floating  point  READs  per  millisecond 

—  Data  Structure  Sizing  Calculations 
dim.size  *  nbr.targets  ♦  nbr.targets; 
di.size  =  nbr.targets; 

Gc.size  ®  nbr.clusters; 

Lwc.size  =  redundamey  ♦  nbr.clusters; 

Lwt.size  =  redundancy  *  nbr.targets; 
pi j .size  =  nbr.targets  *  nbr.weapons; 

Tij.size  =  nbr.targets  ♦  nbr.weapons; 
tip.size  -  nbr.targets; 

Uij.size  =  nbr.targets  ♦  nbr.weapons; 


Figure  3.2:  WTA/TS  Graph  ADL  Program 


30 

for  larger  numbers  of  targets,  the  Target  Cluster  Definition  function  uses  most  of  the 
resources.  A  second  aspect  is  that  there  axe  simple  techniques  for  making  the  Weapon 
to  Target  Assignment  and  the  Target  Sequencing  functions  parallel,  but  they  use  very 
little  resources.  In  order  to  meet  the  response  time  requirements,  the  Target  Cluster 
Definition  function  must  be  made  parallel. 

3.2.3  The  Detailed  Model 

The  third  step  was  to  investigate  the  Target  Cluster  Definition  function  to  see  what 
could  be  done  to  make  it  execute  in  parallel.  Figure  3.4  shows  the  data  flow  of  the 
TCD  function.  There  are  three  major  modules  in  the  TCD  function: 

Gradient,  LaGrange,  and  Median  This  module  uses  linear  programming  tech¬ 
niques  to  create  clusters  based  on  the  distances  between  targets.  The  median 
distances  between  targets  in  a  cluster  are  also  computed.  The  linear  program¬ 
ming  solution  defines  probabilities  that  targets  should  be  assigned  to  clusters. 

Cluster  Formation  This  module  uses  the  median  information  and  the  cluster  prob¬ 
abilities  to  assign  targets  to  clusters.  Once  the  clusters  are  defined,  the  clus¬ 
tering  is  evaluated.  If  the  cluster  size  is  sufficiently  close  to  the  goal,  then 
the  cluster  definitions  are  pcissed  on  to  feaisible  cluster  definition.  Otherwise, 
another  linear  programming  iteration  is  performed. 

Feasible  Cluster  Definition  This  module  creates  lists  of  target  assignments  for 
each  cluster. 

The  TCD  function  uses  only  one  major  data  structure,  the  Target  Interdistance 
Matrix.  The  structure  of  the  algorithm  features  a  loop,  where  a  linear  programming 
approach  to  the  solution  is  iteratively  refined  in  order  to  achieve  the  integer  solution 
desired. 

Figure  3.5  shows  the  Attribute  Definition  Language  program  for  the  GLM  node. 
This  program  uses  the  values  of  the  mission  parameters  and  data  structure  sizes 
which  it  inherits  from  the  WTA/TS  graph  ADL.  It  also  inherits  the  TCD  iteration 
count  TCDXIc  from  the  TCD  graph.  The  inherited  values  are  used  to  determine  the 
firing  delay  attribute  for  the  node  and  the  consume,  threshold,  initial,  and  produce 
attributes  for  the  ports  of  the  GLM  node.  This  allows  the  user  of  the  system  to  be 
hidden  from  the  ADAS  attributes  and  terminology  and  to  concentrate  instead  on  the 
definition  of  the  mission  and  hardware  parameters. 

Figure  3.6  shows  the  relative  use  of  a  single  processor’s  computing  resources  by 
the  three  different  modules  as  a  function  of  the  number  of  targets.  While  the  relative 


Figure  3.4;  ADAS  Subgraph  of  Target  Cluster  Definition  Algorithm 


33 


op.count  =  TCD.LIc  ♦  8  *  nbr.targets  ♦  nbr.targets; 

instr.count  =  TCD.scale  *  op.count; 

mpy.count  =  TCD.LIc  *  nbr_targets; 

io.ops  =  TCD_LIc  *  (xim.size  +  dim.size  +  Cim.size) ; 

f iring.delay  =  (  instr_co\mt/mips  )  + 

(  mpy_ count  /  fpt.mult  )  + 

(  io_ops  /  read_fpt  ) ; 

—  Consumes  an  entire  dim  matrix  each  iteration 
token_consume_rate(inO)  *  TCD_LIc  ♦  xim_size; 

f iring_threshold(inO)  =  token_consume_rate(inO) ; 

—  initial_token_count(inO)  =  token.consume.rateCinO) ; 

—  Consumes  an  entire  xim  matrix  each  iteration 
token_consume_rate(inl)  =  dim_size; 

f iring_threshold(inl)  =  token_consume_rate(inl) ; 

—  Produces  an  entire  Cim  matrix  each  iteration 
token_produce_rate(outO)  =  TCD.LIc  ♦  Cim.size; 


Figure  3.5:  GLM  Node  ADL  Program 

utilizations  of  the  functions  in  the  WTA/TS  graph  varied  considerably  as  a  function 
of  the  number  of  targets,  the  utilizations  of  the  modules  within  the  TCD  remained 
relatively  constant.  Unfortunately,  while  there  are  ways  of  partitioning  the  GLM 
module  so  that  it  can  execute  in  parallel,  there  are  no  obvious  ways  of  partitioning 
the  Cluster  Formation  module.  Since  Cluster  Formation  has  the  highest  utilization, 
making  GLM  parallel  can  improve  performance  by  at  most  40%.  This  limits  the 
benefits  of  parallel  architectures  for  this  problem. 


3.2.4  Software  Partitioning  and  Parallelism 

The  algorithms  which  had  been  developed  were  originally  implemented  on  a  sequen¬ 
tial  processor.  In  order  to  meet  the  response  time  performance  requirements,  the 
algorithms  needed  to  be  adapted  to  take  advantage  of  the  available  computing  re¬ 
sources  in  the  multiprocessor  environment  addressed  by  the  DAHPHRS  study.  Two 
techniques  for  improving  the  performance  of  the  algorithm  were  evaluated:  pipelining 
and  parallelism. 

A  cursory  evaluation  of  pipelining  the  algorithms  at  the  macro  level  indicated 
that  this  approach  would  not  be  effective.  The  primary  issue  at  the  macro  level 


35 


was  response  time,  not  throughput.  Pipelining  increases  system  throughput  at  the 
possible  cost  of  an  increase  in  response  time.  At  a  lower  level  of  detail,  pipelining 
could  be  very  effective  if  the  individual  processors  supported  pipelining. 

At  the  macro  level,  the  algorithm  provided  several  opportunities  for  coarse  grain 
parallelism.  These  opportunities  were  captured  in  the  form  of  parallel  subgraphs  for 
the  top  level  operations.  These  parallel  subgraphs  were  designed  to  serve  as  models  for 
graph  transformation  rules.  Simulation  of  these  models  revealed  that  the  utilization 
of  some  inherently  sequential  tasks  limited  the  benefits  of  parallelism. 

As  described  above,  the  limiting  factor  in  this  case  is  the  ability  to  make  the 
Cluster  Formation  module  parallel.  Without  a  parallel  version  of  Cluster  Formation, 
at  most  a  factor  of  2  speedup  can  be  achieved.  This  is  not  nearly  enough  to  achieve 
the  desired  performance  requirements. 


3.2.5  Communication  and  Fault  Tolerance 

A  second  set  of  issues  related  to  this  project  is  the  cost  of  fault  tolerance.  The  cost  of 
fault  tolerance  was  evaluated  in  the  context  of  the  FTPP  architecture,  which  provides 
both  parallel  processing  and  fault  tolerance.  The  FTPP  approach  to  fault  tolerance 
involves  the  use  of  Triple  Modular  Redundancy  and  quadruplicate  voting.  There  is 
an  obvious  cost  in  terms  of  additional  hardware  required  for  TMR,  but  there  is  also  a 
significant  performance  cost  imposed  by  the  need  for  frequent  voting  of  intermediate 
results. 

In  order  to  evaluate  the  overhead  costs  of  conununication  and  fault  tolerance, 
a  parallel  algorithm  was  constructed  (which  introduced  communications  costs)  and 
mapped  onto  a  FTPP  architecture  with  multiple  clusters  and  multiple  TMR  processor 
groups  per  cluster.  The  GLM  algorithm  was  partitioned  into  four  parallel  processes. 
Figure  3.7  shows  three  different  mappings  of  the  parallel  version  of  the  GLM  and  shows 
the  additional  costs  imposed  by  the  fault  tolerance  algorithms  of  the  FTPP.  The  three 
different  mappings  are  based  on  different  distances  for  the  communications.  The  first 
pair  of  bars  shows  a  one  cluster  system,  where  no  intercluster  communications  are 
required.  The  second  pair  of  bars  shows  a  two  cluster  system,  where  half  of  the 
interprocessor  communication  requires  intercluster  communications.  The  third  pair 
of  bars  shows  a  four  cluster  system,  where  all  interprocessor  communications  requires 
intercluster  communications,  and  the  longest  communications  must  traverse  of  four 
clusters,  including  the  source  and  the  sink  clusters.  The  cost  without  fault  tolerance 
was  modeled  by  assuming  that  the  fault  tolerance  algorithms  could  be  performed  in 
zero  time. 

Three  conclusions  emerge  from  examining  Figure  3.7.  The  first  is  that  there  are 
significant  overhead  costs  in  distributing  the  parallel  modules  across  multiple  clus- 


36 


ters  in  the  FTPP  architecture.  The  second  is  that  significant  performance  overhead 
is  associated  with  the  FTPP  implementation  of  fault-tolerant  communications.  The 
third  is  that  the  proportion  of  execution  time  associated  with  the  FTPP  implementa¬ 
tion  of  fault-tolerant  communications  increases  as  the  distance  of  the  communication 
increases.  This  makes  intercluster  communication  involving  more  than  two  clusters 
very  unattractive. 


Performance  Costs  of  Fault  Tolerance 


4.  FURTHER  WORK 


The  goal  of  the  AIVD  effort  was  to  develop  prototype  tools  which  would  use  artificial 
intelligence  techniques  to  extend  the  ADAS  tool  set  capabilities.  Experience  with 
AIVD  indicates  that  we  have  succeeded  in  meeting  our  goal.  There  is  still  a  long 
way  to  go  before  AIVD  is  a  standard  part  of  every  system  designer’s  toolkit.  In  this 
section,  some  of  the  steps  that  still  need  to  be  taken  to  make  AIVD  reach  its  full 
potential  are  discussed.  These  steps  fall  into  three  categories; 

•  Further  application  of  AIVD  tools. 

•  Enhancements  of  AIVD  tools. 

•  Converting  AIVD  to  a  production  quality  system. 


4.1  Further  Application  of  AIVD  Tools 

RTI  will  continue  to  use  the  AIVD  tools  in  their  current  configuration  in  order  to 
support  its  work  on  the  modeling  of  systems.  Several  projects  will  begin  shortly 
which  will  make  use  of  these  capabilities.  These  projects  range  from  further  work  on 
C^I  systems  for  the  Strategic  Defense  Initiative,  to  fault- tolerant,  distributed  avionics 
systems  for  military  and  commercial  aircraft. 

AIVD  is  designed  to  support  the  use  of  reusable  libraries  of  both  algorithms  and 
architectures.  As  RTI  uses  the  AIVD  tools,  it  will  be  accumulating  design  experience 
in  the  form  of  algorithm  and  architecture  libraries  and  rule  bases  for  using  those 
libraries. 


4.2  Further  Enhancement  of  AIVD  Tools 

Experience  with  AIVD  points  out  the  need  for  more  work  in  developing  these  tools 
to  make  them  more  “user  friendly.”  This  section  describes  some  of  those  techniques. 


4.2.1  Develop  a  System  Experiment  Environment 

Some  of  the  early  design  work  on  AIVD  focussed  on  the  need  for  a  System  Experiment 
Environment  (SEE).  In  keeping  with  the  AIVD  design  approach  of  simplifying  the 
interfaces,  a  very  rudimentary  version  of  an  SEE  was  developed  for  the  AIVD  demo. 
The  demo  uses  VMS  command  files  to  construct  scenarios  for  running  multiple  tools. 


38 


39 

each  in  its  own  window.  While  this  approach  is  sufficient  for  the  demo,  a  full-time  user 
would  prefer  an  integrated  environment,  where  the  equivalent  of  the  command  files  are 
generated  graphically  and  interpreted  interactively.  This  type  of  environment  requires 
extensive  work  in  integrating  the  AIVD  tools  which  were  developed  independently  into 
a  common  user  environment. 

The  SEE  would  support  batch  experiments,  where  the  user  interactively  defines 
a  complete  experiment  a  priori  and  then  submits  the  experiment  definition  to  the 
workstation  operating  system  for  a  batch  run.  The  batch  run  will  produce  the  final 
edited  results  without  intervention  by  the  user.  The  SEE  should  also  support  interac¬ 
tive  experiment  execution  where  the  user  can  monitor  the  experimental  process  and 
modify  the  approach  during  the  middle  of  the  experiment. 

In  order  to  avoid  overwhelming  the  user  with  huge  quantities  of  data,  the  SEE 
should  provide  a  set  of  data  reduction  techniques  which  will  allow  the  user  to  edit  the 
results  from  many  simulations  into  tables  which  contain  critical  results.  These  tables 
can  be  read  by  other  tools  or  plotted  in  formats  readily  accessible  to  the  user. 

4.2.2  Enhance  the  Graph  Transformation  System 

The  current  Graph  Transformation  System  provides  the  user  with  a  powerful  tool  for 
creating  system  data  flow  graphs.  More  experience  is  needed  to  fully  understand  the 
capabilities  and  limitations  of  the  current  tool.  However,  even  at  this  stage  in  its 
use,  there  are  several  parts  of  the  system  which  could  be  improved.  One  is  the  way 
that  the  transformation  process  is  controlled.  Both  the  rule  selection  and  the  match 
and  transform  evaluation  processes  need  to  be  extended.  In  particular,  an  enhanced 
GTS  should  be  able  to  compare  specific  instantiations  of  different  patterns.  Different 
representations  for  higher  level  control  techniques  (i.e.,  the  selection  of  pattern  and 
transformation  sets)  need  to  be  evcduated  and  implemented.  Also,  an  understanding 
of  how  to  define  very  high-level  goals  that  can  be  understood  by  both  the  mapping 
program  and  GTS  needs  to  be  developed. 

An  enhanced  GTS  should  permit  more  interaction  with  the  mapping  tool  and  the 
simulator.  In  particular,  an  enhanced  GTS  should  be  able  to  process  the  same  set 
of  design  goals  and  constraints  that  the  mapping  tool  uses.  Also,  GTS  should  get 
feedback  from  the  mapping  tool  which  will  allow  it  to  generate  graphs  which  more 
accurately  reflect  the  communications  overhead  for  multihop  transmissions. 

Different  pattern  matching  strategies  need  to  be  evaluated  in  order  to  reduce  the 
total  cost  of  pattern  matching  as  part  of  the  transformation  process.  Strategies  which 
are  cost-effective  should  be  implemented. 

Different  mechanisms  for  user  interaction  with  the  GTS  need  to  be  evaluated  so 
that  a  user  can  get  a  better  understanding  of  where  the  transformation  process  stands. 


40 

These  mechanisms  include  the  display  of  the  transformation  status,  the  display  of 
proposed  matches,  and  the  display  of  the  current  transformation  rules. 

An  enhanced  GTS  should  be  able  to  access  static  performance  analysis  capabilities 
that  have  been  developed  for  ADAS.  These  packages  would  allow  GTS  to  estimate 
the  performance  of  an  intermediate  transformed  graph  and  suggest  transformations 
based  on  the  available  performance  information. 

4.2.3  Enhance  the  Software  to  Hardware  Mapping  Program 

More  work  is  needed  in  enhancing  the  ASH  in  order  to  allow  the  user  to  interact  with 
the  ASH  and  in  order  to  allow  the  ASH  to  deal  with  additional  real  world  constraints. 

Further  work  is  needed  to  improve  communications  between  the  ASH  and  the 
GTS.  In  particular,  the  insertion  of  communications  nodes,  which  is  done  by  the 
GTS,  needs  to  be  based  on  information  provided  by  ASH,  including  mapping  in¬ 
formation.  This  could  lead  to  an  iterative  process  where  GTS  and  ASH  are  called 
alternatively  in  order  to  create  a  graph  which  can  be  mapped  properly  and  can  also 
meet  the  performance  modeling  capabilities  which  the  communications  node  libraries 
can  provide. 

Different  mapping  goals  and  constraints  shall  be  investigated  to  determine  if  they 
can  be  used  effectively  in  the  mapping  process.  One  particular  area  of  importance  for 
new  goals  and  constraints  is  in  the  Mea  of  supporting  fault-tolerant  computing.  The 
mapping  program  needs  to  support  constraints  which  require  that  certain  computa¬ 
tions  be  mapped  to  different  fault-masking  groups  of  the  architecture.  These  types 
of  constraints  will  be  developed  and  implemented. 

4.3  Converting  AIVD  to  Product  Quality 

The  current  implementation  of  AIVD  is  a  prototype.  Prolog  was  used  to  provide  rapid 
prototyping  capabilities.  All  of  the  AIVD  tools  should  be  converted  to  C  in  order  to 
allow  portability,  better  performance,  and  compatibility  with  the  other  ADAS  tools. 
The  decision  to  build  AVID  as  a  set  of  loosely  coupled  tools  needs  to  be  reversed 
in  a  product  version.  Finally,  a  great  deal  more  testing  and  better  error  handling 
capabilities  are  needed. 


5.  CONCLUSIONS 


The  goal  of  the  AIVD  effort  was  to  develop  prototype  tools  which  would  use  arti¬ 
ficial  intelligence  techniques  to  extend  the  ADAS  tool  set  capabilities.  Preliminary 
experience  with  AIVD  indicates  that  we  have  succeeded  in  meeting  this  goal.  Feed¬ 
back  at  the  AIVD  demo  indicates  that  many  users  believe  that  AIVD  will  provide 
a  major  increase  in  the  productivity  of  ADAS  users.  This  improvement  in  produc¬ 
tivity  will  arise  from  many  factors.  The  use  of  the  ADL  axid  GTS  will  reduce  the 
amount  of  time  that  users  spend  on  tedious,  repetitive,  ajid  error-prone  steps.  The 
use  of  ADL  and  GTS  to  build  models  will  not  only  reduce  the  work  for  users,  but 
will  also  help  to  document  the  models  that  are  produced.  Furthermore,  the  formal 
documentation  provided  by  the  ADL  descriptions  and  the  rule  bases  will  help  users 
in  verifying  that  the  models  they  build  are  correct.  Finally,  the  ADL  descriptions  and 
GTS  transformations  will  help  maJce  ADAS  models  much  more  reusable.  It  is  in  this 
final  capability  that  the  largest  potential  for  increased  productivity  lies.  However, 
the  greatest  benefits  of  reusability  will  not  be  achieved  until  libraries  of  algorithm 
and  architecture  descriptions  have  been  constructed.  AIVD  provides  some  tools  for 
building  those  libraries,  but  other  projects  will  have  to  populate  them. 

The  AIVD  experience  seems  to  validate  the  development  approach  used  for  this 
project.  A  focus  on  prototypes,  and  a  pattern  of  supporting  multiple  releases  of  only 
two  documents,  rather  than  a  more  formal  development  based  on  freezing  require¬ 
ments,  specifications,  designs,  etc.,  paid  off.  The  use  of  very  simple  interfaces  may 
have  reduced  the  convenience  of  the  tools,  but  it  made  integration  of  the  tools  into  a 
prototype  system  much  easier. 

Finally,  although  AIVD  accomplished  a  lot,  there  is  much  more  that  needs  to 
be  done.  AIVD  defines  a  skeleton  for  algorithm  and  architecture  libraries,  but  did 
not  populate  them.  Further  work  is  needed  in  integrating  the  tools  into  a  System 
Experiment  Environment. 


41 


