Army  Research  Laboratory 
^ 

Impact  of  Cognitive  Architectures  on  Human- Computer 

Interaction 

by  Sidney  C  Smith 


ARL-TR-7092 


September  2014 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  is  unlimited. 


NOTICES 

Disclaimers 


The  findings  in  this  report  are  not  to  be  eonstrued  as  an  oftieial  Department  of  the  Army  position  unless  so 
designated  by  other  authorized  doeuments. 

Citation  of  manufaeturer’s  or  trade  names  does  not  eonstitute  an  oftieial  endorsement  or  approval  of  the  use 
thereof. 


Destroy  this  report  when  it  is  no  longer  needed.  Do  not  return  it  to  the  originator. 


Army  Research  Laboratory 

Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  MD  21005-5067 


ARL-TR-7092 


September  2014 


Impact  of  Cognitive  Architectures  on  Human- Computer 

Interaction 


Sidney  C  Smith 

Computational  and  Informational  Sciences  Directorate,  ARL 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  is  unlimited. 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


Form  Approved 
OMB  No.  0704-0188 


Public  reporting  burden  for  this  collection  of  information  is  estimated  to  average  1  hour  per  response,  including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  data  sources,  gathering 
and  maintaining  the  data  needed,  and  completing  and  reviewing  the  collection  information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  aspect  of  this  collection  of  information, 
including  suggestions  for  reducing  the  burden,  to  Department  of  Defense,  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  Information  Operations  and  Reports  (0704-0188),  1215  Jefferson 
Davis  Highway,  Suite  1204,  Arlington,  VA  22202-4302.  Respondents  should  be  aware  that  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  no  person  shall  be  subject  to  any  penalty  for  failing  to 
comply  with  a  collection  of  information  if  it  does  not  display  a  currently  valid  OMB  control  number. 

PLEASE  DO  NOT  RETURN  YOUR  FORM  TO  THE  ABOVE  ADDRESS. 


2.  REPORT  TYPE 

Final 


1.  REPORT  DATE  (DD-MM-YYYY) 

September  2014 


4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

Impact  of  Cognitive  Architectures  on  Human-Computer  Interaction 


6.  AUTHOR(S) 

Sidney  C  Smith 


3.  DATES  COVERED  (From  -  To) 

January  2014-June  2014 


5a.  CONTRACT  NUMBER 


5b.  GRANT  NUMBER 


5c.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT  NUMBER 


5d.  PROJECT  NUMBER 


5e.  TASK  NUMBER 


5f.  WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

US  Army  Research  Laboratory 
ATTN:  RDRL-CIN-S 

Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  MD  21005-5069 


9.  SPONSORING/MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 

ARL-TR-7092 


10.  SPONSOR/MONITOR'S  ACRONYM(S) 


11.  SPONSOR/MONITOR'S  REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 


12.  DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  is  unlimited. 


13.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

Author  email:  <sidney.c.smith24.civ@mail.mil> 


14.  ABSTRACT 

Researchers  have  been  developing,  using,  and  implementing  cognitive  architectures  in  an  attempt  to  understand  how  humans 
gather,  process,  and  use  information.  Cognitive  architectures  have  been  used  to  advance  the  study  and  application  of  artificial 
intelligence.  They  have  also  been  used  to  predict  human  performance  and,  in  so  doing,  evaluate  user  interfaces.  In  this  report  we 
will  review  the  influence  of  several  cognitive  architectures — specifically,  asking  what  promises  were  made,  what  impacts  were 
realized,  and  what  potential  impact  can  we  reasonably  expect  in  the  future. 


15.  SUBJECT  TERMS 

human-computer  interaction  (HCI),  cognitive  architectures,  ACT-R,  CLARION,  EPIC,  Soar 


16.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF: 

17.  LIMITATION 

OF  ABSTRACT 

18.  NUMBER 

OF  PAGES 

19a.  NAME  OF  RESPONSIBLE  PERSON 

Sidney  C  Smith 

a.  REPORT 

Unclassified 

b.  ABSTRACT 

Unclassified 

c.  THIS  PAGE 

Unclassified 

UU 

18 

19b.  TELEPHONE  NUMBER  (Include  area  code) 

410-278-6235 

11 


Standard  Form  298  (Rev.  8/98) 
Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std.  Z39.18 


Contents 


1.  Introduction  1 

2.  Cognitive  Architectures  Overview  2 

2. 1  The  Atomic  Components  of  Thought-Rational  (ACT-R) .  2 

2.2  CLARION .  3 

2.3  EPIC .  3 

2.4  Soar .  3 

3.  Early  Promises  4 

4.  Applications  of  Cognitive  Architectures  5 

5.  Conclusions  and  Future  Work  6 

6.  References  9 

Distribution  List  12 


iii 


Intentionally  left  blank. 


IV 


1.  Introduction 


Newell  and  Card  observed  a  phenomenon  that  they  related  to  Gresham’s  law,  whieh  states,  “Bad 
money  drives  out  good.’’^  Sir  Thomas  Gresham  notieed  that  the  newer  eoins  were  eonsidered 
more  valuable;  therefore,  they  began  to  disappear  from  eireulation  because  people  would  rather 
pay  with  the  older  coins,  which  were  considered  less  valuable.  Mundell  argues  that  the  expression 
is  backwards  and  should  be  rendered,  “Good  money  drives  out  bad.’’^  I  suppose  it  depends  upon 
whether  the  buyers  or  the  sellers  have  more  control  over  the  currency.  Newell  applies  this  same 
logic  to  science  and  observes  that  “hard  science  drives  out  soft.’’^  Using  three 
examples — Operations  Research,  Human  Factors,  and  Programming  Languages — Newell  and 
Card  illustrate  how  the  hard  sciences  of  linear  programming,  engineering,  and  parsing  have 
relegated  the  soft  sciences  into  the  background.  I  have  seen  this  in  software  engineering,  where 
the  hard  functional  requirements  push  the  soft  nonfunctional  requirements  into  the  background. 
Our  terminology,  functional  versus  nonfunctional,  displays  the  bias.  We  all  agree  that  usability, 
maintainability,  and  security  are  important,  but  since  we  do  not  really  know  how  to  measure  these 
things,  they  take  a  back  seat  to  things  that  we  can  measure. 

Working  as  an  information  assurance  professional  for  10  years,  I  have  found  that  the  progression 
of  security  is  directly  proportional  to  our  ability  to  measure  it.  Newell  and  Card  are  convinced  that 
for  psychology  to  remain  relevant  in  human-computer  interaction  (HCI),  it  must  harden.  Their 
vision  is  for  psychology  to  provide  engineering  style  theory  that  influences  the  design  of 
computer  interfaces.  They  acknowledge  that  there  are  competing  visions.  One  vision  uses 
psychology  primarily  as  an  evaluation  tool.  The  other  vision  provides  an  explanation  where  the 
work  is  done  to  prove  that  the  theory  is  correct  and  not  to  provide  useful  tools  to  designers.  While 
acknowledging  the  value  of  these  visions,  Newell  and  Card  clearly  state,  “They  will  never  beat 
Gresham’s  Law.’’^  Hardening  a  science  is  difficult,  and  Newell  and  Card  acknowledge  four  major 
obstacles  to  realizing  their  vision:  psychology,  as  it  applies  to  computer  interfaces,  is  too  low 
level,  the  scope  is  too  limited,  it  is  too  late,  and  it  is  too  difficult  to  apply.  ^  The  hardest  science  in 
this  space  deals  with  cognitive  architectures  and  makes  use  of  Fitts’s  Law,^  which  provides 
empirical  data  that  may  be  used  to  provide  numbers  that  designers  may  incorporate  into  their 
designs.  Card  et  al.  used  this  kind  of  science  when  they  built  the  Model  Human  Processor  and  the 
Goals,  Operations,  Methods,  and  Selection  (GOMS)  model,  which  they  used  to  investigate  text 
editing  with  a  line  editor  on  a  teletype  machine."^  One  of  the  key  issues  is  that  the  problems 
designers  are  trying  to  solve  are  much  bigger  than  the  problems  researchers  are  investigating. 


1 


Moreover,  the  findings  in  the  researeh  do  not  seale  up  to  solving  the  problems  of  the  designers. 
Newell  and  Card  demonstrate  that  the  average  life  eyele  of  a  user  interfaee  deviee  is  about  20 
years.  By  1985  when  they  had  eompleted  their  work,  teletype  maehines  had  been  replaeed  by 
glass  terminals,  and  line  editors  had  been  replaeed  by  full  sereen  visual  editors.  By  the  time  I 
started  my  eareer  in  1989,  teletypes  where  a  relie  of  the  past,  and  the  only  ones  I  ever  saw  were 
the  eonsoles  of  Digital  Equipment  Corporation  Virtual  Address  extension  DEC  VAX  11-785 
super  minieomputers  that  were  themselves  eonsidered  old  at  the  time.  Beeause  of  the  rapid 
ehanges  in  teehonology,  by  the  time  the  researeh  is  eoneluded  and  the  findings  have  been 
published,  the  results  are  diffieult  to  apply  to  modern  teehnologies. 

In  this  report,  I  will  examine  the  progress  that  has  been  made  sinee  1985  to  diseover  how 
sueeessfully  the  seienee  has  been  hardened  and  gauge  the  realization  of  Newell  and  Card’s  vision. 
In  Seetion  2, 1  will  review  some  of  the  eognitive  arehiteetures  being  used  in  HCI.  In  Seetion  3, 1 
will  outline  some  of  the  early  promises  made  in  this  field.  In  Seetion  4, 1  will  eover  the 
applieations  of  eognitive  arehiteetures.  In  Seetion  5, 1  will  eonelude  by  eomparing  the  promises  of 
Seetion  3  to  the  deliveries  in  Seetion  4. 


2.  Cognitive  Architectures  Overview 


Cognitive  arehiteetures  are  used  to  express  the  psyehologieal  theories  in  a  quantitative  format  to 
drive  the  models  neeessary  to  allow  applieation  designers  to  design  more  usable  systems  and  to 
generate  intelligent  behavior.^  They  are  also  foeused  on  those  aspeets  that  are  eonstant  over  time. 
Eangley  et  al.  related  this  to  a  building,  saying,  “There  is  also  a  direet  analogy  with  a  building’s 
arehiteeture,  whieh  eonsists  of  permanent  features  like  its  foundation,  roof,  and  rooms,  rather  than 
its  furniture  and  applianees,  whieh  one  ean  move  or  replaee.”^  The  goals  of  quantitative  models 
and  intelligent  behavior  are  eomplementary,  and  eaeh  serves  to  mature  or  harden  this  seienee. 
Eangley  et  al.  inelude  brief  summaries  of  18  separate  eognitive  arehiteetures,  but  foeus  on  only 
4.^  In  a  similar  manner  we  will  foeus  on  only  a  few  arehiteetures. 

2.1  The  Atomic  Components  of  Thought-Rational  (ACT-R) 

In  their  book  The  Atomic  Components  of  Thought,  Anderson  and  Eebiere  present  their  ACT-R 
eognitive  model,  whieh  they  elaim  “eonsists  of  a  theory  of  the  nature  of  human  knowledge,  a 
theory  of  how  this  knowledge  is  deployed,  and  a  theory  of  how  that  knowledge  is  aequired.”^ 
ACT-R  is  eomposed  of  modules  that  eommunieate  with  a  eentral  produetion  system  through 


2 


buffers.  The  number  of  modules  is  not  key  to  the  theory,  and  more  may  be  added  as  necessary. 
Theories  and  techniques  have  been  incorporated  from  other  cognitive  architectures  like  Executive 
Process-Interactive  Control  (EPIC)  cognitive  architecture.  The  core  is  the  buffering  to  the  central 
production  system  because  the  central  production  system  may  work  with  only  the  data  that 
currently  reside  in  its  buffers.  Anderson  et  al.  go  to  great  lengths  to  show  how  their  architecture 
maps  to  the  regions  of  the  brain  as  seen  in  integrated  brain  imaging.^ 

2.2  CLARION 

The  CEARION  cognitive  architecture  is  composed  of  four  subsystems:  the 
action-centered-centered  subsystem  (ACS),  the  non- action-centered  subsystem  (NACS),  the 
motivational  subsystem  (MS),  and  the  meta-cognitive  subsystem  (MCS).^  Each  of  these 
subsystems  has  both  an  implicit  and  explicit  representational  structure.  The  ACS  uses  neural 
networks  to  compute  the  quality  of  each  action.  It  then  selects  the  action  with  the  highest  quality. 
There  is  a  Q-learning  algorithm  that  improves  this  assessment  over  time.  The  NACS  provides  the 
memory  for  the  architecture.  MS  sets  the  goals  and  evaluates  whether  the  goal  has  been  achieved. 
The  MCS  monitors  the  system  to  improve  its  cognitive  performance.^ 

2.3  EPIC 

David  Kieras  and  David  Meyer  presented  the  EPIC  cognitive  architecture  and  used  it  to  explore 
human  performance.^  The  EPIC  cognitive  architecture  builds  upon  the  Model  Human  Processor"^ 
and  is  composed  of  a  collection  of  models  of  human  performance,  fashioned  together  by  a 
simplified  theory,  and  tuned  using  performance  information  gathered  from  the  literature.  To 
validate  the  model,  they  used  EPIC  to  examine  common  problems  in  HCI  (e.g.,  choosing  an  item 
from  a  pull-down  menu,  typing  spoken  data,  and  processing  multiple  visual  information  sources). 
Eor  each  of  these  problems  the  predictions  from  EPIC  were  compared  to  actual  human 
performance.^  What  differentiates  EPIC  from  ACT-R  is  that  EPIC  has,  from  the  beginning,  used 
empirical  data  to  provide  constraints  on  the  model,  like  how  long  it  takes  a  human  to  move  a 
hand,  or  the  smallest  area  upon  which  an  eye  may  focus. 

2.4  Soar 

The  Soar  cognitive  architecture  uses  problem  spaces  connected  to  a  production  system  that  uses 
subgoaling  via  impasse  detection,  learning,  and  chunking  to  create  a  model  of  human  thought. 
The  cognitive  architecture  was  built  iteratively  with  new  modules  and  functionality  being  added 
to  almost  every  new  version.  In  2004  Nuxoll  and  Eaird  added  episodic  memory  to  the  Soar 
architecture.^^  In  2008  Eaird  presented  extensions  to  Soar  that  included  nonsymbolic 


3 


representation,  new  learning  mechanisms,  and  long-term  memories.  These  extensions  enable 
working  memory  activation,  reinforced  learning,  emotion,  semantic  memory,  episodic  memory, 
and  visual  imagery.^^  In  2010  Rosenbloom  created  a  variant  of  the  Soar  architecture  based  upon 
graphical  models. 


3.  Early  Promises 


Over  the  years  researchers  investigating  cognitive  architectures  have  identified  the  potential  in 
these  models  to  impact  HCI.  Newell  and  Card  discussed  sound  theories  coming  out  of  cognitive 
architecture  that  would  be  used  by  interface  designers  the  same  way  that  engineers  use  the 
theories  of  physics  to  build  bridges.'  They  also  envisioned  a  design  tool  that  would  have  the 
theories  and  the  quantitative  data  embedded  inside  of  it,  providing  this  capability  to  the  designer 
while  insulating  the  designer  from  it.'  Kieras  and  Meyer  talked  about  using  cognitive 
architectures  to  predict  human  performance  and  to  compare  different  user  interface  approaches.^ 
Langley  et  al.  discussed  using  cognitive  architectures  to  simulate  humans  for  pedagogical  or 
entertainment  purposes.^  Pirolli  asserted  that  psychology  ought  to  be  able  to  answer  questions 
about  how  to  design  application  programs.'"'  In  their  1990  work,  Olson  and  Olson  identified  five 
roles  for  cognitive  architectures:'^ 

1.  Initially  constraining  the  design  space,  so  that  one  does  not  build  an  interface,  for 
example,  that  requires  more  items  to  be  kept  in  memory  than  will  fit  in  working 
memory  (WM). 

2.  Answering  specific  design  decisions,  so  that  one  can  decide,  for  example,  between 
a  dialogue  that  requires  few  keystrokes  but  difficult  retrieval  from  memory  or  one  that 
involves  more  keystrokes  but  is  easier  to  remember. 

3.  Estimating  the  total  time  for  task  performance  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  make 
decisions  about  how  many  people  are  needed  to  staff  the  performance  of  a  repetitive 
operational  task  on  a  computer. 

4.  Providing  the  base  from  which  both  to  calculate  training  time  and  to  guide  training 
documentation  to  help  the  user  determine  in  which  situations  which  method  is  most 
efficient. 

5.  Knowing  which  stages  of  activity  take  the  longest  time  or  produce  the  most  errors, 
in  directing  research  toward  the  aspects  of  human-computer  interaction  that  will  have 
strong  future  performance  implications. 


4 


With  the  exception  of  using  cognitive  architecture  to  simulate  humans,  I  believe  that  their  list 
provides  a  useful  summary  of  the  early  promises  of  cognitive  architectures  to  the  HCI  community. 


4.  Applications  of  Cognitive  Architectures 


In  the  last  30  years  since  Newell  and  Card  published  their  work  on  the  prospects  of  this 
technology,  researchers  have  made  significant  progress.  Space  will  not  permit  an  exhaustive 
summary;  however,  I  have  highlighted  some  of  this  work: 


•  John  and  Vera  were  able  to  use  GOMS  analysis  and  the  Soar  cognitive  architecture  to 
predict  the  behavior  of  an  expert  using  a  highly  interactive  machine-based  graphic  task  (i.e., 
a  video  game)  with  a  60%  success  rate.^^ 

•  Gray  et  al.  used  GOMS  analysis  in  Project  Ernestine  to  compare  the  time  it  took  telephone 
company  operators  to  complete  certain  tasks. This  study  showed  that  the  performance  of  a 
new  workstation  was  actually  slower  than  the  previous  workstation.  Their  theoretical 
findings  were  validated  with  empirical  data.^’ 

•  Byrne  reported  the  work  of  Nelson  et  al.  in  constructing  the  NASA  Test  Director  (NTD) 
simulator  in  NTD-Soar.^^  This  simulation  was  able  to  perform  the  3,000  pages  of  tasks  that 
an  NTD  would  need  to  perform  before  a  launch.  Although  this  simulation  probably  will  not 
be  used  to  launch  spacecraft,  it  could  be  used  to  test  new  interfaces  to  automate  some  of  the 
NTD’s  work.^^ 

•  Chella  et  al.  proposed  a  cognitive  architectural  approach  to  the  solve  problems  with 
artificial  vision  for  an  autonomous  agent. 

•  Huguenard  et  al.  conducted  a  study  of  telephone  menus  and  discovered  that  contrary  to 
prevailing  wisdom,  smaller  menus  do  not  reduce  error  rate.  The  cognitive  architecture 
provided  a  theoretical  explanation  of  why  this  happened. 

•  Sweller  et  al.  described  their  use  of  cognitive  architectures  for  designing  curriculum.^' 

•  Byrne  used  the  ACT-R  cognitive  architecture  to  successfully  predict  human  performance  in 
menu  selection. 


5 


•  Cockburn  et  al.  used  the  Hick-Hyman  and  Fitts’s  law  to  compare  4  different  menu 
technologies:  traditional,  recency,  frequency,  and  adaptive.  They  compared  their  results 
with  empirical  data  and  found  that  they  matched  extremely  well.^^ 

•  Hornof  used  the  EPIC  cognitive  architecture  to  compare  the  performance  of  several 
different  visual  layouts. 

•  Salvucci  successfully  used  the  ACT-R  cognitive  model  to  explain  and  predict  the  effects  of 
distraction  upon  driving  an  automobile.^^ 

•  Magerko  et  al.  used  the  Soar  cognitive  architecture  to  implement  characters  in  a  computer 
game  based  upon  Unreal  Toumament.^^  They  observed  that  every  computer  game  in 
existence  is  proof  that  you  do  not  need  realistic  artificial  intelligence  (Al)  in  the  nonplayer 
characters  (NPCs)  for  the  game  to  be  enjoyable.  They  lamented  that  many  of  the  most 
popular  games  like  Quake  have  very  limited  violent  adversarial  relations  with  the  NPCs, 
which  are  basically  just  “computerized  punching  bags.”^^  Their  goal  is  to  create  a 
nonviolent,  plot  driven  game  that  really  needs  Al  characters.  The  basic  framework  for  this 
game  is  complete,  and  now  they  are  enriching  it  toward  their  ultimate  goal.^^ 

•  Tambe  et  al.  are  using  cognitive  architectures  to  simulate  human  pilots  in  a  battlefield 
simulation.  In  this  work  they  were  preparing  for  the  Synthetic  Theatre  of  War- 1997  exercise 
where  between  10,000  and  50,000  automated  agents  would  work  with  up  to  1,000 
humans. The  results  of  this  exercise  are  documented  by  Laird  et  al.^^ 


5.  Conclusions  and  Future  Work 


To  assess  whether  cognitive  architectures  have  been  able  to  fulfill  their  potential,  in  the  following 
paragraphs,  I  will  take  each  role  as  outlined  by  Olson  and  Olson,  plus  the  promises  of  simulated 
humans,  and  compare  it  against  the  accomplishments  listed  in  Section  3: 

•  Role  #1:  “Initially  constraining  the  design  space,  so  that  one  does  not  build  an  interface,  for 
example,  that  requires  more  items  to  be  kept  in  memory  than  will  fit  in  working  memory 
(WM).”^^  Miller’s  rule  of  7,  plus  or  minus  2,^^  has  made  its  way  into  the  mainstream  of 
interface  design  thinking.  It  is  not  clear  to  me  that  cognitive  architectures  played  a 
significant  role  in  establishing  this  rule;  however,  this  is  clearly  a  case  where  psychology 
has  influenced  interface  design. 


6 


•  Role  #2:  “Answering  specific  design  decisions,  so  that  one  can  decide,  for  example, 
between  a  dialogue  that  requires  few  keystrokes  but  difficult  retrieval  from  memory  or  one 
that  involves  more  keystrokes  but  is  easier  to  remember.”^^  Byrne’s  work  on  menu 
selection,^^  Cockbum  et  al.’s  work  on  menu  technology,^^  and  Hornof ’s  work  on  visual 
layout^"^  show  that  cognitive  architectures  are  indeed  being  used  to  fill  the  role;  however,  it 
seems  that  these  tools  still  have  not  made  their  way  into  the  hands  of  interface  designers. 
When  Tullis  et  al.  were  considering  navigation  architectures  for  a  redesign  of  the  Fidelity 
Regional  Security  &  Operations  Website,  no  consideration  was  given  to  the  information 
gained  from  cognitive  architectures.  They  simply  used  intuition  and  imitation  to  create  6 
navigation  strategies  and  conducted  a  usability  study  to  discover  which  worked  the  best.^° 

•  Role  #3:  “Estimating  the  total  time  for  task  performance  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  make 
decisions  about  how  many  people  are  needed  to  staff  the  performance  of  a  repetitive 
operational  task  on  a  computer.” The  work  of  Gary  et  al.  on  Project  Ernestine 
demonstrates  the  value  of  cognitive  architectures  for  this  purpose. 

•  Role  #4:  “Providing  the  base  from  which  both  to  calculate  training  time  and  to  guide 
training  documentation  to  help  the  user  determine  in  which  situations  which  method  is  most 
efficient.” Sweller  et  al.  demonstrate  that  cognitive  architectures  can  and  have  been  used 
for  this  purpose. 

•  Role  #5:  “Knowing  which  stages  of  activity  take  the  longest  time  or  produce  the  most 
errors,  in  directing  research  toward  the  aspects  of  human-computer  interaction  that  will 
have  strong  future  performance  implications.”'^  Huguenard  et  al.’s  work  with  phone  menus 
demonstrates  how  cognitive  architectures  may  be  used  for  this  purpose. 

•  Role  #6:  Providing  a  simulated  human  in  simulated  environments  for  training  and 
entertainment.  The  work  of  Magerko  et  al.  and  Tambe  et  al.  demonstrates  the  ability  of 
cognitive  architectures  to  fulfill  this  role. 


Although  there  has  been  work  which  demonstrates  that  cognitive  architectures  are  capable  of 
fulfilling  each  of  the  roles  promised  by  early  researchers,  we  are  still  a  long  way  from  the  vision 
Newell  and  Card  described  where  psychology  would  provide  design  principles  that  would  be  used 
by  interface  designers.  Interface  designers  are  still  more  likely  to  use  intuition  and  imitation  to 
complete  their  work  rather  than  consult  psychologist  and  cognitive  models.  This  might  be  the 
time  for  the  technology  to  establish  itself  in  Website  design.  World  Wide  Web  applications  are 
mature  enough  for  the  research  to  be  able  to  provide  relevant  information.  Palmer’s  study  clearly 
indicates  that  more  usable  Websites  have  the  ability  to  generate  more  revenue.^'  Increased 


7 


revenue  may  provide  the  incentive  necessary  to  utilize  this  technology  if  it  were  packaged  in  a 
way  that  was  easy  for  Web  designers  to  use.  I  can  envision  a  virtual  Web  user  similar  to  the  virtual 
NTD  described  earlier  that,  given  a  Website  and  goals,  would  be  able  to  assess  the  usability  of  the 
site  and  provide  some  kind  of  score  and  suggestions  on  improvements.  Over  the  past  few  months, 
I  have  personally  used  10  different  automated  Web  usability  tools,  but  almost  all  of  them  report 
on  compliance  to  the  legal  requirements  to  support  usability  of  disabled  persons.  As  a  later 
refinement,  research  into  the  cultural  aspects  of  Web  design  may  be  incorporated. 


8 


6.  References 


1.  Newell  A,  Card  SK.  The  prospects  for  psychological  science  in  human-computer  interaction. 
Hum.-Comput.  Interact.  1985;l(3):209-242. 

2.  Mundell  R.  Uses  and  abuses  of  Gresham’s  law  in  the  history  of  money.  Zagreb  Journal  of 
Economics.  1998;2(2):3-38. 

3.  Soukoreff  RW,  MacKenzie  IS.  Towards  a  standard  for  pointing  device  evaluation, 
perspectives  on  27  years  of  Fitts’  law  research  in  HCI.  International  Journal  of 
Human-Computer  Studies.  2004;61(6):751-789. 

4.  Card  SK,  Moran  TP,  Newell  A.  The  psychology  of  human-computer  interaction.  Boca  Raton 
(FL):  CRC  Press;  1986. 

5.  Fangley  P,  Faird  JE,  Rogers  S.  Cognitive  architectures:  research  issues  and  challenges. 
Cognitive  Systems  Research.  2009;10(2):141-160. 

6.  Anderson  JR,  Febiere  C.  The  atomic  components  of  thought.  New  York  (NY):  Psychology 
Press;  1998. 

7.  Anderson  JR,  Bothell  D,  Byrne  MD,  Douglass  S,  Febiere  C,  Qin  Y.  An  integrated  theory  of 
the  mind.  Psychological  Review.  2004;111:1036-1060. 

8.  Sun  R.  The  importance  of  cognitive  architectures:  an  analysis  based  on  CFARION.  Journal 
of  Experimental  &  Theoretical  Artificial  Intelligence.  2007;19(2):159-193. 

9.  Kieras  DE,  Meyer  DE.  An  overview  of  the  epic  architecture  for  cognition  and  performance 
with  application  to  human-computer  interaction.  Human-Computer  Interaction. 
1997;I2(4):39I-438. 

10.  Faird  JE,  Rosenbloom  P.  The  evolution  of  the  Soar  cognitive  architecture.  In:  Mind  matters:  a 
tribute  to  Allen  Newell;  Steier  D,  Mitchell  T,  editors.  New  York  (NY):  Psychology  Press; 
2014;  p.  1-50. 

11.  Nuxoll  A,  Faird  JE.  A  cognitive  model  of  episodic  memory  integrated  with  a  general 
cognitive  architecture.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Cognitive 
Modelling,  ICCM  2004;  2004  July  30-August  1;  Pittsburgh,  PA.  p.  220-225. 


9 


12.  Laird  JE.  Extending  the  soar  cognitive  architecture.  Erontiers  in  Artificial  Intelligence  and 
Applications.  2008;  17 1:224. 

13.  Rosenbloom  PS.  Rethinking  cognitive  architecture  via  graphical  models.  Cognitive  Systems 
Research.  2011;  12(2):  198-209. 

14.  Pirolli  P.  Cognitive  engineering  models  and  cognitive  architectures  in  human-computer 
interaction.  In:  Handbook  of  applied  cognition;  Durso  ET,  Nickerson  RS,  Damis  S, 
Eewandoskey  S,  Perfect  TJ,  editors.  West  Sussex,  England:  John  Wiley  &  Sons;  1999.  p. 
441-477. 

15.  Olson  JR,  Olson  GM.  The  growth  of  cognitive  modeling  in  human-computer  interaction 
since  GOMS.  Hum.-Comput.  Interact.  1990;5(2):221-265. 

16.  John  BE,  Vera  AH.  A  GOMS  analysis  of  a  graphic  machine-paced,  highly  interactive  task. 

In:  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Eactors  in  Computing  Systems;  1992  ; 
Monterey,  CA.  CHI  ’92,  New  York,  NY,  USA:  ACM;  1992.  p.  251-258. 

17.  Gray  WD,  John  BE,  Atwood  ME.  Project  Ernestine:  validating  a  GOMS  analysis  for 
predicting  and  explaining  real-world  task  performance.  Human-Computer  Interaction. 
1993;8(3):237-309. 

18.  Byrne  MD.  Cognitive  architecture.  In:  The  human-computer  interaction  handbook: 
fundamentals,  evolving  technologies  and  emerging  applications;  Jacko  JA,  Sears  A,  editors. 
Hillsdale  (NJ):  Eawrence  Erlbaum  Associates  Inc.;  2003;  p.  97-117. 

19.  Chella  A,  Erixione  M,  Gaglio  S.  A  cognitive  architecture  for  artificial  vision.  Artificial 
Intelligence.  1997;89(1):73-111. 

20.  Huguenard  BR,  Eerch  EJ,  Junker  BW,  Patz  RJ,  Kass  RE.  Working-memory  failure  in 
phone-based  interaction.  ACM  Transactions  on  Computer-Human  Interaction  (TOCHI). 
1997;4(2):67-102. 

21.  Sweller  J,  Van  Merrienboer  JJ,  Paas  EG.  Cognitive  architecture  and  instructional  design. 
Educational  Psychology  Review.  1998;  10(3):25 1-296. 

22.  Byrne  MD.  ACT-R/PM  and  menu  selection:  applying  a  cognitive  architecture  to  HCI. 
International  Journal  of  Human-Computer  Studies.  2001;55(l):41-84. 

23.  Cockburn  A,  Gutwin  C,  Greenberg  S.  A  predictive  model  of  menu  performance.  In: 
Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Eactors  in  Computing  Systems;  2007.  San 
Jose,  CA.  p.  627-636. 


10 


24.  Hornof  AJ.  Cognitive  strategies  for  the  visual  search  of  hierarchical  computer  displays. 
Human-Computer  Interaction.  2004;  19(3):  183-223. 

25.  Salvucci  DD.  Modeling  driver  behavior  in  a  cognitive  architecture.  Human  Factors:  The 
Journal  of  the  Human  Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society.  2006;48(2):362-380. 

26.  Magerko  B,  Laird  J,  Assanie  M,  Kerfoot  A,  Stokes  D.  AI  characters  and  directors  for 
interactive  computer  games.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  Sixteenth  Innovative  Applications  of 
Artificial  Intelligence  Conference;  2004  July  27-29;  San  Jose,  CA.  Menlo  Park  (CA):  AAAI 
Press;  2004.  p.  877-883. 

27.  Tambe  M,  Johnson  WL,  Jones  RM,  Koss  F,  Laird  JE,  Rosenbloom  PS, 

Schwamb  K.  Intelligent  agents  for  interactive  simulation  environments.  AI  magazine. 
1995;I6(I):I5. 

28.  Laird  JE,  Coulter  KJ,  Jones  RM,  Kenny  PG,  Koss  L,  Nielsen  PE.  Integrating  intelligent 
computer  generated  forces  in  distributed  simulations:  Tacair-soar  in  STOW-97.  Paper 
presented  at:  Simulation  Interoperability  Workshop.  1998  March  9-13;  Orlando,  PL. 

29.  Miller  GA.  The  magical  number  seven,  plus  or  minus  two:  some  limits  on  our  capacity  for 
processing  information.  Psychological  Review.  1956;63(2):81. 

30.  Tullis  TS,  Connor  E,  LeDoux  L,  Chadwick-Dias  A,  True  M,  Catani  M,  Investments  P.  A 
study  of  website  navigation  methods.  Paper  presented  at:  Usability  Professionals  Association 
Conference.  2005  June  27-July  1;  Montreal,  Quebec. 

31.  Palmer  JW.  Web  site  usability,  design,  and  performance  metrics.  Information  Systems 
Research.  2002;  13(2):  15 1-I67. 

32.  Luna  D,  Peracchio  LA,  de  Juan  MD.  Cross-cultural  and  cognitive  aspects  of  web  site 
navigation.  Journal  of  the  Academy  of  Marketing  Science.  2002;30(4):397-410. 

33.  Kralisch  A,  Eisend  M,  Berendt  B.  Impact  of  culture  on  website  navigation  behaviour.  In: 
Proceedings  of  the  Ilth  International  Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interation;  2005  ;  Las 
Vegas,  NV.  Lawrence  Erlbaum  Associates,  Inc.;  2005. 


II 


1  DEFENSE  TECHNICAL 
(PDF)  INFORMATION  CTR 

DTIC  OCA 

2  DIRECTOR 

(PDF)  US  ARMY  RESEARCH  LAB 
RDRL  CIO  EL 

IMAL  HRA  MAIL  &  RECORDS  MGMT 

I  GOVT  PRINTG  OFC 
(PDF)  A  MALHOTRA 

I  DIR  USARL 
(PDF)  RDRL  CIN  S 
S  SMITH 


12 


