DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 329 452 SO 021 063 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



Holland, Simon 

Artificial Intelligence, Education and Music: The Use 

of Artificial Intelligence To Encourage and 

Facilitate Music Composition by Novices. 

Open Univ., Walton, Bletchley, Bucks (England), Inst. 

of Educational Technology. 

CITE-88 

Jul 89 

305p, 

Reports - Lescriptive (141) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC13 Plus Postage. 

"Artificial Intelligence; Cognitive Processes; 
Cognitive Psychology; Computer Science; Computer Uses 
in Education; Educational Research; "Educational 
Technology; Educational Theories; "Musical 
Composition; "Music Education; Music Theory 
Harmony 



ABSTRACT 

The goal of this project was to find ways of using 
artificial intelligence to encourage and aid music composition by 
musical novices, particularly those without traditional musical 
skills. Two complementary approaches are presented. In the first 
approach. Harmony Space, a new kind of direct manipulation tool for 
music, is described. Two recent cognitive theories of harmony 
demonstrated how to design Harmony Space, with the expressivity to 
allow novices to sketch, analyze, modify, and compose harmonic 
sequences simply and clearly by moving two-dimensional patterns on a 
computer screen linked to a synthesizer. An investigation with a 
small number of subjects showed that Harmony space considerably 
reduces the prerequisites required for novices to learn about, 
sketch, analyze, and experiment with harmony — activities that would 
normally be very difficult without considerable theoretical knowledge 
or instrumental skill. The second approach described is a 
knowledge-based tutoring system to help novices use an interface to 
compose chord sequences; this system is in the developmental stage. 
It is argued that traditional, remedial intelligent tutoring systems 
approaches were inadequate for tutoring in domains that require 
open-ended thinking. The foundation of a new approach is developed 
based on the exploration and transformation of case studies described 
in terms of chunks, styles, and plans. This approach draws on the 
characterization of creativity of Johnson-Laird (1988). Programs have 
been implemented to illustrate the feasibility of key parts of the 
new approach. (Author/DB) 



" Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
* from the original document. 



SCOPE OF INTEREST NOTICE 



The fcRtC Facility hog attiondd 
thu documant for procsttlnp 





In out ludgment, Ihis documon{ 
n ado of intoraat to th« Clear 
inyhouaes noted to tho right 
Indexing should rofloct thoir 
Apeciai poiniG of view 



Centxe for Infonmtion 
Technology in Educadon 

Artificial Intelligence, Education and Music 

The use of Artificial Intelligence to encourage and facilii 
music composition by novices 

® Simon Holland 
CITE Report No. 88 




UJi OePARTMf NTOF EDUCAriON 




r IMK '.ru JlviAl MJ ':vOUMCJ S iMffWM/MION 





I'1-I^I>'ISSI0N fC rltP^KjOULJ; THIS 

WATtniAi riAS Wt i N •:',mamt:-.o i3Y 





Institute ot Bducbtkmal TocluioU^y 
OpenUnivmity 
Walton HaU 
Milton Keynes 



IIV^ORMAHON CL-Nff.H (I- F^ICi" 



Great Britain 
MK76AA 




Artificial Intelligence, Education and Music 

The use of Artificial Intelligence to encourage and facilitate music 
composition by novices 



Simon lioUand 

MSc Cognition, Computing and Psychology, University of Warwick, 1985 
BSc Mathematics, UnivvTsity of Reading, 1976 



Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Artificial Intelligence 
The Open University, Milton Keynes 

July 1989 



© Simon Holland 



Abstract 



The goal of the research described in this thesis is to find ways of using artificial 
intelligence to cncourai^e and facilitate music composition by musical novices, 
particularly tho^e without traditional musical skills. Two complementary approaches 
are presented. 

We show how two recent cognitive theories of harmony can be used to design a new 
kind of direct manipulation tool for music, known as "Harmony Space", with the 
expressivity to allow novices to sketch, analyse, modify and compose harmonic 
sequences simply and clearly by moving two-dimensional patterns on a computer 
SCTeen Unker to a synthesizer. Harmony Space provides novices with a way of 
c escribing and controlling harmonic structures and relationships using a single, 
principled, uniform spatial metaphor at various musical levels; note level, interval 
level, chord level, harmonic succession level and key level. A prototype interface has 
been implemented to demonstrate the coherence and feasibility of the design. An 
investigation with a sinall number of subjects demonstrates that Harmony Space 
considerably reduces the prerequisites required for novices to learn about, sketch, 
analyse and experiment with harmony - activities that would normally be very 
difficult for them without considerable theoretical knowledge or instrumental skill. 

The second part of the thesis presents work towards a knowledge-based tutoring 
system to help novices using the interface to compose chord sequences. It is argued 
that traditional, remedial intelligent tutoring systems approaches are inadequate for 
tutoring in domains that require open-ended thinking. The foundation of a new 
approach is developed based on the explw^ition and ttansformation of case studies 
described in terms of chunks, styles and plans. This approach draws on a 
characterisation of creativity due to Johnson-Laltxi (1988). Programs have been 
implemented to illustrate the feasibility of key parts of the new approach. 



Dedication 



To Caroline, Simon, Peter, and my Mother and Father 
with all my love 



Acknowledgments 



Thanks to my supervisor, Mark who has bont the brunt of the lunacy, the 
diversions, the modal harmonic ostinati, and kept me on planet earth throughout. 
Mark provided much needed support. He also provided an inspiring and energetic 
example of how to do outstanding research in Artif ^-ial Intelligence and Education. 
Without Mark's assured expertise in AI and his practical musicianship, I would not 
have had the confidence to start research in AI and Music. 

This work would not have been started (or completed in a reasonable time scale) 
without Tim O'Shca, my co-supervisor. At the beginning, Tim found a simple way 
to get me to overcome my own doubts about tackling this challenging, 
interdisciplinary subject. At countless critical points, Tim solved practical difficulties 
and found just the right few words to motivate me. In the last few weeks before 
submission, Tim displayed exceptional generosity, horse sense, humour, 
intelligence and creativity. Tim invented ways of cutting the anwunt of work to do in 
half. He patiently and humorously picked garbage out of faxed drafts in the middle 
of the night, (The remaining garbage is due to my own cussedness). Tim is a first 
rate researcher and nurturcr of uscarch, but, more rarely, he ii; also a generous and 
open person. 

I would like to thank Mark Steedman for his suggestion that Longuet-Higgins' 
theory might be a good area to explore for educational applications. 

I would like to record my gratitude to George Kiss, a fine researcher and a 
conscientious teacher for being my mentor when I began Artificial Intelligence 
research. 

Thanks to Claire O'Malley, who was supportive and generous in the last, crucial, 
phase of the write up, at a tin^e when she had much more pressing demands on her 
time. I would like to thank people who gave their time to read drafts of the thesis, 
producing vital improvements; Peter Dcsain, Henkjan Honing and Sara Hennessey. 
Thanks to Fiona Spensley, Alistair Edwards, Mike Baker, John Sloboda, Trevor 
Bray and Mark Steedman for feedback on particular chapters or earlier drafts. 
Special thanks are due to Simon Bento for doing a wonderful job on proof-reading 
(any finally escaped typos are my fault - 1 look forward to reading Simon's thesis). 
Special thanks to Barry Jones for very kindly taking time to rescue me from various 
musical errors. 

Thanks to Chris Fry, Kevin Jones and Tom Green who generously took time to give 
me useful pointers when I was getting in started in AI and Music. Thanks for 
encouragement, useful discussions, support and shared joy from other researchers 
in AI and music and other (more or less) related fields; Dave Levitt, Henry 
Liebcrman, folk at the Media Lab; Peter Dcsain, Henkjan Honing, Sterling 
Beckwith, David Wessel, Lelio Camilleri, Linda Sorisio, Christopher Longuet- 
Higgins, Jeanne Bamberger, Wally Fcurzcig, Gerald Balzano, Mike Baker, Eric 
Clarke, Ian Cross, Stephen Pope, Mira Balaban, Kemal Ebcioglu, Rick Ashley, 

Er|c Iv . 



Derek Ludwig (and others at NcnhWestem); Colin Wells, Nigel Morgan, Keith 
Waters, Anders Friberg, Lennart Fahlcn, Steve McAdams, Xavier Rodet, Jean 
Baptiste Barri6rc and others at IRCAM; Mirilyn Taft Thomas, Roger Dannenberg 
and folk at Carnegie Mellon; Stellan Ohlsson, Jeff Bonar and others at LRDC; Alan 
Boming, Bill Gaver, Fred Lcrdahl, Alan Marsden, Stephen Page, Mike 
Grcenhough, Christoph Lischka, Neil Todd, Tony Watkins, Simon Emmerson and 
Pete Howell. 

Thanks for strong practical and moral support to Eileen Scanlon, Diana Lauriliard, 
Pete Whalley, Sterling Beckwith, Nancy Marlett, Rachel Hewson, Richard Southall, 
and Jayalaksmi. 

Special thanks to Olwyn Wilson, Dave Wakely (watch out. National Sound 
Archive), Tony Durham, Conrad Cork, Phil Butcher, Dianne Murray, Steve Cook, 
Mike Brayshaw, Di Mason, Pat Cross and Rick Evertsz. 

Thanks for various kinds of help and encouragement to Pat Fung, Fiona Spensley, 
Anne Blandford, Norman White, Gordon Burt, Nicola Durbridgc, Kathy Evans, 
Rae Sibbitt, Roshni Devi, Laurence Alpay, Rod Moysc, Betty Swift, Kate Stainton- 
EUis, Beryl Crooks, Anne Wood, Margaret Harkin, Helen Boyce, Arthur Stutt, 
John Domingue, Tony Hascmer, Tim Rajan, Marc Eiscnstadt, Hank Kahney, Don 
Clarke, Yibing Lee, Ann Jones, John Close, Richard Joiner, Bradley, Ed Lisle, 
Mike Fox Jitu Patcl, Dave Kay, Simon Nuttall, Phil Swann, Benedict Heal, Hansa 
Solanki, aad all in the Centre for Information Technology in Education, the Institute 
for Educational Technology, the Computer- Aided Learning Research Group and the 
Human Cognition Research Laboratory. 

Thanks to various musicians who helped: Herbert Balsam, Martin Brems, Tony 
Jefferics, Jonathan Brown, Grant Shipcott, Sean Graham, John Winter, Guillame 
Ormond, John Walsh, John Close, Mike Baker, Rod Moyse, John Bickersteth, 
Fred de Borst, Gerda Koetje, Dave Gollancz, Richard Middleton, Donald Burrows, 
Rev. Cousins, Dean Lloyd, Frank Hawkins and Chris Clark. 

I owe a considerable typographical debt to Rob Waller and Rachel Hewson. 

Emergency squad: very big thanks to Simon Bento, Pete Whalley (not for the first 
time), Claire O'Malley, Katerine Bielaczyc, Tom Vincent and Aileen Treacy. 

Utterly final emergency squad: Tim O'Shea, Claire O'Malley, Simon Bento, Sara 
Hennessy, Rae Sibbitt, Roshni Devi, Benedict Nugroho Budi Priyanto, Dana 
Sensuse, Bill Ball, Claudine and the security team. A special thank you to Dave 
Perry for help at this time. 

Thanks to the experimental subjects for their hard work. 

Thanks to Peter Mennim, Anne, Gerry, Rachel, Christine, Lindsay, Noleen, 
Sinead, Ainc, Steven Brown, Richard Wrigley and Penelope for injecting a little 
sanity. 



ERIC 



Bill Harpc, Wendy Harpc, Stevie Smith, Martin Brems, Judy Bates, Sally Morris, 
Niel, Stephen Knox, Eddie Tagoc, Rie Toft Hansen and Vivi Mitts for alternative 
reality training and companionship. 

Typhun, Bcyhan and Dr. Torsun for initial encouragement. 

Thanks and apologies to those who accidentally aren't thanked properly by name. 

Big thanks to Lydia, Tina, Howard, Ralph, Claire, Phillipa, Andrew, Thomas, Jo, 
Ursula, Christine, Barbara, Sharon, Phillip (first novice Harmony Space user), 
David, Francis, Julie and all of the family. 

The most heartfelt thanks of all are due to my wife Caroline. This research would 
not have been possible at all without her sustained love, support, sympathy, humour 
and help. Lots of love. 

Thanks to my sons Simon and Peter for love, help, fun, education and for 
reminding me that there are things infinitely more important than research. Big hugs. 

Thanks to my mother and the memory of my father. Both are fine musicians and 
exceptional people whom I love, admire and respect deeply. Lots of love. 

This research was supported by ESRC studentship C(X)428525025. The OU 
research committee gave an equipment grant. lET gave a study extension. These are 
all gratefully acknowledged. 




VI 



Contents 



PART 1 INTRODUCnON 

Chapter 1 Introduction 

1 The problem 

2 General af^roach 

3 Relevance for ITS in domains other than music 

4 Timeliness 

5 Roots of the research 

6 Strucmrc of the thesis 

Chapter 2 Early uses of computers in teaching music 

1 Computer-aided instruction in music education 

2 Music Logos 

3 Tools for the student 

4 Interactive gnqjhic music games 

5 Conclusions on early approaches 

Chapter 3 The musician-machine interface 

1 The importance of the interface 

2 General strategies for designing good interfaces for novices 

3 MMI meets HCI - a two way traffic 

4 Intelligent Instruments 

5 MMI in music education 

6 Conclusions on the musician-machine interface 

Chapter 4 Intelligent Tutoring systems for music composition 

1 A role for the 'traditional' ITS model in music composition 

2 Vivace: an expert system for harmonisation 

3 Mac Voice: a critic for voice-leading 

4 Lasso: an intelligent tutcning system for 16th century count rpoint 

5 Conclusions on intelligent tutors for music composition 

6 Related woric in other fields 

7 Conclusions on tlie use of computers in teaching music 



vii 



Contents 



PART U HARMONY SPACE 

Chapter 5 Harmony Space 

1 Longuet-Higgins' theory of hannony 

2 The 'statics' of harmony 

3 A computer-based learning environment 

4 Representing harmonic succession 

5 Analysing music Liiormally in Harmony Space 

6 Conclusions 

Chapter 6 Adapting Longuet-Higgins' theory for Harmony Space 

1 Lx)nguet-Higgins' non-repeating space 

2 Comparison of the two Longuet-Higgins' spaces 

3 Direct manipulation 

4 Use of the 12-fold representation in Harmony Space 

5 Conclusions 

Chapter 7 Harmony Space using Balzano's Theory 

1 Balzano's theory of Harmony 

I Review of design decisions 

3 Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 

4 Expressi'/ity of a version of Harmony Space based on thirds space 

5 Analysing a chord progression in the thirds space 

6 Relationship between the alternative Harmony Space designs 

7 Implementation of Harmony Space 

8 Some educational uses of Harmony Space 

9 Intended users of the tool 

10 Related interfaces 

I I Limitations and further work 
12 Conclusions 



ERIC 



vm 



Contents 



PART in TOWARDS AIn INTELLIGENT TUTOR FOR MUSIC COMPOSITION 

Chapter 8 An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music 
composition 

1 Introduction 

2 Tutoring in open-ended creative domains 

3 Architecture of a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

3.1 An interaction style: the 'Paul Simon' method 

3.2 Representation of pieces 

3.3 Representation of styles 

3.4 Musical plans 

4 ITS perspectives on the framework 

5 Partial implementation of MC 

6 Further work: supporting active teaching strategies. 

7 Problems and limitations. 

8 Summary and conclusioits 

PART IV CONCLUSIONS 

Chapter 13 Novices experiences with Harmony space 

1 Introduction 

2 Method 

3 Session 1: YB: harmonic analysis by mechanical methods 

4 Session 2: BN: an eight year old's experience with Harmony Space 

5 Session 3: RJ: virtuoso visual performance 

6 Session 4: HS: analysing Mozart's Ave Verum 

7 Session 5: LA: putting it together and making sense of the sounds 

8 Conclusions 

9 Extensions 

10 Further work 



Chapter 14 Conclusions; and further work 

1 Contribution 

2 Criticisms and limitations 

3 Further work 



ERIC 



References 



Appendices 

1 Harmony Space Prototype implementation 

2 Harmony Space notional interface 

3 Chord symbol conventions 



TABLE OFnGURES 



Chapter 2 

Fig 1 Guido intervals program 

Fig 2 Guido melody program 

Fig 3 Guido chord quality program 

Fig 4 Guido harmony program 

Fig 5 Guido rhythm program 

Fig 6 Fast regular beat 

Fig 7 Slow regular beat 

Fig 8 "London Bridge is falling down" 

Fig 9 "London Bridge is falling down" (with pulse) 

Fig 10 "London Bridge is falling down" (with pulse & linked trace) 

Fig 1 1 Lamb's interactive graphics game: initial set up 

Fig 12 Player draws a curve 

Fig 13 Curve is straightened to preserve Icft-to-right flow 

Fig 14 Computer changes carve into discrete notes 

Fig 15 Circled notes are to be transformed 

Fig 16 Notes to be transformed are displayed as hollow triangles 



Chapter 3 

Fig 17 Musician/scOTcAinstrument relationship 1 

Fig 18 Musician/score/instrument relationship 2 

Fig 19 Musician/scOTe/instrument relationship 3 

Fig 20 Blank working screen for Hookup 

Fig 21 Hookup with various icons waiting to be hooked up 

Fig 22 A Hookup progr m to play chord progressions 

Fig 23 A typical 'M' screen 

Fig 24 Jam Factory 



Chapter 4 

Fig 25 Mac Voice 



Conienus 



Chapter 5 

Fig 1 Longuet-Higgins' note array 

Fig 2 12-fold version of Longuet-Higgins note array 

Fig 3 Triads in 12-fold space 

Fig 4 Scale-tone sevenths in 12-fold space 

Fig 6 Cycles of fifths in 12-fold space 

Fig 7 A scalic progression 

Fig 8 A chromatic progression 

Fig 9 Diatonic cycles of thirds 

Fig 10 Movement in major thirds unconstrained by key 

Fig 1 1 Movement in minor thirds unconstrained by key 

Fig 12 Table of intervals in 12-fold space 

Fig 13 Chord progression of "All the Things You Are" in the 1 2-fold 
space 

Chapter 6 

Fig 1 Longuet-Higgins original non-repeating space 

Fig 2 VI triad in the non-repeating space 

Fig 3 n triad in the non-repeating space 

Fig 4 Triads in C major in the non-repeating space 

Fig 5 Comparison of chromatic progressions in the non-repeating and 

12-fold spaces 

Chapter 7 

Fig 1 The semitone space 

Fig 2 The fifths space 

Fig 3 Steps of tones and tritones 

Fig 4 Steps of major thirds and minor thirds 

Fig 5 Diatonic scale embedded in fifths space 

Fig 6 Balzano's thuds space 

Fig 7 Harmony Space using thirds representation 

Fig 8 Triads in the thirds space 

Fig 9 Scale tone sevenths in the thinJs space 

Fig 10 Trajectories down the fifths axis in the thirds space 

Fig 11 Scalic trajectories 

Fig 12 Chromatic trajectCMries 

Fig 13 Trace of "All The Things You Are" in the diirds space 
Fig 14 Screen dump firom Harmony Space prototype 
Fig 15 Longuet-Higgins' Light organ 
Fig 16 Harmony Grid 

ERIC ^ , 



Contents 



Fig 17 Music Mouse 



Chapter 8 

Fig 1 General architecture of proposed tutoring system 

Fig 2 Kinds of domain knowledge in MC architecture 

Fig 3 Chord sequence of Randy Crawford's (1978) "Street Life" 

Fig 4 A version of "Abracadabra" (The Steve Miller band, 1984) 

Fig 5 "Abracadabra" under assembly - motor rhythm stage 

Fig 6 "Abracadabn" reconstructed in seven chunks 

Fig 6a Major version of "Abracadabra" 

Fig 6b Version of "Abracadabra" in ninths 

Fig 6c Version of "Abracadabra" with chord alphabet restriction lifted 
Fig 6d Version of "Abracadabra" with new harmonic trajectory direction 
Fig 7 A prototypical reggae accompaniment pattem 
Fig 8 A prototypical Fats Dcmiino pattern 

Fig 9 Tree of songs instantiating the "return home conspicuously" plan 

Fig 10 First eight bars of "All the things you are" 

Fig 1 1 Example modal replanning of "All the things you are" 



Chapter 9 

Fig 1 Harmony Space with chord function labelling 
Fig 2 Harmony Space with semit(Hie number labelling 
Fig 3 Harmony Space with alphabet name labelling 



Chapter 10 

Fig 1 Suggested Harmony Space metric display 

Fig 2 Assessing the harmonic resources of the pentatonic scale 



ERIC 



Chapter 1: Introduction 



The goal of this rcsear'-*' is to find ways of using artificial intelligence to encourage 
and facilitate the composition of music by novices, particularly those without 
traditional skills. It will be argued that the research also has implications for 
intelligent tutoring systems in general, because the fostering of open-ended 
approaches is relevant to any sufficiently complex domain (e.g. engineering design, 
architectural design, etcetera). 

1 The ^vio'^ilem 

Th 5 goal of nusic composition can vary from composer to composer and occasion 
to occasion and cannot normally be stated precisely beforehand. Almost the only 
goal that applies to music composition in general is "compose something interesting" 
(Levitt, 1985). The original focus of the research was on novices who have little or 
no formal education in music, and are teaching themselves, perhaps with the help of 
their friends, outside a formal educational setting. As Camilleri (1987) points out in 
a critical review of an earlier report on part of this research (Holland, 1987a), this 
aim fits well with the general educational orientation of the institution which has 
supported the research (the Open University). Following this ori ginal aim, our 
illustrations and vocabulary are drawn predominantiy from popular music and jazz, 
since it seems good educational practice to focus on music that is highly motivating 
to potential students. In fact, it turns out that most of tiic work is equally applicable 
to western tonal music in general. 

2 General Approach 

2.1 Introduction to the approach 

Much of the current work in open-ended computer-based learning environments still 



1 



Chapter 1 : Introductioji 



draws its inspiration ultimately from work on the Logo project (Papert, 1980). Logo 
is a programming language that attempts to link, amongst other things, the idea of a 
function to a child's intuitions about her own body movement. The validity of the 
claims made for the educational effectiveness of Logo are now hotly contested (see, 
for example, Kurland, Pea, Clement and Mawby (1986)). However, it can at least 
be claimed with some justice that Logo bears a special relationship to mathematics 
due to the more or less central role played by the mathematical function in both 
mathematics (Kasner and Newman, 1968) and Logo (Hayes and Sutherland, 1989). 
In many other domains, such as music, it is far less clear that functional application 
is a particularly appropriate metaphor. When designing an exploratory microworld 
for some new domain, we advocate that metaphors or formalisms should be sought 
that lie at the heart of that particular domain in order to be given appropriate 
computational embodiment. This advocated approach, which we will illustrate in 
Part II contrasts with the more 'traditional' microworld approach of addressing a 
non-mathematical domain by adding superficial, domain-specific facilities to a Lisp- 
like programming language. 

2.2 Developing a learning environment appealing to intuitions in several modalities 

Another source of power in microworlds can arise from linking a domain metaphor 
to simple intuitions in many modalities (sound, gesture, animation etc.). The 
learning environment for harmony discussed in part II of the thesis links cognitive 
theories of harmony at a number of levels to intuitions in three modalities; visual, 
auditory and body movement This learning environment uses the cognitive theories 
to make abstract harmonic concepts concrete and manipulable. This allows abstract 
concepts to be treated in a computer -based environment using all the advantages of 
direct manipulation methods (Shneidcrman, 1982), (O'Malley, in press). 

2.3 The need for new intelligent tutoring systems approaches in domains that 
demand creative behaviour 

One of the most interesting consequence of the choice of domain from an intelligent 
tutoring systems (often abbreviated to 'ITS') point of view is that it is inappropriate 
for the system to be directly prescriptive or critical. There already exist a number of 



ERIC 



2 



Chapter 1: Introduction 



rule-based intelligent tutOx& for music composition which have a prescriptive and 
critical style. For example, Stephen Ncwcomb's (1985) LASSO is a tutor for a 
paradigm or style of music known as 16lh Century Counterpoint, and Marilyn Taft 
Thomas's (1985) MacVoice is an intelligent tutor for a musical task known as voice 
leading - which is part of the related task of four-pan harmonisation. Both of these 
pioneering musical Intelligent Tutoring Systems are prescriptive and critical and it is 
appropriate for their particular domains that they should use tliis approach. Why tlien 
could not a tutor for f ^j^ular music composition be prescriptive in the same way? 
The answer is that 16th Century Counterpoint and four part harmonisation ai e 
genres that (as taught in schools) can be considered to have stable and known rules, 
goals, constraints and bugs.^ In the case of popular music it might be possible to 
write a series of distinct expert components for a range of genres or paradigms of 
composition but this would not satisfactorily address the problem. This is 
particularly so in the case of self educators driven by personal motivation rather than 
a need to satisfy an examination or course requirement. The reasons for this are 
twofold. Firstly, genres in popular culture arc still rapidly evolving from a rich set 
of background genres. A new song can easily combine features, rules and goals 
from genres not previously mixed. Designing a series of expert components that 
could pcrspicaciously characterise each genre or paradigm, be freely interchangeable 
and clearly exhibit inter-relationships between the styles, remains an unresolved 
research problem. Secondly, any new piece of music worth its salt invents new 
rules, goals and constraints specifically for that piece, and may consequently violate 
some rules normally expected of the genre. In this constantly evolving domain it is 
hard to see how any intelligent tutoring system could know enough to be 
prescriptive or critical without the risk of misunderstanding all the most innovative 
and interesting ideas. 

If we are claiming that a prescriptive or critical style is not appropriate for the 
domain, does this mean that we are limited to a non-directed microworld or 
environment approach? To the contrary, we will argue that microworlds arc useful 
for such tasks, but that they need complementing with other ITS approaches. 

^ This is an over-simplificatioii because as we will note in chapter 4, work on formal models of 
musical processes has shown that text book niles arc grossly inadequate - but the assumption of a 
stable, understood style is often made by educators. 



Chapter I: Introduction 



2.4 k framework for individually relevant guidance 

An important issue in the design of microworlds is the issue of providing 
individually relevant guidance. For example, the music microworld Music Logo 
(Bamberger, 1986), comes with a well-written manual containing graded work 
sheets. Anyone, novice or expert who worked through the book would leam a lot 
about music or see it anew fr^m a fresh angle - but the issue of educaiionally 
exploiting individual differences in areas of nwtivation and ability is not considered. 
In a schtwl context, this is easily addressed - the teacher can consider each 
individual's special interests and point them to different worksheets in different 
orders. She can suggest modified versions of the exercisesi to take into account likes 
and dislikes - so maximising motivation. In the case of a self-educator, opportunitiCw^ 
are missed to greatly accelerate the learning prcx^ess and fuel motivation. 

25 Broad architecture of a tutor for music composition 

Given that ve cannot be overtly presaiptive in our domain but want to open up the 
possibility of tackling the issue of providing individually relevant guidance, how can 
we proceed, since neither the open-ended microworld appmach nor the traditional 
interventionist tutoring approach is adequate for both purposes? In broad tc^rms, our 
answer is to use a non-prescriptive knowledge-based tutor linked to one or more 
musical microworlds. The point of such an architecture is that the knowledge base 
could provide abstract knowledge and individizaliy relevant guidance tor exploring 
the microworlds, £md the microworlds give principled visual and gestural alternative 
representations to auditoi7 experience and predominaTitly textual, oonc^ ptual 
knowledge. This kind of approach coincides with the broad framework of Guided 
Discovery Learning, proposed by Elsom-Cook (1984) as a framework for 
combining the l)enefits of learning environments with those of interventionist tutors. 
Broadly speaking, Guided Discovery Learning methodology proposes the 
framework of providing a microworld in which discovery leartiing can take place, 
integrated witii a tutor that is capable of executing teaching strategies that range from 
an almost completely non-interventionist approach to highly reginicrited strategies 
that give the tutor a much larger degree of control than the smdent. The place of the 



Chapter l; introduction 



ITS architecture of this project within the Guided Discovery Learning paradigm is 
discus: in Holland tnd Elsom-Cook (in press). Of course, Guided Discovery 
Learning does not in itstlf solve the problem of tutoring in open-ended domains as 
oudiiied earlier, but it does give a fraraework for combining discovery learning in a 
computer environm*5nt with the provision of individually relevant guidance. 

Fountidlioxis for a new tutoring approach for open-ended domains are developed 
base<.l on the explof aon and transwnnation of case studies described in terms of 
chunks, stj^Ies at^d plans. This apprcwch diaws on a characterisation of creativity due 
to Johwscn-Laird (1.988), Interventionist teaching stimtegies for providing 
individual^ relevant guidance are not presented in the thesis. The new tutoring 
framework looks very well suited to supporting a wide range of active teaching 
strategies but the work is concentrated on finding solutions for tlie core problems 
that had to be solved to make a tutor possible at all: the devising of ways of 
chaiacterising strategic considerations about chord sequences in ways that are both 
suitable to the modelling of creative processes and at the same time potentially 
communicable to novices. Although a fully implemented tutoring system is not 
described, programs lo illustrate the feasibility of key parts of the new approach 
have been implemented. One of the main techniques developed is to describe chord 
seqiiences in terms of plans and manipulate the plans using a musical planner, which 
we will now discuss. 

2.6 Complementing microworld representations with abstract knowledge 

A major issue related to the issue of individually relevant guidance (and one that 
microworld approaches in general have only i-ecently started to tackle) is the issue of 
providing abstract knowledge to complement direct experience and to guide 
exploration of the domain. The need for this can be illustrated in the case of music 
composition as follows. Music composition is alx)ut more than just familiarity with 
raw musical materials and the way they are perceived. When we listen to any piece 
of music, we are influenced by ex|te.ctations based on otlier pieces of music, and by 
styles that we already know. To explore effectively ways of using the raw 
materials, we need some way of miating them to musical knowledge about existing 
works, styles and sensible musical behaviour in general. We introduce a new way 

5 



Chapter 1: Introduction 



of characterising abstract knowledge about harmonic sequences called "musical 
plans", to try to make explicit plausible reasons why existing pieces use raw 
materials in the way they do, and to characterise a range of common intelligent 
musical behaviors. Musical plans suggest various ways of organising raw musical 
materials to satisfy various common musical goals. 

3 Relevance for ITS in domains other than music 

Almost all work in intelligent tutoring systems up until now has been restricted to 
domains such as arithmetic, electronics, physics and programming in which there 
are clear-cut goals and in which it is relatively easy to test formally if ? solution is 
right or not. In domains demanding creative behaviour, on the othe* .land, goals 
may not be precisely definable before the event, and "good" solutions may be very 
hard to identify formally. We will argue that existing ITS approaches are inadequate 
for such domains, and that finding ITS methodologies for dealing with open-ended 
domains of this nature is an important task for ITS as a whole. Tutoring creative 
bchaviou • cannot be dismissed as being relevant to only a handful of "unusual" 
domains; to the contrary, this issue is of central concern if intelligent tutoring 
systems are ever to progress beyond highly restricted domains into real worid areas 
with less well-defined goals and methods. We can postulate that in any knowledge- 
rich domain with a sufficiently large search space, searching the space can be treated 
as an open-ended creative task. Any domain at all, even arithmetic, electronics, 
physics or programming may need to be considered creatively when a requirement 
arises to extend the domain or reconceptualise it. Indeed, some teachers and 
psychologists might argue that extension and reconceptualisation lie at the heart ot 
effective learning in general. For these reasons, progress towards ai-chitecture& for 
tutoring creative tasks has implications for the discipline as a whole. This project 
does not solve the problem, of tutoring in a creative domain in general, but makes 
some first steps. 

A second reason why intelligent tutoring systems for music composition may have 
important implications for the discipline as a whole, is that due to the demanding 
nature of the domain, research in ITS for music can act as a valuable forcing 
function for ITS methodology and architectures, introducing unusual perspectives 



ERIC 



6 



Chapter 1: Introduction 



and fresh techniques. 
4 Timeliness 

The research is timely in a practical sense due to the coincidence of a number of 
theoretical, educational and technological developments. AI researchers have taken 
an active interest in AI and music research for some time; examples include Simon 
(Simon and Sumner ;:/o8), Winograd (1968), Minsky (1981a), Longuet-Higgins 
(1962), Steedman (1984) and Johnson-Laird (1988). This work has been very 
broad, ranging from surprising strides in clarifying music theory (Longuet-Higgins, 
1962) and ways of relating music to other areas of human cognition (Lerdahl and 
Jackendoff, 1983), to finding flexible ways of representing general time-embedded 
highly interacting parallel processes (Rodet and Cointc, 1984). More recently, there 
has been a strong upsurge of research in the psychology of music, particularly 
research influenced by the cognitive paradigm (Sloboda, 1985). This has been 
associated with a shift of theoretical attention from low level phenomena to higher 
level musical processes in rich contexts. This has provided a stream of powerful 
explanations and theories for musical phenomena that had previously defied 
formal analysis for centuries, e.g. aspects of ; 

• harmony (Longuet-ffiggins, 1962), (Balzano, 1980), 

• rhythm (Longuet-Higgins and Lee, 1984), 

• voice-leading (Wright, 1986), (McAdams and Bregman, 1985), 
( Cross, Howell and West, 1988), (Huron, 1988) 

• hierarchical reduction (Lerdahl and Jackendoff, 1983), 

• rubato (Todd, 1985). 

Up until recently, much of this research had very little scope for application due to 
the rarity and expense of computer controllable musical instruments. The recent 
emergence of inexpensive high quality electronic musical instruments in the 
marketplace, coinciding with the recent establishment (Loy, 1985) of an industry 
standard (MIDI) for connecting computers to electronic musical instruments means 
that all of this work is now open for the first time to widespread practical 

7 

er|c 



Chapter 1: Introduction 



application. These converging considerations mean that work done now in ITS and 
music is timely and capable of exploitation. 

5 Roots of the research 

Part II of the thesis was inspired directly by a single piece of work - Longuet- 
Higgins (1962). Some points of the interface design were influenced by Smith, 
Irby, Kimball, Verplank and Harslem (1982), and a later version of the interface 
was designed to take intc account Balzano (1980). Part III of the thesis (the 
architecture for a tutoring system for music composition) was loosely inspired by 
work in machine learning due to Lenat (1982), but arose diiiectly from consideration 
of the 'traditional' structure of intelligent tutoring systems, as described in, for 
example, Sleeman and Brown (1982), and simple observations about the nature of 
open-ended tasks. Inspiration for the constraint-based planner for music 
composition came from Levitt's work (1981, 1985). 

6 Structure of thesis 

The thesis is divided into 4 sections, together with some appendices. 

Part I provides an introduction to the thesis as a whole. This part includes a 
selected review of previous work related to Artificial Intelligence, Education and 
Music. 

Part II reviews two cognitive theories of harmony and shows how they can be used 
to design learning environments for tonal harmony. Some programs developed 
independently that relate to the wOTk are discussed. 

Part III outlines an architecture for tutoring music composition that combines the 
learning environment with sources of more abstract knowledge. A musical planner 
is the key abstract knowledge component of the architeaurc. 

Part IV outlines a practical investigation carried out with Harmony Space, 
summarises the results of the thesis as a whole and looks at possibilities for further 
work. 



8 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 



In Part I of the thesis, we review the uses of computers in music education. Chapter 
2 looks at early uses of computers in music education. Chapter 3 reviews recent 
tiends in the musician machine interface. Chapter 4 is concerned with intelligent 
tutors for music. The final chapter includes pointers to related work in other fields. 

In this chapter, we review early uses of computers in music education, with special 
attention to the needs of novices learning to compose. We review four representative 
and contrasted early approaches. The four approaches considered are: computer- 
assisted instruction (CAI) in music; music logos; tools for music education; and 
int< tractive graphical games. (Straightforward music editors and computer musical 
instruments are omitted, except for brief references.) The review is selective 
throughout. Applications may display characteristics of more than one division, so 
the categories cannot be taken as hard and fast. The structure of the chapter can be 
summed up as follows; 

1 Computer-aided instruction in music education 

2 Music logos 

3 Tools for the student 

4 Games 

5 Conclusions on early approaches 

We will begin by considering the first of the four early approaches, namely 
computer-aided instruction in music education. 

1 Computer-aided instruction in music education 

Historically, the first use of computers in teaching music or teaching any other 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 

subject for that matter, was associated with programmed learning, derived originally 
from behaviourism. Branching programs, perhaps the most common type of 
programmed learning, step through essentially the following algorithm. (The next 
two or three paragraphs draw on the best existing survey of the area, to be found in 
O'Shea and Self (1983)). 

1 Present a "frame" to the student i.e. 

Present the st'iaent with prcstorcd material (textual or audio visual). 
Solicit a response from the student. 

2 Compare the response literally with prcstorcd altemative responses. 

3 Give any prestored comment associated with the response. 

4 Look up the next frame to present on ttie basis of the response. 

Branching programs can be used to present a kind of individualised tutorial in which 
different answers would cause students to be treated differently. However, every 
possible p ath through the frames must be considered by the author of the material, or 
else the material might not make sense following some routes. The number of 
possible routes can quickly become very large, making this kind of material very 
laborious to prepare (O'Shea and Self, 1983). 

A development of programmed learning, called 'generative computer assisted 
learning', allowed questions and answers to be generated from a template instead of 
being pre-stored. For example, new equations to be solved could be generated and 
solved (for testing the response) or new sequences of chords to be identified could 
be generated by a grammar (Gross, 1984). The student's results could be used to 
control the difficulty and subject of the next example according to some simple 
prespecified strategy. Generative computer assisted learning was often used for 
drills rather than tutorial presentations. 

Music educators such as Gross (1984) and Hofstetter (1975) used systems along 
these lines to attempt to teach music fundamentals, music theory, music history and 
aural miining. Hofstetter's GUIDO system at the University of Delaware (Hofstetter 
1975 and 1981), is a paradigmatic example of computer aided instruction in ear 



10 



Chapter 2; Early uses of computers in teaching music 



training. 



1.1 GUIDO:- Ear training by computer administered dictation 

The GUIDO system (named after the 1 1th Century music educator Guido d'Arezzo) 
has a twin puipose; the provision of computer based ear training, and the collection 
of data for research into the acquisition of aural skiUs. GUIDO can oversee dictation 
in five areas; intervals, melody, chords, harmony and rhythm. GUIDO plays 
musical example^; by means of a four voice synthesizer, and the student is invited to 
select from a multiple-choice touch- sensitive display what he thinks he has heard. 
Example displays from each of the five dictation areas are reproduced in Figs 1 - 5. 



PLAY 



BASIC 



EII3I3HE1E1EIE1HI3E10E 

MONK 



MBjODKUP 



] [ 



PDC BOTTOM 



][ 



1 



1 0 



I 



MBLOOCMDC 



INTHRVALS 



] [ 



LENGTH 



1 



NEXT ID UH tiB OAMB V BACK iv d» PL < V t^ft 




Unii 7: Leapt from MV and VII in nujor keys 



29*righL Youricore:2 Gotl:4ouof5. IVsMNfiXT 







E 


i 






B 

















PLAY AGAIN 



SPETO) 



Fig 1 Guido intervals program 

Both figures redrawn from Hofctcltcr (1981) pages 85 and 86. 
Originals © University of Delaware Plato Project. 



Fig 2 Guido melody program 



We will look at each of the drills in a little detail (The following descriptions of the 
various drills draw closely on Hofstetter (1981))» For the interval drill (fig 1), 
GUIDO plays aii interval, and the student touches a box on the screen to indicate 
what interval was heard» The three columns of boxes in the middle of the screen can 



11 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in icaching music 



be used by the teacher or student to control how the dictation is given. The teacher 
has the option of "locking" the control boxes or allowing the student to control them. 



QUALITY I^fVERSION 



MAJOR 



MINOR 



ROOT 



FIRST 



DIMINISHED 



r AUG 



AUGMENTED 



SECOND 



Press NEXT for judging 



Oxms! PnasNEXT 
J 



Review. All triads. All Invcmoiu. Voiced 



APPEGGIO 



SIM. 



PLAY AGAIN 



Press shift-back io exit 



Unit 8; I. !V, V and V1I''6 triads 
Exercise I 



m 



I I I I 'i I I I 



I IV K VIP6 I IV V I 
Touch the Roman Numerals 



Press NEXT after each one 



HELP is available 



I 


II 1 


III 




V 


VI 


k^i 




Mig 


Min 1 


Aug 


Dim 




6 14 12 





PLAY AGAIN 




VOLUME 




SPEED 



Fig 3 Guido chord quality program Pig 4 Guido harmony program 

Both figures redrawn from Hofstetter (1981) page 86. 
Originals © University of Delaware Plato Project. 



The legends (fig 1) are mostly self explanatory, and all details do not need to be 
grasped for our purposes, but two non-obvious points are worth mentioning. 
Firstly, the box marked "intervals" can be used to eliminate from the dictation any 
selected intervals; secondly, the attractive looking keyboard display at the bottom of 
the screen is used in this program only when fixing the lower or upper note of 
intervals, in the melody program (fig 2), GUIDO plays a tune and the student tries 
to reproduce it by touching the note "boxes". Options arc available for the srudent to 
input using boxes marked with solfa syllables, or the keyboard shown in fig 1 . The 
students' input is sounded and displayed simultaneously as staff notation. 



12 

o 

ERIC 



Giapter 2: Early ->:ses of computers in teaching music 



Unit 9: Quarter -Beat Values in 2/4, 3/4 and 4/4 



I rrnjn rm \ n.j ni 



Goal: 5 out of 8. Your score: 0 



Press NEXT 



NOTE 1 , 




|J||JUI>I>|J^ 


1 REST 


regular] 


1 DOTTED 1 


OTHERS 



PLAY AGAIN 



METRONOME 



SPEED 



HELP is available 



Fig 5 Guido rhythm program 

Redrawn from Hofstctter (1981) page 87. 
Original © University of Delaware Plato Project. 



The chord quality program asks the student to indicate the quality and inversion of 
chords sounded (fig 3). In the harmony program (fig 4), th;; student listens to a four 
part exercise in chorale style, and then indicates what he has heard by touching 
boxes for Roman numerals and soprano and bass notes. GUIDO displays the 
responses in staff notation. As in most of the programs, the student can ask to he;ir 
the example played again, can control the tempo, and can alter the relative loudness 
of the different voices. Finally, in the rhythm dictation program (fig. 5), GUIDO 
plays a rhythm, and the student touches boxes to indicate what was heard. GUIDO 
displays the response as it is input. 



13 



Chapter 2: Early ustjs of comixiters in teaching music 



1,1.1 Discovery learning mode 

GUIDO does not adhere strictly to programmed learning dogma. All of the GUIDO 
programs can be used for discovery learning as well as dictation. In discovery 
learning mode, the touch sensitive displays can be used playfully to "play" GUIDO 
as a musical instrument. 

1.2 Advantages of Com,; i:ter Aided Instruction in music dictation/ aural training 
If the aim is to practise and test aural skills formally, then dictation, whether 
administered by teacher or computer is a useful method. GUIDO's competitors for 
dictation in undergraduate courses are classroom dictation and tape. The advantages 
claimed for GUIDO are firstly that speed of dictation, order of presentation and time 
allowed for answering can be individualised for each student; secondly that the 
students replies can be recorded, analysed and acted upon instantly. Hofstetter 
demonstTited experimentally that a group of students using the GUIDO harmony 
program scored better in subsequent traditional classroom dictation using a piano 
than a control group using taped dictation practice (Hofstetter, 1975, page 104). The 
vast majority of students seem to enjoy using GUIDO (Hofstetter 1975). 

The criticisms of traditional CAI in fields other than music can be summarised as 
follows. The system is neither able to recognise any correct answers that were not 
catered for explicitly by the author, nor to make educational capital out of slightly 
wrong answers, or answers that are "wrong for a good reason" that were not 
forseen. If a student happens to know most of the material in the course, and simply 
wishes to extract one or two pieces of information, many programmed learning 
systems cannot help; they can only run through those paths the author allowed for. 
CAI in the restricted domain of aural dictation seems to avoid most of these charges. 
Many aural drills only have one right answer, and GUIDO often allows a choice of 
ways of presenting this answer. It is not always obvious how educational capital 
could be made out of wrong answers to aural dictation. Certainly, with all the 
control boxes off, GUIDO gives the student full rein to extract "information". Aural 
training seems to be one of the few areas where traditional CAI really is an 



14 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 

improvement over the alt^^.-^tives. (It might be argued that there are better ways of 
helping someone to learn how to recognise, say, chord qualities, than by dictation, 
but tliat is a different question), 

1.3 Limitations of Computer Aided Instruction in music 

For our purposes, 'traditional' CAI in music to date has at least two limitations. 
Firstly, in practice most CAI in music education has been strictly limited to music 
fundamentals (i.e simple questions and answers about basic concepts), music 
history or aural udining. Gross (1984), using an aural dictation system similar to 
GUIDO found that while practice in aural skills with such systems made the students 
better at low level aural skills , the effect on larger scale topics was not measurable. 
Hence a CAI program for aural dictation might make students better at taking aural 
dictation, but would be likely to have minimal impact on composition skills. 
Secondly, the problems of trying to design a 'traditional' CAI program to teach 
composition skills would be hamstrung by the complex open ended nature of the 
tast. It seems unlikely that tiie mere presentation of text and audio visual material 
would go very far towards teaching anyone how to compose in an open-ended 
sense. CAI depends on being able tc anticipate all possible responses, whereas one 
essential component of composition can be tiie unexpected. 

2 Music Logos 

Music Logo, as a generic approach, contains elements of music editors and games. 
However, its intellectual parentage and ambitious aims are such that the approach 
can reasonably be discussed in a category of its own. In its original and pioneering 
incarnation. Music Logo (Bamberger, 1974) took the form of research revolving 
around prototype versions of the "Tune Blocks" and the "Time Machine" games, 
which we will describe shortly. More recently. Music Logo has become 
commercially available as a proprietary programming language (Bamberger, 1986), 
running on Apple II computers. In the suggested pedagogical uses of the coirmiercial 
computer language, versions of "Tune Blocks" and the "Time Machine" play 
central roles. But Music Logo as a generic approach is an attempt to apply the ideas 
of Logo to music, so it is fruitful to begin by asking "What is Logo?". 



15 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in leaching music 



2.1 What is Logo? 

Logo is a programming language that tries to embody an educadonal philosophy of 
"learning without being taught" (Papert. 1980, page 7). Logo is an attempt to link 
deep and powerful mathematical ideas (e.g. the idea of a function) to a child's 
intuitions about her own body movement (Papert. 1980, page viii). Logo draws on 
many different communities n:^d bodies of work: Feurzeig, Piaget. The Artificial 
Intelligence Community r will', Bourbaki, Lisp, Church's lambda calculus and 
Alan Kay's Dynabook Project (Papert, 1980, page 210). Logo is expliciUy intended 
to appeal to the emotions as well as the intellect (Papert, 1980, page 7). One of 
Logo's chief proponents, Seymour Papert, sees computers as potential tools for 
exploring how thinking and learning work, and as possessing a double-edged power 
to change how people think and learn. (Papert, 1980-, page 209) Logo has taken 
;nany forms, but the best known and best explored version is "turtle geometry" 
Logo. 

Turtle geometry is a computational version of geometry which can be explored by 
giving commands to a "turtle" which leaves a trace as it moves. (Tlie turtle may be a 
physical robot or may move about in two dimensions on computer terminal screen.) 
Commands can be assembled in packages called procedures, which can be re-used, 
adapted, or used as building blocks for further procedures. (Lest readers from non- 
Artificial Intelligence backgrounds tiiink that Logo is only a toy for children, it 
should be stressed that while easy to use, Logo is both theoretically and practically a 
powerful programming language.) Strong claims are made for Logo by its 
proponents. Speaking in the context of the way in which the notions underiying 
differential calculus crop up naturally in Logo when trying to "teach" a turtle to 
move in a circle o- spiral, Papert says that "I have seen elementary school children 
who understand c.^ariy why differential equations are the natural form of laws of 
motion." (Papert, 1980, page 221). To attribute this understanding to Logo would 
be a very strong claim, (and Papert only makes it implicitly) since this is an 
understanding that escapes many graduate mathematicians, physicists and engineers. 
The validity of the claims made for Logo are hotly contested. Papert says that the 
sort of growth he is interested in fostering can take decades to bear fruit, and would 



16 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in leaching music 



r»r neoessaiily show jp on "pre and post" tests (Papert, 1980, page viii). 

2.2 Bamberger's Music Iu)go: two key experiments and their implications 

In one sense, any attempt to do, using music, what turtle geometry does using 
mathematics could be considered as a music Logo, But the term *Music Logo' is 
usually identified with the inspiring research of Jeanne Bamberger and her 
colleagues, workin)? association with Seymour Papert, Ten^ Winograd, Hal 
Abel son and othe^^s at MIT at tlie time. 

Music Logo has aims as ambitious as those of Turtle Logo. One aim is to describe 
music in a way that allows redefining of its elements by the user, and leads lo 
extensible concepts. The representation should have very wide scope, yet be 
uniform and sin;ple. It should allow any student to create her own tools to explore 
and create music that makes musical sense to him, whatever that sense may be. 
Music Logo should not only develop the skills that underlie intelligent listening, 
penormance, analysis and composition, but should also encourage non-musical 
learning and understanding. 

We now describe two experiments by Jeanne Bamberger that play a key role in her 
conception of a music Logo. (The following draws heavily on Bamberger 1972 and 
1974.) 

2.2.7 Tune Blocks 

This experiment startu with a four voice synthesizer connected to a computer, A 
simple tune (say a nursery rhyme ) has already been broken into motives or perhaps 
phrases, depending on the precise variant of the game being played. The phrases are 
labelled, say, Bl to B."^" and if you type in Bl, then the synthesizer plays the 
corresponding phrase. In one game, you are simply given a set of phrases, and 
invited to arrange them, using sequence and repetition, in an order that ' makes 
sense** to you, Tlie game sounds trivial, but strong claims are made for it. First of 
all, anyone can try it - there are virtually no prerequisites. Secondly, it involves 
active manipulation of and listening to musically meaningful elements (i.e. phrases 




Chapter 2: Early uses of computers teaching music 

or motives as opposed to isolaicu notes or arbitrary fragments). Thirdly , it promotes 
"context-dependent" as opposed to isolated listening (e.g. block 1 followed by block 
2 may give both blocks a new slant). Listening to what people say as they play the 
game, Bamberger reports that whereas a phrase is initially perceived in only one way 
e.g. "went down" or "went faster", as the game proceeds, it comes to be perceived 
in a variety of ways, for example "same downward movement as block 1, but 
doesn't sound like an ending". Players produce a wide variety of resulting pieces, 
and comparing other pe^^ic s pieces, especially if they come from a different 
musical culture, is one of the pleasures of the game. Bamberger sees the use of 
neutral tags like Bl, B2 as opposed to more visual representations as a positive 
advantage to tune blocks, as it means that visual sense cannot be used as a substitute 
for listening. There is a variation of the game in whicn the player is given a complete 
piece, programmed in advance, which she can hear at will, and the challenge this 
time is to recreate the original tune from its constituent phrases. Bamberger points 
out that in this version, the student is likely to discover - as an effortless by-product 
of play - the melody's overall structure (e.g. A B A). Players begin to ask 
themselves leading questions like "Why does Bl, B3, B2" seem incomplete, 
although it sounds as though it has ended?". We will go on to look at the "Time 
Machine ", and Bamberger's suggestions for further work before trying to compare 
music Logo with its claims and aims. 

222 The Time machine 

Most people can clap along witli both the rhythm of a melody and its underlying beat 
(some can tap both at once using hands and feet). The Time machine attempts to 
represent the interaction of these two streams of motion in a way at once intuitive 
and concretely representable. The gadgetry is very simple. The player strikes a 
drum, which leaves a trace on a VDU screen. Figs 6, 7 and 8 should make clear the 
relation between what is struck on the drum and what appears on the screen. Pieces 
can be recorded and played back later with synchronised sound and display. One 
crucial feature is that the time machine can play a regular beat against which you can 
input your piece; both the rhythm and the beat will appear on the screen (see fig 9) as 
you play. (Bamberger refers to the rhythm shown in fig 9 as "Mary had a little 
Lamb'\ but British readers might prefer to think of it as "London Bridge is falling 



18 



Oiaptef 2; Efirly uses of computers in leaching music 

down".) Once ycjcordcd, Jnc beat trace can l)e concealed while you listen to both 
streams of sound at once. Bamberger cUiims that one activity in paiticular - trying to 
picture how they mesh, and then revealing the l)eat trace to check your guess - can 
transform how people perceive pieces (Bamberger, 1974, page 13). Players often 
originally perceive the song shown in fig 9 both aurally and visually as consisting 
of three "chunks" - as in fig. 8. 

IMliilllllllllllllill 

Fig 6 Fast regular beat 
Fig 7 Siow regular beat 

iiiiiii III III 

Fig 8 "London Bridge is falling down" 

IIIIIII III III 



Fig 9 "London Bridge is falling down" (with pulse) 

nnm m m 

Fig 10 "London Bridge is falling down" (with pulse & linked trace) 
Figures 6 - 10 redrawn from Bamberger (1974) 

Bamberger shows that the single suggestion of linking visually all the marks that 
occur during the lifetime of each beat (fig. 10) can lead to the recreation of 
conventional rhythm notation, and can lead to the perception (though some people 
already perceive this anyway) that the first chunk contains a sub-chunk identical to 



19 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computer!? in leaching music 

the second and third chunks. Ti.ls is the only "game" that Bamberger describes I'or 
the Time Machine in the papers cited^. 

2 .2 .3 Tackling higher level features of music 

Having considered two key games of Music Logo that deal with small scale musical 
structures, the question arises to what extent a similar approach could help explicate 
higher level structures in music. Given sufficiently extensible representations, it 
appears that musically spnaible transformations could be carried out in a Music Logo 
at various levels of musical structure, and it could be argued that this is an important 
part of what composers do. Bamberger quotes from Schoenberg (196'7): 

Even the writing of simple phrases involves the invention and use of 
motives, though perhaps unconsciously. . . The motive generally appears in 
a characteristic and impressive manner at the beginning of a piece. . . 
Inasmuch as almost every figure within a piece reveals some relationship to 
it, the basic motive is often considered the "germ" of the idea. . . However, 
everything depends upon its use. . . Everything depends upon its treatment 
and development. Accordingly variation requires changing some of the less 
important ones [features]. Preservation of rhythmic features effectively 
produces coherence... For the rest, determining which features are important 
depends on the compositional objective. 
(Schoenberg, 1967, page 8). 

Bamberger mentions briefly experiments with slightly more extendable 
representations; in particular a language for representing and changing separately the 
pitch and durational aspects of a melody. But for more complex musical structures. 
Music Logo needs more extendable representations than those suggested so far, if it 

' The use of Uie time machine links very interestingly with slightly later work by Bamberger 
(1975) in which she analyses different notations (some of them invented spontaneously) used by a 
cross-section of people - children, novices and trained musicians - to record rhythms. The notations 
are classified into two types, figural and metric, and it is claimed that they correspond to two ways 
of perceiving rhythm. It is also claimed that individuals lend to favour one perception or the other, 
but that bolh ways of perceiving must be learned as a pre-rcquisite for full musicianship. 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 



is to permit easy musical manipulation. However, the implied claims made for the 
effects on users' perceptions of using even relatively crude tools like Tool Blocks 
and the Time Machine are interesting. 

Bamberger reports how, for a set of students who had played the two games for 
several weeks, the experience of listening to Haydn's symphony no. 99 was 
transformed by a perception of the piece's evolution from a 5-note motive. The new 
perception, for some, dramatically extended their musical taste. 

It is not hard to believe that better notations and visual representations can be found 
than conventional staff notation, and it is imaginable that theories of tonality, 
rhythm and harmony could be given computational embodiment and recast as 
discovery learning areas (more on this in part II of the thesis); but Music Logo has 
such ambitious aims that fulfilling them is likely to be very hard. 

22 4 Music Logo the language 

Terrapin Music Logo (Bamberger, 1986) is a version of Turtle Logo that "replaces 
graphics with music primitives". As in Turtle Logo, programs are sequences of 
function calls. The central data structures in Terrapin Music Logo are lists of 
integers representing sequences of pitches and durations. Pitch lists and duration 
lists can be manipula.cd separately before being sent by a command to a system 
buffer ready to be played by a synthesiser. 

Note Usts and duration lists may be mar^pulated using arbitrary arithmetic and list 
manipulation functions, and the language supports recursive programming. 
Random number generators are also available. List manipulation funciions 
corresponding to common musical operations are provided. For example, one 
function takes a duration and pitch list and generates a specified number of 
repetitions of the phrase shifted at each repetition by some constant specified pitch 
increment - creating what musicians call a "sequence". Other "musical" functions 
and their effects include; 



21 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 

• retrograde - reverses a piicn lists, 

• invert - processes a pitch list to the complementary values within an octave, 

• frag - extracts sublists, 

• fill - makes a list of all intermediate pitches between two specified pitches^. 

Bamberger suggests many simple exercises that are variations on the basic activity of 
iteratively manipulating the list representations to try to reproduce some previously 
heard musical result, or "^aversely making formal manipulations on lists and 
procedures and trying to guess the musical outcome. Bamberger stresses the 
impoitance of the "shocks" and learning experiences precipitated by two particular 
classes of phenomena; firstly, small manipulations of the duration list which 
produce radically changed perceptions of how the pitch list is chunked and secondly, 
the unpredictable disparity between degree of change in the data stmcture in general 
compared with the degrees of perceived change they produce. 

2 J Loco 

One of the most elegant latterday Music Logos is Loco, developed by Peter Desain 
and Henkjan Honing (1986). Loco is a set of conventions and extensions to Logo 
for dealing with music composition and constitutes a microworld for specialised 
composition techniques - in particular the use of stochastic processes and context 
free music grammars. Desain and Honing make no claims that Loco embodies 
explicit knowledge about how to compose music - indeed, their whole philosophy is 
fiercely opposed to this approach. Desain and Honing argue instead that their 
flexible composition system should make the minimum restrictions on how the 
composer formulates her compositional ideas , and should make no assumptions at 
all about the instrument to be used and how it is controlled. 

To this end, the bare minimum assumptions are built in to Loco about what 
instruments are to be controlled, and what commands each instrument will require. 
All that is assumed is that each command in the stream of commands to the 

^ Lcviu (198)) makes extended use of the related, but more general concept of a 'melodic 
trajectory'. 



22 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 

instruments will take the lorm of a list or ''object*' containing a conimand name 
followed by zero or more arguments of some sort^, and that some instrument will 
recognise and respond to each command. This gives the instrument-controlling end 
of the system great generality, and has allowed tiiie same system to be used to control 
MIDI synthesisers, mechanical percussion installations, tape recorders, etcetera. The 
only other restriction on any instrument-controlling commands that the user may care 
to define is that a notional duration of the event that is triggered by any command 
must either be pres^^-.-t as an argument to the command name or otherwise 
computable from the command. The net result is that Loco could in principle be used 
to control more or less any output device cleanly. 

Lx)co has a very elegant, simple and general time structuring mechanism - without 
which all of the sound events would occur simultaneously. Two relations are 
provided, PARALLEL and SEQUENTIAL which can be used to combine arbitrary 
musical objects, and nested where appropriate. SEQUENTIAL is a function that 
causes musical objects in its jument list to be played one after another. 
PA.^ALLEL is a function that causes its arguments to be played simultaneously. 
However, Desain and Honing are at pains to point out that before any data object is 
played, SEQUENTIAL and PARALLEL objects are treated as items of dat?. that can 
themselves be computed and manipulated. The result of this framework is that 
arbitrary time stmcturing can be appUed with a high degree of flexibility. 

Moving on to tools for particular composition approaches, Desain and Honing 
provide two sets of primitives for composing using stochastic processes and context 
free grammars respectively. The key structuring technique used in both cases is that 
simple one line definitions arc used to associate the name of a variable with a list of 
its possible values. In the stochastic microworld, depending on the choice of 

3 Desain and Honing have fitted their own object-oriented extension to LCXjO, although not 
much detail is given about this aspect of the system. Because it is not reported in detail, it seems 
wise not to make too many assumptions about its nature. They refer to what we call instrument 
"commands" as musical "^objects". However, to avoid making unwarranted assumptions, and to aid 
those readers unfamiliar with object-oriented approaches, it does not seem that any conceptual 
damage would be done by thinking of the word "object"* in this context as meaning simply a lisL 
In either case, perhaps the most important point is that any variable could be arranged to evaluate to 
an executable musical entity. 



23 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 

keyword used in the variable detinition, subsequent evaluations of the variable may 
produce any of various possible effects, including; 

• a random choice anwng its possible values, 

• a choice weighted by a probability distribution, 

• a random choice in which previously picked values cannot be picked again 
until all other possible values have been picked, 

• selection of a v'.ue in a fixed order, returning to the beginning when all 
values have be^r. picked . 

The implementation technique in each case is that the "variable" is actually a simple 
program created by thie "variable definition", but this is invisible to the naive user. 
Typing the name of the variable for evaluation simply produces an appropriate value 
each time in accordance witli the one line defmition. 

Other om line "variable definitions" create variables that increment themselves on 
each evaluation by some amount specified in the definition. At this point, elegant use 
of the facility for functional composition provided by LOGO starts to give the 
system real power - the value of the increment could be specified as a stochastic 
variable, producing a variable that performs a brownian random walk. Brownian 
variables could then be used, for example as arguments in commands to instruments 
within some time structured framework. Techniques such as these are used to 
construct very concise, easy-to-read programs for transition nets, Markov chains 
and other stochastic processes whose precise operation can be modified using the 
full power of a general purpose programming language . In a similar way, rewrite 
rules for context-free (but no more powerful) grammars can be implemented almost 
directly, for example for rhythms. Competing rewrite rules can be assigned 
probabilities giving rise to a so-called "programmed grammar". 

2.3.1 Criticisms of Loco 

The primary design goals of LOCO include ease of use by non-programmers, 
modularity at all levels (to allow anything to be varied without damaging anything 
else) and user extendibility. The goals of modularity and user extendibility are well 



24 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 

met by the choice of a variant of LISP as the programming language, by the elegant 
conventions for time structuring and instrument control, htrJ. adherence to clean 
functional programming. Ease of use. by non-programmers is helped by the use of 
the LOGO variant of LISP which avoids All Those Confusing Brackets (and seems 
to be attested by the successful use of LOCO in workshops for novices and 
professional composers). All of the primary goals are also helped by the elegant 
program generation techniques used in the composition microworlds. LOCO is 
useful for novice a u experienced programmer alike not because it embodies any 
knowledge about music, but because it is a very well-designed programming 
language that is comparatively easy for novices to learn and which contains time 
structuring and instrument interfacing conventions that are modular, flexible and 
general. 

What Loco could not do by itself, and what it does not aim or claim to do, is to teach 
in any explicit way how, for example, tonal harmony worics, or what kinds of 
purposes rhythm serves, or what constraints are implicit in a certain style of music. 
Loco is useful for leaming music, not because ar* ' musicality is embodied in it, but 
because it is an elegant, relatively easy to use programming tool of great modularity, 
flexibility and power. 

3 Tools for the student 

In this category of applicatioii of computers to the teaching of music, the computer is 
being used by the student as a tool to assist in carrying out some task. This contrasts 
loosely with both CAI in which the student is typically being managed, rather than 
being a manager, and also with music Logo, which has a stress on free exploration, 
rather than instrumental use. Three examples of tools are score editors, computer 
musical instruments and music analysis programs. As has ah^eady been mentioned, 
music editors and computer musical instruments are not included in this discussion; 
but it is useful to briefly summarise their most obvious advantages and 
disadvantages. 

On the positive side: computer musical instraments (CMIs) allow students to 
compose and play pieces virtually unrestricted by their level of manual performing 



25 



Chapter 2; Early uses of computers in teaching music 



skill; music editors allow students to listen to music scores, and hear the effect of 
any changes they may > ^^sh to make, in a way impossible with textbooks, records or 
tapes. On the negative side: firstly, ways of controlling computer musical 
instruments in musically meaningful ways are often highly restricted; and secondly, 
most music editors tend either to require knowledge of common music notation 
(which can be very difficult for beginners), or to only offer the most rudimentary 
structuring methods. Both of these problems will be returned to in the section on the 
musician-machine interf'ice. 

We now move on straight away to analytical tools. The following section draws 
mainly on work by Blombach (1981). 

The met common uses of the computer in music analysis are essentially for event 
counting, sorting, pattern recognition and statistical analysis. Typical analysis 
programs can recognise occurrences of pitches, note values, intervals and 
combina ions and sequences of these elements. One use of such a tool could be to 
test the v>aidity of statements by music theorists about the piece being studied. For 
example, it is possible in studying the Bach chorales to: 

"determine the range of each of ihe four voices, or the number of times pairs 
of voices cross and compare the results with standard elementary theory 
textbook statements. Or .hey (the students) might us3 the computer to find 
occurrences of parallel perfect fifths in the Bach chorales or examine 
resolutions of tritones. . . . Students find these exercises especially 
satisfying if they prove the textbook author's discussions inaccurate, 
imprecise or incomplete" (Blombach, 1981. page 75). 

The principal problem with this sort of analysis is that, as Dorothy Gross says 
(Gross. 1984). there are "serious questions regarding the significance of mere 
counts of events". Such counts may help in establishing, for example, authorship of 
pieces, but there is no prospect that event counting can distinguish good music from 
bad. Such analytical tools may help identify places in the great composers where, for 
example, part-^yriting rules have been observed or broken, but they do no^ get us 

26 

ERIC .jij 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 

much closer to knowing the significance of these "rules", or when it makes musical 
sense to break them. Statistical analysis tools are limited in what they can teach 
because they connect ..either with any developed theory nor established practice of 
music analysis. Later in the literature review, tools for musical analysis that reach a 
little deeper will be considered, but now we turn to the final section on current 
practice, about an educational music game with roots a little different from those of 
Music Logo. 

4 Interactive graphics music games 

Music Logo is by no means the only educational music game or the only music 
discovery learning environment. In this section, we describe an interactive graphical 
music game presented by Martin Lamb (1982). Although the game has many 
similarities with Music Logo (which Lamb mentions), its modest aims and roots in 
traditional music notation put it in a different (though not necessarily inferior) 
categoiy. Lamb says that the purpose of the game is: 

1/ to provide musically untrained children with a means of inventing their 
own compositions and hearing them immediately, and 

2/ to teach musical transformations (e.g. augmentation, transposition and 
inversion) by letting children manipulate their visual analogues and 
immediately hear their effect. 

The game is best described using pictures. The student begins with a set of blank 
staves (Fig 11). The player points to the word "Draw" on the display, using a 
pointing device, and then, holding down a button on the pointing device, can sketch 
a freehand curve on the staves (Fig 12). Ttie program then straightens the curve to 
preserve left-to-right flow (Fig 13). Next, the program plays a line of music with the 
same shape (pitch for height) as the straightened curve. The curve then breaks up 
into discrete triangle shapes, each representing a note (Fig 14) (This diagram fails to 
show properly that a note can lie on a line or a space, or midway between the 
conventional positions, to indicate black notes. The length of each triangle is 
proportional to the length of the note.) Pointing to "transform", a group of notes can 

- 1 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 



be selected by circling them (Fig 15), and an inner circle can be drawn to exclude 
notes. A copy of the selected notes can then be moved about the screen (Fig lo). 
Using one of two physical sliders, the selected fragment can be continuously 
stretched or squashed relative to a horizontal axis (time relations are preserved). 





DRAW 

+ 






J' 






EXIT PIANO 





FIG 1 1 Lamb's Interactive graphics game: initial set up 













■ ^ 1 











FIG 12 player draws a curve 

BguTM rednwn from I^iib (1982) 



The image can be squashed beyond a completely flat position continuously through 
to its mirror image. When the image reaches exact inversion, it indicates this by 
glowing more brightly. Similarly, using the other slider, a fragment can be squashed 
vertically into a chord, beyond simultaneity if desired to its exact retrograde and 
further (interval relations are preserved). The reaching of the exact retrograde point 



28 



Chapter 2: Early usCvS of computers in leaching music 



is indicated when the irr ioi -image f;agmeni glows more brightly. At any point, the 
transformation can be played at the pitch at which it is floating, or moved down to a 
different pitch level. It is possible to move or delete notes, as well as copy them, and 
there is an undo command. 




Fig 13 Cuive is straightened to preserve left-to-right flow 





1 


DRAWPLAY TRANSFORM UNDO SAVE 






















\^ = 












CLEAR EXIT PIANO 





Fig 14 Computer changes curve into discrete notes 

Figures redrawn froir Lamb (1982) 



It appears iliat more than one voice can be entered onto the screen by sketching more 
than one curve, and music can also be entered using a keyboard. The display uses a 
colour coding system. Different voices have different colours, but material derived 



29 



Chapter 2; Early uses of computers in teaching music 



by transformation from the same material is displayed in a single colour. ITiis game 
harmonises four elements ; pitch and time, their clear visual analogi??, llicii gestural 
analogue and traditional staff notation. Not only aic pitch and timf , . "lai in 
this way, but also the musical transfoniiations trai^sp Jr., augmentation and 
diminution, and the relations inversion and f; r ;j>:ade. This game appears to amply 
fulfill the modest objectives stated above. What is unclear is how far these objectives 
go towards developing composition skills. 




Fig 15 User has selected transform. Circled notes are to be transformed 
Notes in iimer circle are to be excluded 




Fig 16 Notes to be transformed arc displayed as hollow triangles 



Figures redrawn from Lamb (1982) 



30 



Chapter 2: Early uses of computers in teaching music 



5 Conclusions on early approaches 

Computers have been used up to now in music education mostly as administrators of 
multiple choice questionnaires, as easily used musical instruments, "musical 
typewriters" and for musical games; they can count and identify simple musical 
events, and perfwm simple musical manipulations such as reordering, transposition, 
and pitch and time transformation.'^ High quality exploratory microworlds for 
music are starting t*^ lairoducc a new element on the traditional scene. 

None of the existing microworlds considered make available explicit computational 
representations of the kinds of musical knowledge, for example about harmonic 
interrelationships, that a novice may need when learning to compose tonal music. 

A human teacher who had this knowledge already could use the microworlds to 
devise individually relevant experiments to help students gain the experience they 
need to be able to understand textbook descriptions of the knowledge. In the next 
section we discuss what more might be needed, where expert human help is scarce, 
to encourage and facilitate composition, and speculate how artificial intelligence 
might go some way to help provide it. 



^ Although this review has included material representative of most styles of approach, it has 
been highly selective. Some other work in the area that we have no space to pursue in detail is 
noted below. Distinguished pioneering work in the application of computers to music education has 
been carried out by Sterling Beckwith (1975). Well-known composers who have contributed to 
music education using computers include Xenakis (1985). An excellent set of simple ways for 
novices to explore musical ideas by themselves with a computer can be found in (Jones, 1984). 
Related work can be found in (Winsor, 1987). Music Logos have also been designed by Orlarey 
(1986) and Greenberg (1986) . 

31 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



The purpose of this chapter i;j to look at recent developments in the 'musician- 
machine interface' that J'.ie likely to affect the future use of computers in teaching 
music. We begin by reviewing some general reasons for the importance of the 
musician-machine interface in music education and consider some general strategies 
for designing good interfaces. In the subsequent sections, the following topics are 
covered: we consider connections between research in the musician-machine 
interface (MM^ and research in human-computer interaction (HCI) in general; we 
examine some possible abstract relationships between musician, score and 
instrument; finally we make a brief selective survey of three contrasting types of 
musician- machine interface with educational relevance and draw conclusions. The 
structure of the chapter can be summarised as follows; 

1 The importance of the interface 

2 General strategics for designing good interfaces 

3 MMI meets HCI - a two way traffic 

4 Intelligent Instruments: new relationships between musician and machine 

5 MMI in music education 

5.1 Use of common music notation in interfaces. 

5.2 Interfaces using graphical representations of structure 

5.3 Control panels for computational models 

5.3.1 Dcsain's proposed graphical programming tool. 

5.3.2 Hookup 

5.3.3 Comments on Hookup and Dcsain's proposal 

5.3.4 The 'M' program 

5.3.5 Jam Factory 

6 Conclusions on new developments in the musician-machine interface 

1 The importance of the interface 

Early computer interfaces mimicked typewriters, and so had to organise their input 



ERIC 



32 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



and output as strings of words. For many tasks, this is a highly unsuitable form of 
communication. Buxton (1987) points out that few motorcyclists would be happy 
driving around central London in the rush hour using an interface based on strings 
of words to control their bike. In many respects, education in music composition is a 
task equally ill-suited to be carried out through the medium of text-based interfaces. 
To mention but one disadvantage, recent research has suggested that the very 
gestures involved in performing music can play vital roles in the process of music 
composition (Baily, 1985). But can we conclude that interface design problems in 
specialised domain^ can be solved merely by designing and employing appropriate 
input/output hardA'are for the task? Such a conclusion would be seductive, bearing 
in mind that a host of new and subtie input peripherals such as midi-gloves^ in 
principle allow computers to be controlled in arbitrary respects by ?xbitrary gestures. 
Unfortunately, human-computer interface design problems run much deeper. The 
use of arbitrary gestures to control arbitrary parameters tends, in general, to produce 
arbitrary interfaces. Another underlying problem is that it may be hard for a novice 
to exercise appropriate control of a complex process without extensive knowledge or 
ex')crience of the process being controlled. 

2 General strategies for designing good interfaces for novices 

One general strategy for designing interfaces for novices, aimed to get around the 
last mentioned problem, is to represent expliciUy and perspicaciously in tiie interface 
the implicit knowledge required to operate in the domain. Anotiier general strategy 
for designing interfaces for users who lack relevant knowledge or experience is to 
exploit the novices' existing knowledge or propensities (Smith, Irby, Kimball, 
Verplank and Harslem, 1982). When using either strategy, it is often helpful to 
study the cognitive psychology of the relevant domain in advance: ideally, both the 
structure of tiic domain and relevant human propensities should be taken ini^ 
account when devising mappings of gesture, feedback and action to each other for 

^ As the name suggests, midi-gloves are hand-worn computer peript)crals (demonstrated at \hc 
1986 International Computer Music Conference), that "Woyf finger and hand gestures to generate 
Midi (musical instrument digital interface) signals and thus in principle control arbitrary computer 
actions in real time. Midi gloves are related to work by Tom Zimmerman, Jaron Lanier and others 
(Zimmerman, Lanier, Blanchard, Bryson, and Harvill, 1987) in developing a general purpose hand 
gesture interface device, the 'Data Glove' (which also gives tactile feedback). 



33 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



the interface. 



3 MMl meets HCI - a two way traffic 

Before looking at issues that arise most acutely in music, we will briefly consider 
developments in human-machine interfaces in general. As we noted in passing at the 
beginning of the section, until very recently, computer interfaces in all fields were 
largely text-based, typewritp- like and designed around the convenience of the 
designers and manufacturers. These interfaces required long-term memorisation of 
extensive command languages and syntaxes and short term memorisation of the 
current state of the system. Work at Xerox PARC (Smith, Irby, Kimball, Verplank 
and Harslem, 1982) and elsewhere led to a wave of radically different interfaces. 
The new interfaces were designed with the help of psychologists for the convenience 
of the user and made heavy use of graphics and simple pointing. The new interfaces 
lowered cognitive load by exploiting novices' previous knowledge through visual 
metaphors and displaying the state of the system graphically. The shift in interface 
design m<-thodology involved many other detailed changes in design philosophy that 
we do not have space to explore. These changes affected interface design in 
computer music, but it is also true to say that, due to the demanding nature of 
interface design problems in computer music, there has been considerable traffic of 
innovations in the other direction. Buxton (1987) argues that research in computer 
music interfaces in many respects anticipated (Buxton et al., 1979), and in some 
cases influenced mainstream interface research in areas such as menu design. 
Buxton argues further that present day developments in the musician-machine 
interface, such as use of multiple pointing devices, are once again anticipating 
developments in mainstream human-computer interaction. Whatever the truth of this, 
a central point about human-computer interface design is that the deep issues no 
longer simply concern matters of physical ergonomic5;; good interface design for 
complex cognitive tasks is nowadays often bound up with the construction of good 
cognitive models of the task. Hence because of the complexity of the cognitive 
skills associated with music; its multi-modality, multi-media demands; and because 
of its intertwined, nearly decomposable, temporal dimensions; music can be seen as 
a demsinc^g forcing function in computer interface design in general. 



34 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



4 Intelligent Instruments: possible relationships between musician 
and machine 

Before considering some particular musician-machine interfaces, it may be helpful to 
consider the musician-machine interface at a more abstract level. Mathews and 
Abbott (1980) define three different abstract relationships between musician, score 
and instrument - two familiar and one relatively new. The relationships can be 
described pictorialiy (Figures 17-19). Figure 17 illustrates the way that; 

". . with traditional instruments, all the information in the score passes 
through tlic musician, who communicates the information the instrument 
via physical gestures. The musician has fast, absolute control over the 
sound, but he or she must be able to read the score rapidly and make 
complex gestures quickly and accurately." (Mathews with (sic) Abbott, 
1980, page 45) 

The second relationship is that whicn holds with musique concrete, player pianos 
and music programming languages (Fig 18). The score completely specifies the 
performance, and although this can be amended indefinitely off-line, no real-time 
demands or opportunities fall to the player during perfOTmance. Fig 19 shows a third 
possible relationship. The entire score does not have to be interpreted in real time by 
the musician, but the musician can in principle reserve any aspects of the music for 
his interpretation. 



35 

ERIC 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



Score 




Musician 




Instrument 




Fig. 17 






Musician 




Score 


^ 


Instrument 



Fig. 18 



Musician 



Score 



Instrument 




Fig. 19 

Musician/scorc/instrument relationships 1, 2 and 3 respectively 
Figures redrawn from Mathews with (sic) Abbott (1980) 



"The score is a sequence of partial descriptions of musical events. In general 
the sequence is ordered by time. The information not contained in the score 
is supplied by the musician in real-time during the performance. The aspects 
of the performance that are to be interpreted are generally supplied by the 
musician.The aspects not subject to interpretation are supplied by the score." 
(Mathews with Abbott, 1980, page 45) 

A special case of this third relationship is of course, the familiar conductor-orchestra 
relationship. No representation and control methods are known at present, needless 
to say, that could allow a human-machine relationsliip to approach the subtlety of the 
orchestra-conductor relationship. However, some special cases of relationship 3 
may be very useful despite their relative lack of sophistication. One of the most 
obvious is to separate rhythmic and pitch information, as was done by Bamberger. 
Mathew's "sequential drum" can go some way beyond this. The drum is a 
rectangular surface that can be played by hand or stick, and has four outputs; hit 
time, hit strength, and X and Y position on the drum's surface .The four signals can 
be used to control any synthesizer parameters; loudness, timbre, location of sound, 
time of occurrence, or perhaps even the tempo of groups of notes. The score might, 

36 




Oiapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



in a simple case, contain a liiythmless melody, allowing the musician to concentrate 
on phrasing and accent. At least one composer, Joel Chadabe (Chadabe, 1983) 
performs, or "interactively composes" - his term - in much this way, although 
Chadabe uses two theremin rods ^ rather than sequential drums as controllers. The 
boundary between musical performance and composition has always been blurred, 
but the developments we have been discussing may make the two activities even 
harder to distinguish in the future. 

It might be wondered if this discussion of musician-machine interfaces has much to 
do with artificial intelligence and learning composition skills. There is a strong 
argument that it has. Artificial intelligence research has long been inextricably 
intertwined with efforts to improve the human machine interface in a wider context. 
As we have abready noted, musicians' physical gestures in making music may be an 
essential dement in a description of what music is about (Baily, 1985). Conversely, 
musical intelligence may become a useful component in responsive musical 
inrtmments. 

5 MMI in music education 

We now turn to developments in the musician-machine interface that have special 
potential relevance to educational concerns. A good survey of the musician-machine 
interface in general can be found in Pennycook (1985a) and a survey of the role of 
graphics in computer-aided music instruction can be found in Pennycook (1985b 
and 1985c). Human computer interfaces for music are used for a wide variety of 
tasks, and it can be hard to dr .w clear distinctions between tiiosc with and without 
educational implications. Typical tasks addressed by existing interfaces include score 
editing, real-time performance, assisting composition, computer-aided instmction, 
signal processing, assisting analysis, computer musical instruments, manipulating 
recorded sound and others, all of which can overlap to a greater or lesser extent. A 
better way of classifying the various approaches than by the ostensible purpose for 
which the interfaces arc designed is to consider the main representation or 
representations offered to the user by the interface for visualisation or control. 

2 Tbeitmin rods are proximity-sensitive antennae used to control cleclionic musical insmiments 
by fluid hand gestures, invented by Lev Theremin in 1920. 



37 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



Recurring representations include textual strings; niidi streams; sound input and 
output; representations of key or finger boards; common music notation; two and 
three dimensional graphs and aiTays; trees and nets; and control panels for 
computational models. We will discuss only three classes of representation in 
interfaces, namely common music notation, graphical representations and control 
panels for computational models. One reason for picking these particular classes of 
interfac* representation for discussion is that they are particularly suitable for 
communicating high-levwi structure. We will begin with the use of common music 
notation in computer interfaces. 

5.1 Use of common music notation in computer interfaces. 

Common music notation (CMN), with origins traceable back at least as far as the 
11 th century and music educator Guido D'Amezzo, is a highly sophisticated notation 
that makes use of many clever devices to make musical structure visible and reduce 
cognitive load by chunking. Ingenious notational devices include the key signature, 
visual grouping by meter, cartesian encoding of time and pitch, and visual gestalts 
for certain aspects of scales and chords. Direct manipulation of notes on a graphic 
score is now a ubiquitous interface technique in computer music. Many of the most 
sophisticated ideas for the use of CMN in computer interfaces now in widespread 
use were first developed by Buxton et al. (1979) as part of the Structured Sound 
Synthesis Project at the University of T.„ronto. This project was notable as the first 
major systematic investigation of human machine interface design issues in 
computer music. Pennycook (1985a), notes that this project drew on earlier work on 
the musician-machine interface including: Pulfer (1971) and Tanner (1972) and the 
"Computer Aid for Musical Composers" project at the National Research Council of 
Canada; Veicoe (1975) at the MTT Experimental Music Studio; Truax's POD system 
(1977), and work by Otto Laske (1978). 

The sophistication and ubiquity of common music notation make it an excellent 
starting point for designing interfaces for those with considerable musical experience 
and training. However, common music notation can act as a formidable barrier to the 
novice. It can take a substantial effort for a novice to learn to read music fluently 



38 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



and with understanding: typically a few years practice and study is required. One 
reason for the difficulty is as follows: music notation chunks some concepts (such as 
the concept of key) very compactly, but as a result it may take prolonged effort for 
the novice to come to understand what is only implicit in the notation. A few 
examples are given below of the way that common music notation calls on 
substantial implicit knowledge for its decoding (many more examples could be 
given). 

• The stave notation makes pitch distances explicit in terms of degrees of the 
scale, but obscures them in t«rms of chromatic steps: the distance in 
semitones between two points on the stave depends on the key signature in 
force. 

• The structure of the diatonic scale as a whole (in terms of semitone step 
sizes) is not shown anywhere explicitly in the notation. 

• The varying quality of scale-tone chords is not made explicit by the 
notation. The inference of chord quality from the notation depends on 
experience (or calculation based on abstract knowledge) of key structure. So, 
for example, major, minor and diminished triads may appear visually 
indistinguishable from each other in the notation. 

• Tonal centres arc not indicated explicitly, their location must be calculated 
using memorised abstract rules. 

• The rules for constructing key signatures require use of a memorised 
abstract procedure. 

• Relationships between notes in remote keys are difficult to decode visually. 

In summary, the same ingenious chunking of musical concepts that helps to make 
common music notation so useful for experienced musicians can make it an obstacle 
for novices.^ For this reason, while there will always be an important place for 

^ Lamb's (1982) interface, reviewed earlier, is an interesting apparent exception to this claim, but 

39 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



common music notation in the musician-machine interface for seasoned musicians, 
there is a need for other kinds of interfaces to help beginners. Such interfaces could 
help novices, especially those without good teachers, to gather sufficient musical 
experience, knowledge, vocabulary and motivation to begin performing a range of 
musical tasks with confidence, and to learn enough to be able to understand the basis 
of more complex notations. We will return to this theme in part U of the thesis. 

5.2 Interfaces using groijhical representations of structure 

Tlie second of the three classes of musicifji-machine interface that we wUl consider 
involves use of specialised graphic representations. We will deal briefly and 
selectively with just one representation of this kind, namely tree-like 
representations. (Other graphic representations such as arrays, and interfaces based 
on them, such as Music Mouse (Spiegel, 1986), will be considered in part II of the 
thesis.) Tree-like notations for music can appear in music interfaces in a number of 
guises; as a structuring device for scores (Buxton et al., 1979), as part of a notation 
for analysis (Smoliar, 1980) as a hierarchical structuring device for composition 
(Lerdahl and Potard, 1985) and as a notation for grammars. Tree-like notations arc 
often us-'^ -n collaboration with common music notation (Buxton et al., 1979). One 
interesting ' nplicit use of tree-like structures ir? an unusual modality takes the form 
of aurally presented analyses of pieces of music in terms of shorter pieces of music. 
The key idea behind tiiis kind of analysis is tiiat some notes of the original piece are 
deemed less important than otiiers and left out, revealing a series of recursively 
nested skeletal structures. (See Urdahl and Jackendoff (1983) for such a theory.) 
Though interfaces based on trees are of great interest, and though there is no reason 
why such interfaces should not be designed for novices, at present most interfaces 
with a heavy commitment to this representation appear to be suitable only foi' users 
who already have very sophisticated knowledge or experience of tonal music. 

5.3 Interactive control panels for computational models 

The final of the tiiree classes of interfaces that we will comment on is the class 



on closer examinaUon the representation used by Lamb bears only a very superficial resemblance lo 
common music notation. 



40 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



consisting of control panels for computational tnodels. In one sense, of course, any 
programming language that can control musical peripherals, such as Music Logp or 
Loco constitutes such an "interface". Our focus, however, will be more particularly 
on grc^hical front ends to computational models. Note that a graphical front end to 
a programming language does not in itself constitute a computational model: a 
language is a kit for constructing such models. Some programs, on the other hand, 
offer graphical interfaces to some pre-designed, fixed com' national model of some 
musical process. Yet other programs allow graphical tools to be used to inteix;onnect 
large prefabricated components to assemble customised versions of some basic 
computational model. Wc will consider aspects of four interfaces that offer 
interactive control panels for building or controlling computational models of 
musical processes: two offer graphical interfaces to general programming kits, and 
two offering elegant graphical interfaces to processes that are in some way 
'prefabricated' to a higher degree. The interfaces are: Desain's (1986) proposed 
graphical programming tool. Hookup (Sloane, Levitt, Travers, So and Cavero, 
1986), 'M' (ZicarelU, 1987) and Jam factory (Zicharelli, 1987), which we shall now 
deil with in that order*. 



5.3.1 Desain's proposed graphical programming tool. 

Desain (1986) describes an interface that allows a user to manipulate icons 
representing signal processing components (such as microphones, loudspeakers, 
amplifiers and delays) to construct signal processing devices on screen. The two 
essential software components of such a system are a graph editor and an 
incremental compiler for signal processing. Such components exist separately, but 
arc not connected in Desain's system. Desain notes that if the graph editor were to be 
connected to a signal processing compiler and appropriate hardware, t^e user could 
test out the 'devices' she had assembled using a real microphone and loudspeaker. 
So far, this proposal relates directly to signal processing rather than music 
composition, but Desain goes on to propose that similar techniques could be used 
for programming a graphical front end to die Loco language, described earlier. This 
proposal seems entirely feasible, using either a graphic metaphor for functional 

4 See also MiUer Puckeue's excellent Patcher' (Puckettc, 1988). Patcher is an iconic object- 
oriented programming language with MIDI (and other real-Ume control) facilities. Patcher is part of 
the Max environment associated with ERCAM. 

41 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 

composition, (as used, for example, in 'Icon machiiic Logo', discussed in Feurzeig 
(1986) for the domain of algebra), or using a graphical metaphor for message 
passing, as proposed by Desain. We will defer commenting on this proposal until 
after we have considered Sloane, Levitt, Travers, So and Cavero's (1986) related 
interface "Hookup". After this, we will comment on both interfaces together. 

5.3.2 Hookup. 

Hookup (Sloane, Levi*% Travers, So and Cavero, 1986) is a prototype software 
toolkit that allows icons to be interconnected on screen to create little working data- 
flow programs. Figure 20 shows a blank working screen. In the data-flow model of 
computation, quantities (typically numerical) 'flow' in one direction through a series 
of interconnected primitive processors, each processor producing a new output 
asynchronously whenever it is presented with a full set of new inputs. While waiting 
for a quantity to arrive at one input of a processor, quantities may be 'queued' on 
another input. The data flow paradigm of computing is normally used for signal 
processin 5, simulation and computer music applications (Desain, 1986). In the case 
of Hookup, icons are provided for input devices that include the mouse itself, 
graphic slidors, buttons, clocks and boxes for inputting numerical quantities. 
Processors include arithmetic and logic components. Output devices include graphic 
'sprites', graphs and midi output. Icons for some of these devices waiting to be 
connected up are shown in Figure 21. The specialised input and output devices 
provided by Hookup mean that it is suitable for animation and simple music 
composition. For example, Figure 22 shows a program that allows sliders and 
buttons to be manipulated to produce chord progressions. Other dataflow programs 
assembled in Hookup have realised, for example 'process music' compositions by 
the minimalist composer Steve Reich. We will now comment on Desain's proposal 
and Hookup together. 



42 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



4 File Edit Special 




Fig 20 Blank Working Screen for H'jokup 



m 



I 



aaoD 
nnaw 
□oara 

r i 

inrra 



4^ 



©■ D- ©- 




I ^ 



4 im"" 



Fig 21 Hookup with various icons waiting to be hooked up 



43 



Chapter 3: ITie musician-machine interlace 




Fig 22 A Hookup program to play chord progressions 



5.3.3 Conclusions on Hookup and Desain's proposed graphical front end to Loco 
Botli Hookup and Desain's proposed graphical front viid to Loco are joyous ideas, 
full of promise, that could hai'dly fail to capture the enthusiasm and participation of 
novice would-fje musicians, Both are outstanding contributions. However, neither 
remarkable , urogram fully addresses the particular issues that we are pursuing, for 
the following reasons. Hookup is perhaps most accurately thought of as a tool for 
animation and Midi processing rather than than as a tool for novices to explore music 
composition (perhaps with the exception of 'process music'). Midi command 
streams manipulated by dataflow appear to be too low a level of description for 
modelling most aspects of tonal music perspicaciously. However, experiments on 
the use of Hookup to teach novices ab(.)ut aspects of music composition would be of 
the greatest interest. Desain's proposal, based on the full flexibility and symbolic 
power of Lisp, almost certainly has the potential to constitute an interface well 
suited for teaching novices I'lxiiit music composition. But while such an interface 
might constitute a gocxl tool box for building computational models of aspects of 
musical expertise for novices to play with, it would not in itself constitute such a 
model. Given that one of our main purnuits is the provision of novices with explicit 
models of musical relationships and musical expertise in manipulable, perspicacious 
form, graphical front etKls to general programming laJiguages do not in themselves 



44 



Chapter 3: Tlie musician-machine interface 



provide us with what we require, and we need to look further. Now that we have 
looked at two general programming kits with graphical interfaces, we shall go on to 
look at our final two example interfaces, which offer elegant graphical interfaces to 
computational processes that are in some way 'prefabricated' to a higher degree. 

5.3.4 The 'M' program. 

M and Jam Factory are proprietary programs for the Apple Macintosh. (Zicharelli, 
1987). M (Figure 23) allows sequences of notes, chords, rhythmic patterns, accent 
patterns and so forth to be built up in libraries and edited graphically. The sequences 
can be initially created using midi input from an instrument, or by means of various 
graphic editors. Particular note, rhythm and other patterns can then be graphically 
selected for combination to produce musical output, in real time, in up to four 
voices. Patterns can also be selected for real-time scrambling at random, or 
scrambling according to probability distributions in various ways. The result of 
changing which patterns arc contributing to the output can be heard instantly. The 
scrambling can provide a degree of variation even when the user is not intervening. 

Rather like the intelligent drum, M has a control area whose x and y value can be 
used to control which of the patterns in each musical dimension (pitch, rhythm, 
accent, etc.) are selected at any time to contribute to the live result. The choice of 
pattern in any of the musical dimensions addressed can be set to be controlled either 
by current x or current y value , or disconnected from the xy controller altogether. 
Either x or y position can also be set to control parameters other than temporal 
patterns, such as timbre and tempo. The hnks between parameters and controller can 
easily be changed in real time. As it happens, all of the musical parameters controlled 
have just six discrete values to chose from at any time (i.e. 6 note patterns, 6 rhythm 
patterns, 6 timbres, etcetera ) except for tempo, which can be varied continuously. 

The selection of the current x and y values is done by moving an iconic baton 
around in the control area. By moving around the baton, the user can navigate 
between combinations of parameters and so "compose" interactively. M uses a 
variety of ingenious graphic input tools to facilitate the use of the various different 
editors, and uses carefully designed graphics to: represent the vju-ious patterns; show 



45 



Chapter 3: TJie musiciaii-machinc interface 



what values are selected; and show what other choices are available for any 
paramete'\ 

In all, M is well designed for "interactive composition". Most of the skill in using M 
10 good effect seems to lie in the initial (and time-consuming) selection and creation 
of raw material to be mixed* M is a good tool to allow experienced composers, who 
know what they are doing, to experiment fluidly and flexibly with different 
combinations of their basic materials. However, M does not appear to address the 
particular issues that we are pursuing, in the following senses. Although novices can 
undoubtedly produce interesting and varied music with M simply by moving a 
mouse around about, there is little evidence that their newly found "skills" would 
make them any more able to compose when deprived of M, or able to articulate in 
any detail what they had been doing. With very careful selection of initial materials 
and structured guidance, novices might be led to experience educational "shocks" of 
the kind described by Bamberger (as reported the previous chapter). M is not in the 
business of providing novices with explicit models of musical relationships and 
musical expertise in manipulable, perspicacious form, except in the important regard 
of allowing pitch lists, rhythm lists, etcetera, to be combined perspicaciously. We 
will now consider the final interface, "Jam Factory". 



Ifc File Edit UariQble$ Pottem lUindoius Options 



demo2 



■+ 



• fTir 



T E H r • 



input 



iffT tN fRC 



CTIL 

t H«r 



An 



AH 



AH 

tcwQ l I AH 



sterns 



Q 




mm 



I I 1 ^ I I T I 

I mi MiinMA 



Mid. 



Uariablet 



■ a H tt 








7 


1 


1 






















CHUCK 




h 


% 




• 






J 


k 


1 


m 


m 


• 







J/" TI«Nir»IITI«H 



Ef ill nmm 



0 



IMATHNfl 



/f1 llUUf 





¥ 



Ssfc^zfc 



- ..I. wur 

. .«..-« .aUMaa ■■■■ 
Mttai (•••■ 



Fig. 23 A typical 'M' screen 



46 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



5.3^ Jam Factory 

Jam factory (Figure 23) contains four "players" that "listen" to Midi input and 
"perform" instant vaiiations on the input in real time. Thus, Jam Factory provides a 
sense of improvising or 'jamming' with the user. The variations on the original input 
are introduced by making probabilistic changes to the pitches and note durations of 
the input based on what has happened before according to information held in 
transition tables fXcnakis, 1971) associated with each player. The parameters of ♦he 
transition tables (held separately for pitch and duration) can be varied by the user. 
The user may also introduce combinations of various kinds of deterministic 
processing into the changes made by each player. The deterministic variations affect 
such parameters as microtiming, articulation and the sustaining of notes that are 
followed by randomly introduced silences. Jam Factory has a well-designed (if 
initially confusing) interface and as a proprietary product is unique of its kind. From 
the point of view of our restricted viewpoint, the educational possibilities of Jam 
fa( tory as regards composition are hard to evaluate. Jam Factory might act as a sort 
of 'Rorshach test' for experienced composers, echoing back to them variations of 
what they have played, from which they might pick out interesting variations for 
further development. In the case of novice would-be composers, leaving aside any 
general motivational benefits, it is hard to see any mechanisms by which novices 
exposed to Jam Factory might come any nearer to knowing how to compose using 
aiiy other instrument or tool. Similarly, it seems unlikely that Jam factory would do 
much to help novices find a vocabulary to articulate musical experience. Needless to 
say, no criticism is intended of Jam Factory in its own right; we are merely 
commenting on its suitability for our particular aims. In general, one of the problems 
about probabilistic models of musical processes is that they tend to be superficial and 
crude. 



47 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine interface 



^ File Edit Options Ccnjure tUlndouit 




lOOH 




Cgek 0| 

Lf*d Rtfft 12 3 4 

Pnoh M Our IMI 



Inffi 



a 




c 


(1 


e 


f 




h 


• 

1 






MovWOff 



RM«r4 PiMI Trw)!!* Ctrl Ech» QgiCh inCh Pyt> 




1 1 1 1— iP 

Qq ISiaBlE»UMlSynfi|Clfiat| ^ 



TtmpoQ^IIIIIIIBIIIIIII Q'ftH >4 



12 



Sus 



10091 

isTI Dura tWii; 50« 
C90W 0 



Pet 



SO 



8 



PhMf 



F«1 Lt*d Bf«ft 12 3 4 
"T Oiwnt I I Pitoh ■ Pur W 

aiuiuiil.... 



B3! 




Fig. 24 Jam Factory 



This concludes our comments on interfaces based on control panels for 
computational models, and our comments on contrasting types of musician-machine 
interface with educational relevance. 



6 Conclusions on the musician-machine interface 

We will now summarise the conclusions drawn from the survey of the musician- 
machine interface (in some cases repeating forms of words used earlier). It is hard to 
exercise appropriate control of a process without knowledge or experience of what is 
being controlled. One general strategy for designing interfaces to get around 
novices' ignorance or lack of experience is to represent explicitly and 
perspicaciously in the interface the implicit knowledge required to operate in the 
domain. Another useful general design strategy is to exploit users' existing 
knowledge or propensities (Smith, Irby, Kimball, Verplank and Harslem, 1982). 
When using either strategy, it is often helpful to study the cognitive psychology of 
the relevant domain in advance: ideally, both the structure of the domain and 
relevant human propensities should be taken into account when devising mappings 
of gesture, feedback and action to each other for the interface, 



48 



Chapter 3: The musician-machine inleifacc 



In the case of exj cneiiced musicians working in tonal music, the use of common 
music notation as the basis of interfaces has many benefits, because it allows 
sophisticated users to make full use of established chunking and structuring 
tendencies. In the case of no . e musicians who want to learn to compose, its use as 
a sole or chief notation may often be inappropriate, because it may take novices 
several years to learn to read the notation fluently, and much important information 
is only represented implicitly in the notation. There is a need for other kinds of 
interfaces to help beginners. Such interfaces could help novices, especially those 
without good teachers, to gather sufficient musical experience, knowledge, 
vocabulary and motivation to begin performing a range of musical tasks with 
confidence, and to learn enough to be able to understand the basis of more complex 
notations. 

In the case of experienced composers, a good design consideration (Desain and 
Honing, 1986) is to design interfaces that have maximum flexibility and make as 
fe v assumptions as possible about how a composer will work. This approach is 
consonant with the observed diversity of the way in which composers work 
(Sloboda, 1985). However, if we wish to educate novices in some particular aspect 
of music, it may be useful to reverse this design consideration and build into 
interfaces a very specific metaphor for some aspect of music. 

Desain's proposal. Hookup, M and Jam Factory are all outstanding innovative 
graphic interfaces for manipulating musical materials. Diverse opportunities remain 
for constructing interfaces to provide novices with explicit models of various kinds 
of musical relationship and musical expertise at different levels in manipulable, 
explicit, form. 



49 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 



The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the design, function and limitations of two 
existing intelligent tutors for music composition. We begin the chapter by noting the 
'traditional' model for an intelligent tutoring system (ITS), and observe restrictions 
on the kind of domain in which this model is directly applicable. We then identify a 
restricted area of music composition likely to be amenable to this kind of treatment, 
namely harmonisation. Next, we review two intelligent tutors that teach particular 
aspects of music related to harmonisation. To help clarify the nature of the tutors, we 
briefly outline the goals, problems and methods associated with writing harmony. 
Finally, we draw conclusions about limits to the applicability of the traditional ITS 
model to music composition. The overall purpose of the chapter is to prepare the 
ground for work to be presented in part III of the thesis on a new framework for 
knowledge-based tutoring in creative domains. The structure of the chapter is as 
follows; 

1 A role for the 'traditional' ITS model in music composition 

2 Vivace: an expert system for harmonisation 

2.1 The goal of four-part harmonisation 

2.2 Problems inherent in harmonisation 

2.3 How to harmonise a chorale melody 

2.4 Pedagogic use of Vivace 

2.5 Contribution of Vivace 

3 Mac Voice: a critic for voice-leading 

3.1 Function and use of Mac Voice 

3.2 Criticisms of Mac Voice and possibilities for further work 

4 Lasso: an intelligent tutoring system for 16th century counterpoint 

5 Conclusions on intelligent tutors for music composition 

6 Related work in other fields 



50 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 
7 Conclusions cn me use of computers in teaching music 

1 A role for the 'traditional' ITS model in music composition 

The first requirement for an intelligent tutoring system for any task is that it has to 
have some ability to perform, or at least to discuss articulately, the task in hand. 
This demands explicit knowledge of the task. Two other features are usually 
associated with ITS's: intelligent tutoring systems are expected to build up 
knowledge of what a particular student knows, so tli^ . opportunities can be seized to 
get points across in the most appropriate way or to diagnose misconceptions; 
secondly an intelligent tutoring system is expected to have explicit knowledge of 
ways of teaching (Self, 1974). ITic traditional model of an intelligent tutoring system 
may be entering a period of transition (Self, 1988), but it provides a good starting 
point. The very first requirement of the model, for explicit knowledge of the task, 
raises the question "for what areas of music composition do wc have explicit 
knowledge 7". This appears to narrow the possibilities for this style of ITS 
contribution to music composition down to a very few areas. It seems entirely 
reasonable to suggest that intelligent tutoring systems might be built for factual 
aspects of music theory related to composition. These might not differ all that much 
from intelligent tutoring systems for, say. Geography (Carbonell, 1970). As 
regards the process of composition itself, one of the very few areas for which 
detailed, explicit rules of thumb can be found in textbooks is harmonisation. At least 
two intelligent tutoring systems for tasks related to harmonisation have been 
constructed, and we will now discuss their design, function and limitations. 

2 Vivace: an expert system for harmonisation 

Vivace is a rule-based expert system for the task of four-part chorale writing, created 
by Thomas (1985). Vivace has been used for teaching in ways that we will describe 
shortly. Vivace takes as input an eighteenth century chorale melody (i.e, roughly 
speaking, a hymn-like melody) and writes a bass line and two inner voices (tenor 
and alto) that fit the melody. We cannot sensibly discuss Vivace without some 
knowledge of what is involved in harmonisation. Accordingly, we will outline in the 
next three paragraphs what the task entails. (Experienced musicians might wish to 
skim from here to sub-section 2.4.) 



51 



Chapter 4: Inte liigenl tutoring systems for music composition 



There is no single correct harmonisation of a given melody, in fact the space of 
acceptable harmonisations of a given melody is very large indeed. There are a 
number of rules and guidelines given in text books for carrying out the task, 
abstracted from the practice cf past composers. The rules and guidelines apply not 
only to each voice in isolation: but also to the sequence of chords that they all interact 
to produce; to interactions between any two pairs of voices; and to vertical spacing 
of the notes at any given lime. There are also guidelines for cadences (chords that act 
as 'punctuation' to the harmonic sequence), guidelines for harmonic tempi, non- 
harmonic tones and various other considerations. Broadly speaking, the rules and 
guidelines arc of four types. There are rules that act as firm requirements, rules that 
are statements of preference but not requirements, rules that are firm prohibitions 
and rules that prefer some occurrence to be avoided. 



2.1 The goal behind four-part harmonisation 

In essence, the aim of the mles appears to be to minimise the number of features that 
do not sound pleasing, and to maximise the number of features that do sound 
pleasing in all of the relevant dimensions (e.g. harmonic progression, voice-leading, 
interest of inner voices etc.). There are other genres (e.g. bebop, punk, minimalism) 
for which other overall goals seem to apply (e.g., induce surprise or shock; 
experiment with perceptually slow rates of change, etcetera). The simple goal we 
have outlined seems to characterise four-part harmonisation at a high level 
surprisingly well. One of the main problems in pursuing the aim is that seidng up a 
pleasing feature in one dimension often destructively interferes with a feature in 
another dimension. 



22 Problems inherent in the harmonisation task 

We will now outline three of the chief problems inherent in the task of 
harmonisation. The first problem is that it is quite possible, indeed very common in 
beginners' classes, to satisfy all of the formal mles and produce a piece of music 
which is correct but is aesthetically quite unsatisfactory. The second problem is that 
most of the guidelines are prohibitions rather than positive suggestions. Milton 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 

Babbit observes that "..tne rules of counterpoint are not intended to tell you what 
to do, but what not to do" (Pierce, 1983, page 5). The same applies to the closely 
related task of four-part harmonisation. To put it another way, viewing 
hamionisation as a typical AI 'generate and test' task, the rules constitute help in the 
testing rather than in the generation phase. The third problem is that it is often 
impossible to satisfy all of the preferences at once - usually some preference rules 
have to be broken; but traditional descriptions of the rules do not assign the 
preference rules wi*:!! a clear order of importance. In fact it is not at all clear that 
simple priorities can be given in general. 

23 How to harwonise a choral: melody (and why it is difficult) 

Typically, beginners arc given a suggested order in which to carry out the tasks 
involved in harmonisation. The order and identification of tasks given below is 
adapted from Thomas (1985); 

• start by deciding where to put cadences, 

• write chords for the cadences, 

• decide on a harmonic rhythm, 

• work backwards considering all possible chords, 

• choose a chord sequence from the sets of possible chords, 

• work backwards fitting in the bass, 

(this must fit the chords and move properly with the melody line), 

• fit the Inner voices. 

As more and more of the harmonisation is completed, more and more mutual 
constraints arise between what is being written and what has already been written. 
Whereas in the early stages many choices would have been more or less equally 
acceptable, as the task progresses, it typically gets harder and harder to fit the 
requirements at all, and sooner or later some set of requirements are over- 
constrained and cannot be met, necessitating the changing of an earlier decision. 
However, the earlier decision may itself have been the only choice possible at that 
stage, so that earlier choices have to be undone and so on. So, for example, it may 
be impossible for an inner voice to complete the planned chord and stay in the proper 



53 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 

relationship with the bass, making it necessary to change the bass, which may be 
impossible without changing the chord, which may necessitate changing the chords 
sequence and so on, in backtracking fashion. 

2.4 Pedagogic use of Vivace 

Given that the textbook rules for carrying out the task have been known for several 
hundred years, it is not, as T»-.^x.ias (1985) pohts out, particularly difficult to write a 
rule-based system that implements the text book rules. Equally, it should be 
reasonably straightforward to construct an traditional intelligent tutoring system to 
use text book rules to criticise students' work and serve as a model of the expertise 
they are supposed to acquire. But how useful would such a tutor be, given the 
problems inherent in the task of hannonisation we have already outlined? Thomas 
not only constructed such a tutor, but also devised ways of making it pedagogically 
useful, despite the 'imitations of the text-book theory. Indeed, much of the 
pedagogical leverage was obtained by using the tutor to illuminate the limitations of 
the theory , as we will now consider. 

By building and experimenting with Vivace, Thomas was able to establish quite 
firmly that typical text book rules are an inadequate characterisation of expert 
performance of the task. For example, Thomas discovered that if tenor and alto parts 
are written using only conventional mles about range and movement, the tenor voice 
would often move to the top of its range and stay there - which is musically 
ridiculous.^ Thomas posited that there must be a set of missing rules and meta- 
rules to fill the gaps, and set about trying to find the rules using Vivace as an 
experimental tool. Note, of course, that a human musician has a role to play in each 
experiment, deciding on the basis of intuitions whether a result is musically 
acceptable or not. Thomas was able to make explicit many new detailed 
considerations about the task that were previously only tacit intuitions, and found 
out that many of the traditional rules were overstated or needed redefining. As well 

^ This echoes Rothgeb's experience in implementing the textbook rules for realising unfigurcd 
continuo bass. Rothgeb (1980) implemented complete computational models of Heinichen's and 
Saint-Lambert's eighteenth century procedures for bass harmonisation. The computational model, 
not surprisingly, showed the bodies of rules to be incomplete and inadequate. 



54 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 

as leading to new knowledge in matters of detail, Thomas was able to make explicit 
knowledge about the task at a more strategic level. For example, Thomas found that 
early versions of Vivace would sometimes 'get stuck', due to the preponderance of 
rules that prohibited actions as opposed to proposing actions. This led Thomas and 
her human pupils to focus on and formulate a number of heuristics for 'what to do' 
as opposed to 'what not to do'. Experience with Vivace also underlined for Tliomas 
the need to make humai pupils aware of high level phrase structure, before diving 
into detail of choid writing. Having experimentally discovered new explicit 
knowledge about the task, as a result of "teaching" her expert system, Thomas used 
this knowledge as a basis for writing a new primer for the task. Part of this 
knowledge was also used in a commercial program, MacVoice, which criticises 
students' voice-leading in a restricted version of a similar task. We will consider 
MacVoice after summarising the contribution of Vivace. 

2-5 Summary of the contribution of Vivace 

Vivace made a significant contribution to music education by enabling the received 
wisdom about a particular task to be procedurally ru ., debugged and refined, 
leading to better explicit knowledge of what was being taught. As well as 
contributing to music education, this work may be in the vanguard of a new wave of 
computational musicology, allowing tiieories of particular areas of music to be 
experimentally testf " 

3 MacVoice: a critic for voice-leading 

Macvoice i"5 a Macintosh program arising from the expert system Vivace that 
criticizes voice-leading for four-part harmonisation. In order to explain what voice- 
leading is, we need first of all to analyse the task of harmonisation conceptually (as 
opposed to analysing it in terms of successive steps, as we did earlier). Readers 
who are familiar with the notion of voice-leading may wish to skip onto sub-section 
3.1. 

Four-part harmonisation has many degrees of freedom, but must be carried out 
within a series of constraints. One degree of freedom arises from the hannonic 



55 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 



ambiguity of any melody. ITierc are many different harmonic sequences that could 
fit a given melody. Hence one implicit subtask in harmonisation is to choose a series 
of chords - although this need not be done explicitly, and may emerge from the 
combined activity of the individual voices. A second implicit subtask is to construct 
a bass line that fits the chord sequence (though the bass Une may sometimes dictate 
the chord sequence): at the same time, the bass line must make a "good melody" in 
its own right. (Note that no clear, detailed guidelines for a "good" melody are 
known.) A third task is ^nie the inner voices. Two overall areas of constraint 
apply at all points to -ill voices, and it is here that the task of voice-leading arises. 
The first area consists of constraints on "chord construction" (Forte, 1979) i.e. 
preferences and prohibitions governing the pitch spacing of simultaneously sounded 
notes. The second area consists of constraints on "chord connection" i.e. the 
preferences and prohibitions on the way individual voices move with respect to 
themselves and other voices as they progress from chord to chord. One purpose of 
the chord construction constraints is to try to ensure a reasonable texture at all points 

- not too cluttered or top heavy. Another puipose of the chord connection constraints 
is to try to ensure that every voice is perceived to move independently at all times - 
not seemingly in a subservient relationship to some other voice. Other purposes of 
the constraints are to ensure that each chord is weU-defined, and yet others may refer 
to a particular historical style. It is these two overall areas of constraint, chord 
construction and choixi connection - particularly the constraints on chord connections 

- that are known as 'voice-leading'. (Note that voice-leading is not applicable 
everywhere in music - it may be appropriate for a musician to ignore voice-leading 
constraints in some contexts, either because voice independence is not a goal at that 
point, or for stylistic reasons.) The purpose of Mac Voice is to criticise solely this 
aspect of students' harmonisations. 



3.1 Use ofMacVoice 

The Mac Voice interface includes a simple music editor. It is possible to input notes 
in any oider, foi example a chord at a time, or a voice at a time or in any fragmentary 
fashion. As soon as any note is placed on the stave, Mac Voice displays its guess as 
to the function of the corresponding chord in the form of an annotated Roman 
numeral. Two important limitations of MacVoice are as follows: firstly, all notes 

56 70 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutodTig systems for music composition 



must be of the same duration (so that the chords lorm homophouic blocks); and 
secondly, the piece must be in a single key. Apart from saving and loading files or 
erasing the stave, there is only one other menu function, called "voice-leading" (fig 
25). When this is selected, a rule base of voice-leading rules inspects the 
harmonisation, and then provides a list of voice-leading errors, Mac Voice is capable 
of quite flexible use, since it can be used on exercises where any combination of 
voices or notes aie already filled in. 



« Flla E<iil $cttlnfl« 



20:34 



Tools 




DEMO #1 



i 



C maj. 



I r IV iii 

Uoict-leidlng Errort 



i' r r r (' I r 



I +v*'i si* 



I lUli Iflf ' If 



:•!; ;-;!]!i;.MiiKi=r 



Double 0 tonal dogrefl for maj/min triad in first Inuerslon in chord 2. 

Double the third for aug/dtm triad in chord i. 

Tritone retoluet Impreperiy In bast and alto betufeen chords 6 and 7. 

nniihlit th> fifth fftr m«tl/titlii trtwrt In »*riinil lt.n.r.lnn n rhnrri 7 



0 



Fig 25 MacVoice 



3.2 Criticisms of MacVoice and possibilities for further work 

MacVoice is the first program of its kind, and is in practical use at Carnegie Mellon 
University. MacVoice opens up many possibilities for further work. The comments 
below mainly concern such possibilitie At present (version 2.0), MacVoice only 
points out errors, it doesn't give strategic positive advice. On the basis of Thomas's 
own work on Vivace, a future version could perhaps give positive advice. Neither 
does MacVoice address the sensibleness or otherwise of the chord sequences 
involved - but such a facility could in principle be added in various ways if desired. 

57 

ERIC 7 , 



Chapter^: Intelligent tutoring systems lor music composition 



An interesting topic for further research might be to attempt to show visually what 
the voice-leading constraints are, or what some of the preferred possibilities are at 
any point. Tills might be very difficult, if only because u. jre are many voice-leading 
rules applicable at any given time. Perhaps as the task became more constrained, 
candidate notes might be shown (on request) in different shades of grey 
corresponding to more or less likely possibilities. Another possibility for further 
research would be to try to abstract or group the rules according to a smaller number 
of abstract principles th^l tney appear to serve, and to try to use the principles to 
inform and illuminate tiie tutor's criticisms. A closely related topic for further work 
would be to design a tutor or environment that could help motivate for the student 
the origin and scope of the rules. Examples of efforts to separate lower level 
knowledge from higher level knowledge in expert systems, and to provide graphic 
windows on an existing tutor's inference processes can be found in work on 
Neomycin (Clancey, 1983) and Guidon-Watch (Richer and Clancey, 1985). 

Another ntriguing possibility for further research in ITS for voice-leading arises 
from recent work in the cognitive psychology of music (Wright, 1986), (McAdams 
and Brcgrnan, 1985), (Cross, Howell and West, 1988), (Huron, 1988). This 
research seems to suggest that voice-leading rules may be a special case of the rules 
that govern conditions under which the human auditory system perceives distinct 
noises as emanating from a single entity or not. This is an important task from an 
evolutionary point of view for a human in a noisy forest trying to distinguish leaves 
moving in the wind from a hungry predator. (This image is due to McAdams 
(1987)0 The function of the rules of voice-leading in four-part harmony may be 
largely to make sure that each voice is perceived as an independent entity (while each 
voice contributes to the purposeful chord sequence that emerges from the 
independent activity). It is not clear how far such general principles might go to 
precisely constrain oaditional voice-leading rules. Such principles might have far- 
reaching educational applications in future intelligent tutors for voice-leading. 

This completes our comments on Vivace and Mac Voice. The other iruclligent tutor 
for music composition that we shall consider is Lasso (Newcomb. 1985). 



58 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 

4 Lasso: an intelligtiit tutoring system for 16th century counterpoint 

Lasso is an intelligent tutoring system for 16th century counterpoint, li lited to two 
voices. The task tackled in writing counterpoint is similar to the voice-leading task 
discussed above, but with a different, historically earlier, set of stylistic constraints 
added. Rules for this paradigm of composition were foimalised by Fux (1725) from 
the practice of earlier composers such as Palestrina 2. A problem highlighted by 
Newcomb (1985) in teaching counterpoint, and indeed other historical styles of 
music, is confusion about whether the goal is to encourage good composition, or to 
encourage schoiaily fidehty to a style as illustrated by historical documents. The goal 
behind Newcomb's approach to formalising the style, as incorporated in Lasso, is 
neither of these. Newcomb, wit' 'commendable honesty, notes that his rules are 
intended to serve as simple and consistent guidelines to help students know what is 
required to pass exams. Like Thomas, Newcomb found that the piocess of 
codification of the necessary knowledge required going beyond mles and guidelines 
given in text books. Unlike Thomas, Newcomb goes about this in a somewhat 
behaviourist, probabilistic manner, analysing scores to find out such ^facts' as ''the 
allowable ratio of skip to non-skip melodic intervals" and "how many eighth note 
passages can be expected to be found in a piece of a given length" (Newcomb, 
1985, page 53). 

Lasso was implemented in a CAI PLATO environment and is more reminiscent of 
CAI than ITS. It does not appear that Lasso can write counterpoint itself (Newcomb, 
1985, page 60), and Newcomb acknowledges that the knowledge used for 
criticising the students work is not coded particularly explicitly. It appears that each 
set of related criteria or rules forjudging students' work is implemented as one lump 
of branching procedural code. Each subtype recognised by such "judging engines" 
is associated with unvarying canned error messages, help messages, or 
congratulatory messages, etcetera. The programming style of Lasso is highly 
constrained by the limitations of the PLATO environment. As we have already 

^ Counterpoint is a style of part writing where each voice has more or less as much melodic 
interest as any other voice - a more demanding lask than ordinary four part hannony where the inner 
voices are relatively subservient to the outer voices. Exercises in counterpoint drawing on Fux's 
rules foi-med an imporumt part of the basic education of the classical composers, and siill form the 
basis of the way counterpoint is taught. 



59 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 

indicated, where the rules go beyond traditional rules, they are based on a way of 
characterising style that relies heavily on counting and legislating about the 
frequency of particular low level features. 

From an ITS perspective, although its CAI flavour limits its extensibility. Lasso is 
nonetheless an impressive achievement. Lasso has a high quality music editor 
associated with it; tackles a complex musical paradigm; and has been used in real 
teaching contexts. Many the limitations of Lasso, such as the inexplicitness of the 
knowledge representation, stem from the limitations of the PLATO environment 
(Newcomb, 1985). In practical terms, Lasso could give students expert criticism 
when access to expert criticism was otherwise unavailable (as it may be to those 
working alone) or limited (as it often is in large classes). This could be of substantial 
practical value, bearing in mind that there is a large space of 'right' answers which 
cannot realistically be codified in advance, and which can only be verif 'ed or 
criticised by an expert. 

On the other hand, even if we were to imagine a reimplementation of Lasso with the 
knowledge coded more explicitly, able to write counterpoint itself, extended to ccpe 
with more features of the style, with a good response time and so forth, there would 
still be substantial problems to solve. Firstly, the rules are at a very low level, and 
there are a lot of them. This is reflected by the fact that there needs to be a system 
rule preventing more than one hundred and twenty seven comments being made 
about any given attempt to complete an exercise! To give a flavour of the rules, 
typical remarks by Lasso include; 

• "A melodic interval of a third is followed by stepwise motion in the same 
direction." 

• "Accented quarter passing note? The dissonant quarter note is not preceded 
by a descending step." (Newcomb, 1985, Page 58) 

The corresponding low level rules are accompanied by canned texts that attempt to 
put the rules in a more general context and motivate them, but a user could easily be 
continually overwhelmed by the quantity of relevant help text required to put in 



60 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 



context a myriad of low-l'^vel criticisms. Students complained that "it was so 
difficult to satisfy LASSO's demands that they were forced to revise the same 
exercises repeatedly" (Newcomb, 1985, Page 60). As we suggested in the case of 
Mac Voice, one way of tackling this problem might t)e try to code explicit general 
principles goveming the low-level rules. Such codified principles might be used to 
cut down the number of low-level comments in any particular case and replace them 
by a smaller number of relevant but more general observations. (The need to 
represent strategic domain skills in expert systems in this way was originally 
exemplified by Ciancey and Letsinger's (1981) work on Neomycin.) As pointed out 
in the previous subsection, resea/ch in the cognitive psychology of music might be 
a good starting point for efforts to codify the relevant abstract knowledge in this 
particular domain. Scope for other future research on Lasso, making use of 
traditional ITS techniques, might include the provision of explicit teaching rules and 
an explicit user model. Such developments might help the tutor to reason about 
when not to say things; decide to concentrate on one fault at a time in a principled 
way; or to reason explicitly about what strategic advice to offer on setting about the 
taek. 

5 Conclusions on intelligent tutors for music composition 

Both MacVoice and Lasso are pioneering musical ITS systems^. They have a 
prescriptive and critical teaching style, and it is reasonable within their restricted 
domains that they should use such an approach. The traditional approach works in 
these cases because 16th Century Counterpoint and four-part harmonisation are 
genres that (as taught in schools) can be considered to have known rules, goals, 
constraints and bugs that are stable. A prescriptive, critical style would be far less 
appropriate in a tutor intended to cover a wide range of evolving styles. In such a 
case, it might be possible to write expert components for a series of sub-genres but 

3 There are not currently many intelligent tutors for music compositiort, and information about 
those that do exist tends to be sparse. Other work in the area is noted below. THE MUSES' is an 
intelligent tutor for music theory developed by Sorisio (1987). 'Piano Tutor' is an intelligent tutor 
for playing the piano under djjvelopment by Sanchez, Joseph, Dannenberg, Miller, Capell and 
Joseph (1987). Baker (1988) has partially designed a tutor for aspects of musical interpretation 
based on work by Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1983) and Friber- and Sundbcrg (1986). Recent related 
work has been carried out by Tobias (1988); Cope (1988); "'ugere, Tremblay and Geleyn (1988); 
and Ames and Domino (1988). 

61 

ERIC ^ 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 

this would not satisfactorily address the problem of evolving styles. Any new piece 
of music worth its salt invents new rules, goals and constraints specifically for that 
piece, and may consequently violate some rules normally expected of the genre. 

A second problem with the 'traditional' intelligent tutoring system approach is that 
enforcing rules abstracted from existing practice is not necessarily the best way of 
teaching music composition. Verbal definitions of a musical concept are often very 
impoverished compared 'Mih the rich multiple meanings they come to have for an 
experienced musician. It is all very well to define a dominant seventh, for example, 
(example due to Levitt (1981)) to a novice in terms of its interval pattern and then 
give some rules for its use, but to an experienced musician, the 'meaning' of a 
dominant seventh would vary greatly depending on the context - for example it 
could imply a forthcoming cadence, evidence of a modulation, an unexpected 
dh-ection taken by a chord sequence, etcetera. Getting the novice to obey any set of 
rules is really far less important than making the novice aware of, and able to 
manipula e intelligently, the stmctures and expectations that are available to the more 
experienced musician. What is needed is not so much verbal explanations of what 
rules have been violated, as some way of providing structured sequences of 
experiences that make the novice aware of musical structures, able to manipulate 
them in musically intelligent ways, and capable of formulating sensible musical 
goals to pursue. 

This completes our review of intelligent tutors for music composition. In part III of 
the thesis, we will proiX)se a different kind of framework for intelligent tutor? in 
creative domains, as a step towards solving some of the problems we have 
discussed. 

6 Related work in other fields 

In this section we give pointers to work in other fields that is related to the use of 
computers in music education. 

6.1 Artificial Intelligence and education 



62 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems for music composition 

A good early collection of papers on AI and education research is Sleennan and 
Brown (1982), Good discussions of most of the issues underlying the field can be 
found in O'Shca and Self (1983). A useful critical survey can be found in Elsom 
Cook (1984), Good recent collections of papers can be found in Self (1988a), 
Elsom-Cook (in press), and elsewhere. The most comprehensive up-to-date survey 
isWenger(1988). 

6.2 Computer musical instruments and music editors 

Computer musical inrtruments, computer-based sequencers and computer sound 
synthesis arc essential for serving the input/output and storage needs of aspects of 
the work in the thesis, but need not concern us directly. Music editors are very 
relevant to educational needs, but usually at a low level, as the musical equivalents 
of 'word processors'. At a higher level, good music editors merge with 'musician 
machine interfaces', already discussed. Good surveys of sound synthesis techniques 
can be found in Roads and Strawn (1985) and Loy and Abbott (1985). An up-to- 
daie survey of an important class of music editors can be found in Scholz (1989). 
Updates in these rapidly expanding fields ran be found annually in the proceedings 
of the International Computer Music Conference, and quarterly in the excellent 
Computer Music Journal. 

6.3 "Computers in music research" 

Confusingly, because textual analysis of scores using simple "dumb pattern 
matching", string search and statistical methods was among the first uses of 
computers in music research, researchers doing this kind of research sometimes 
claim that the term "computers in music research" applies exclusively to this area. 
Consideration of first principles in artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology 
make it unlikely than m.uch knowledge of any depth will be learned about music in 
this way. Even practitioners (Gross, 1984) acknowledge doubts about the quality of 
information gained by this approach. 

6.4 Computer-assisted music analysis 

See Smoliar (1980) for early information on computer-assisted music analysis 



63 



Chapter 4: InleUigenl tutoring systems for music composition 



(though the field has since been much influenced since by Lerdahl and Jackendoff 
(1983)). The complexity, subtlety and lack of precisely defined knowledge required 
for most kinds of music analysis tends to limit its relevance to the needs of untrained 
novices. 

65 The cognitive psychology of music 

Good general surveys of the cognitive psychology of music can be found in 
Sloboda (1985), Howell, Cross and West (1985) Deutch (1982), Dowling (1986). 
Recent research can be found in the excellent journal 'Music Perception'. The single 
most influential work in the field is probably Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1983). 

6.6 Knowledge representation in music 

Good general surveys of knowledge representation in music can be found in Roads 
(1984) and the regular series in Computer Music Journal ,"Machine Tongues". 

6.7 Computer-aided composition 

Computer-aided composition is normally taken to refer to automated assistants or 
environments for practiced composers who already have a lot of tacit knowledge 
about music, and well-developed compositional skills and strategies. It also 
frequently refers to composition in the electro-acoustic paradigm. Experienced 
composers are notoriously diverse in their approaches (Sloboda, 1985). Hence 
much of this work concentrates on providing powerful tools that make as few 
constraining assumptions about musical structure as possible. 

7 Conclusions on the use of computers in teaching music. 

To complete part I, we will review our conclusions in three areas, namely: early 
approaches to the use of computers in teaching music; developments in the 
musician-machine interface; and intelligent tutors for music composition. These 
correspond to collected and more concise versions of conclusions already drawn in 
the relevant sections. 



64 



Chapter 4: Intelligent tutoring systems fCi music composition 



7.1 Conclusions about early approaches 

Computers arc currently used in music education mostly as quiz-masters, easily used 
musical instruments, "musical typewriters" and for musical games; they can they 
can count and identify simple musical events, and perform simple musical 
manipulations such as reordering, transposition, and pitch and time transformations. 

High quality eAploratory microworlds for music are beginning to introduce 
opportunities for exploratory learning for those without traditional musical skills. 

Few of the early applications exploit new opportunities to make explicit 
representations of the kinds of musical knowledge that a novice may need when 
learning to compose tonal music. Musical knowledge is mostly left implicit. 

A human teacher with expert musical knowledge could use musical microworlds to 
devise individually relevant experiments to help students gain the experience they 
need. The teacher could also help interpret the results of the experiments to students. 
To some extent, the same purpose might be served by books of experiments 
associated with particular microworlds, but this would miss opportunities to 
capitalise on individual differences. Intelligent tutors to complement microworlds 
could help with such problems. 

7.2 Conclusions about developments in the nmician-machine interface 

In the case of experienced composers, a good design consideration is to design 
interfaces that have maximum ilexibility and make as few assumptions as possible 
about how a composer will work. This approach is consonant with the observed 
diversity of the way in which composers work (Sloboda, 1985). However, if we 
wish to educate novices in some particular aspect of music, it may be useful to 
reverse this design consideration and build into interfaces very specific metaphors 
for particular aspects of music. 

New developments in the musician-machine interface are beginning to provide 



65 



Chapter 4: Iniclligcnt tutoring systems for music composition 



novices with diverse powei tools for music composition, some of which we 
summarise below. Music editors make it possible for novices without traditional 
musical skills to manipulate and listen to music represented in common music 
notation. Graphical programming kits for music, although currently in the 
experimental stage, offer tools for novices to construct computational models of 
musical processes. Interactive composition tools make it easy for novices to control 
musical manipulations such as reordering, transposition, and pitch and time 
transformations in real-t\ae. However, these exciting developments leave many 
issues unaddressed, wiilch can be summarised as follows. Limitations of Music 
editors: in the case of novice musicians who want to learn to compose, thf. use of 
common music notation as a sole or chief notation may not always be appropriate, 
since much important information is only represented implicitly in the notation, and 
novices can have very great difficulty learning it. To exploit new opportunities to 
help beginners get initial musical experience, there is a need for other kinds of 
notations, and other kinds of interfaces. Limitations of graphical programming kits 
for musi( : visually constructed programs can be very hard to understand, unless 
they aie very small, or unless good visual structuring facilities are provided. 
Graphical programming kits provide tools for building explicit computational models 
of musical processes, but they do not in themselves constitute such models. To use 
graphical programming kits to represent specific musical knowledge 
perspicaciously, they require augmentation in the following areas; 

♦ identification of appropriate musical knowledge for use in models, 

♦ formulation of the knowledge in appropriate computational form, 

♦ selection of grain size for the knowledge to aid perspicacity, 

♦ identification of good computational metaphors to make the knowledge 
easy to communicate to novices, 

♦ devising of mechanisms for making the knowledge flexibly accessible lo 
students from different viewpoints. 

Several of these issues will be addressed in part III of the thesis. Limitations to 
interactive composition tools: although novices can undoubtedly produce 
interesting and varied music with interactive composition programs, there is little 



66 



Chapter 4: TnlelUgent Jutoring systems for music coir position 



evidence that their newly found "skills" would make them any more able to 
compose when deprived of the program, or able to articulate in any detail what they 
had been doing. With careful seleccion of initial materials, structured guidance, and 
expert interpretation, novices might be led to experience beneficial educational 
"shocks" (such as in more traditional microworlds) that would lead to the 
development of compositional insight. There is a role for intelligent tutors to 
complement such tools. 

7.3 Conclusions about intelligent tutors for music composition 

The traditional remedial ITS approach can be applied to certain restricted areas of 
music which can be considered to have identifiable and stable rules, goals, 
constraints or bugs. A prescriptive, critical style is less appropriate in a tutor 
intended to cover a wide range of evolving current practices. Any new piece of 
music worth its salt invents new rules, goals and constraints specifically for that 
piece, and may consequently violate some rules normally expected of the genre. In 
such a constantly evolving domain, it is hard to see how any intelligent tutoring 
system could know enough to be prescriptive or critical without the risk of crushing 
innovative and interesting ideas. 

Verbal definitions of a musical concept are often very impoverished compared with 
the rich multiple meanings they come to have for an experienced musician. Getting 
the novice to obey the rules is may be far less important than making the novice 
aware of, and able to manipulate intelligently, the sductures and expectations that are 
available to the more experienced musician. What is needed is not so much verbal 
explanations of what rules have been violated, as some way of providing structured 
sequences of experiences that make the novice aware of musical structures, able to 
manipulate them with musical intelligence, and capable of formulating sensible 
musical goals to pursue. 



67 



PART II: Harmony Space: an interface for exploring tonal Hii. mony 



•7 played piano at school, but not for very long. The teachers always 
wanted you to play "Ugly Duckling" over and over again. .. it drove me up 
the wall What I really wanted was someone to tell me why some notes 
sounded better than others did..JiockWRoll theory, if there is sue \ a 

thing". »w J 

Seamus Behan (1986), member of rock group Madness . 



"[The property of uneven spacing in a scale}... eruibles t^ie listener to have, 
at every moment, a clear sense of where the music is with respect to such a 
framework. Only with res^sct to such a framework can there be things 
such as motion or rest, tension and resolution, or in short the underlying 
dynamisms of tonal music. By contrast, the complete symmetry and 
regularity of the chromatic and whole tone scales means it every note has 
the same status as every other. The fact that for such scales there can be no 
clear sense of location, and hence of motion is, I believe, the reason that 
such scales have never enjoyed wide or sustained popularity as a basis for 
music." 

She.phard (1982) quoted in Sloboda (1985, page 25b). 



In Part II of the thesis, we present a theoretical basis and a detailed design for a 
computer-based interface, "Harmony Space", designed to enable novices to compose 
chord sequences and learn about tonal harmony. The interface is based on recent 
cognitive theories of how people perceive and process tonal hamiony . Two different 
versions of Harmony Space, based on two different theories, are presented in 
chapters 5 and 7. 



68 



Chapter 5: Harmony Space 



In this chapter, we present a version of Harmony Space based on Longuet-Higgins' 
(1962) theory of tonal harmony. We investigate the representation of chords, key 
areas, tonal centres and modulation in a simplified version of the theory. We then 
outline the design of Harmony Space, and investigate the representation of various 
chord progressions of fundamental importance using Harmony Space. The structure 
of this chapter is as follows; 

1 Longuet-Higgins' theory of harmony 

2 The 'statics' of harmony: chord and key structure 

2.1 Keys and modulation 

2.2 Chords and tonal cenlres 

3 A computer-based learning environment 

3.1 llie minimal features of Harmony Space 

3.2 Harmony Space design decisions 

4 The 'dynamics' of hanwny: representing harmonic succession 

4. 1 One chord harmony 

4.2 Two chord progiessions 

4.3 Tliree chord progressions 

4.4 Hannonic trajectories and paths 

4.4.1 Cycles of fifth trajectories 

4.4.2 Scalic trdjectories 

4 4.3 Chromatic trajectories 
4.4.5 Progressions in thirds 

4.5 Genernl mapping of intervals in 12-fold space 

4.6 Summary of 'dynamics' of harmony 

4.7 Hinnonic plans 

5 Analysing music infonnally in Harmony Space 

6 Conclusions 

1 Longuet-Higgins' theory of harmony 

Longuet-Higgins' theory of harmony (1962) investigates the properties of an array 
of notes arranged in ascending perfect fifths on one ax^ '-)r thirds on the 



69 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



other axis (fig. 1). This representation turns out to be a good framework for theories 
explaining how people perceive and process tonal hamiony (Steedman, 1972, 
Sloboda, 1985). Our focus here is on the rather different goal of applying the theory 
to develop new educational tools. Longuet-Higgins' (1962) theory asserts that the 
set of intervals that occur in Western tonal music are those between notes v/hose 
frequencies are in ratios expressible as the product of the thn5e prime factors 2, 3, 
and 5 and no others. Given this premise, it follows from the fundamental theorem of 
arithmetic that the set of three intervals consisting of tne octave, the perfect fifth and 
the major thiid is the only co-ordinate space that can provide a unique co-ordinate 
for each interval in musical use (Steedman, 1972). We can represent this graphically 
by laying out notes in a three dimensional grid with notes ascending in octaves, 
perfect thirds and major fifths along the three axes^. We can think of columns of 
notes in more and more distant octaves stacked on top of each note in Fig 1. The 
octave dimension is discarded in mo»i discussions on grounds of practical 
convenience for focussing on the other two dimensions, and on grounds of octave 
equivalence (Fig 1). 'Octave equivalence' simply refers to the fact that for many 
elementary musical purposciv''', notes an octave apart are considered by musicians 
to be equivalent. 

2 The 'statics' of harmony 

1 In Longuet-Higgins' presentations of the theory, and in all discussions of it in the 
psychological literature, the convention is that ascending perfect fifths appear on the x-axis and f e 
ascending major thirds on the y-axis. For educational use, we reverse this convention on three 
grounds. Firstly, it could allow students to switch more easily between versions of Harmony Siiacc 
using Balzano's representation (chapter 7) and the 12-note version of the Longuet-Higgins 
repasentation. (Under our convention, the x-axes of the two representations coincide and th y-axes 
are related as if by a shear operation.) Secondly, it makes the dominant and subdominant areas 
coincide with Schoenberg's (1954) dominant and subdominant regions (though of course the x-axcs 
and the overall meaning of the r ^pective diagrams differ). Tliirdly, tl>e V-I movements that dominate 
Western tonal harmony at many different levels become aligned with physical gravity in a metaphor 
that may be useful to novices. This convention has since been adopted by the innovauvc music 
educator Conrad Cork(1988), to whom I introduced Longuet-Higgins' theory. Cork is the only other 
person I am aware of who has used Longuet-Higgins' theory educationally. 

2 As Henkjan Honing (1989) has pointed out, it can be useful to distinguish bci ween melodic and 
harmonic octave equivalence. For the purposes of our discussion, we consider invned harmonic 
functions to be equivalent. Later, we will outline how inversions can be controlled and rr presented 
naturally in Harmony Space. 



70 



Chapter 5: Hannony Space 



2.1 Keys and modulation 

We begin by looking at how various 'static' relationships in hannony appear in this 
representation. In diagrams such as Fig. 1, all of the notes of the diatonic scale are 
'clumped' into a compact region. For example, all of the notes of C major, and no 
other notes are contained in the box or window in Fig. 1. 



1 



Perfect 
fifths 



Db 


F 


A 


C# 


E# 


Gx 


Gb 


Bb 


D 


F# 


A# 


Cx 


Cb 


Eb 


G 


n 


D# 
— 


Fx 


Fb 


Ab 


C 


E 


G# 


B# 


Bbb 


Db 


F 


A 


C# 


E# 


Ebb 


Gb 


Bb 


D 


F# 


A# 


Abb 


Cb 


Eb 


G 


D 


m 



key 

window 
for key of 
C Major 



Major thirds 



Fig 1 Longuct-Higgins' note array 
(diagram adapted from Longuet-Higgins (1962)) 



If we imagine ihe box or window as being ft«e to slide around over the fixed grid of 
notes and delimit the set of notes it lies over at any one time, we wiU see that moving 
the window vertically upwards or downwards corresponds to modulation to the 
dominant and su! (dominant keys respectively. Other keys can be found by sliding the 
window in other diicctions. The tonic and other degrees of the scale correspond to 
fixed positions in relation tu the window. Despite the repetition of note names, it is 
important to note that in the original theory, notes with the same name in different 
positions are not the same note, but notes with the same name in different key 
relationshipf (Steedman (1972) calls such notes "homonyms"). 

However, for the purposes of educating novices in the elementary facts of tonal 
harmony, it iujhs out to be convenient to map Longuet-Higgins' space onto the 
twelve note vocabulary of a fixed-tuning insuiiment, resulting in a 12-note, two- 
dimensional versitn of Longuet-Higgin's representation. (We will look at the 

ERJC 7, . ■- 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



reasons behind ♦his move in Chapter 6. For the puiposes of this chapter, we will 
just investigate its consequences.) As a consequence of this mapping, we lose the 
double sharps and double flats of fig 1, and the space now repeats exactly in all 
directions (fig 2). 



perfect 
fifths 
using 
12-note 
pitch set 



1 



B 
E 
A 



Db 



D 


H 




D 


FH 


Bj, 


D 


F|^ 


G 


B 




G 


B 


Eb 


G 


B 


C 


E 


\ 


C 


E 


Ai. 


C 


B 


F 


A 


Db 


F 


A 


Db 


F 


A 




D 


Fit 


Bb 


D 


F« 


Bi» 


1 




G 


B 


El, 


G 


B 


Eb 


G 




C 


E 




C 


E 


^ 


C 


Db 


F 


A 


Db 


F 


A 


Db 


F 



D 

G 
C 
F 



FK Bt* 
Eb 



B 
E 
A 



Db 



D 

G B 

C E 

F A 



F« Bb 
Eb 
Ab 

Db 



major thirds using 
12-note pitch set 



key 

windows 
for 

C major 



Fig 2 12-fold version of Longuet-Higgins' note array 

Notes with the same name really are the same note in this space. A little thought will 
show that the space is in fact a torus, which we have unfolded and repeated like a 
wallpaper pattern. The key window pattern has been repeated as well (fig 2). (We 
have used arbitrary spellings in these diagrams (e.g. F# instead of Gb etcetera), but 
we could equally easily use neutral semitone numbers or any preferred convention.) 
We will refer to the original space as "Longuet-Higgins' original space" or the 
"non-repeating space", and to the 12-fold space variously as the "12-fold", "12 
note" or "collapsed" space. 

'Hie collapse to the 12-fold space makes it appaiently impossible to make distinctions 
about note spelling that could be made in the original space ^ but we can console 

ERIC 72 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



ourselves with the thought that in this respect it is no more misleading than a piano 
keyboard. We will sec in chapter 7 that in many other respects it represents harmonic 
relationships very much more explicitly than a piano. We would encourage a novice 
learning about music to play with a piano to her heart's content - no one would 
dream of discouraging this on the grounds that it misrepresented note spelling or 
other harmonic distinctions. 

2.2 Chords and toned centres 

Let us now turn to look at the representation of triads and tonal centres in the 12-fold 
space. The representation allows many interrelationships between chords and tonal 
areas to be summarised graphically and very succinctly, as we will now demonstrate. 
In 12-note versions of Longuet-Higgins' space, major triads correspond to triangle- 
shapes (fig 3). Major triads consist of three distinct objects in the space that are 
maximally close"*. The dominant and subdominant triads are seen to be triads 
maximally close to the tonic triad. It is plain from the diagram that the three primary 
triads together contain all of the notes in the diatonic scale. There is a clear spatial 
metaphor for the centrality of the tonic - the tonic triad is literally the central one of 
the three major triads of any major key^. We can make similar observations for the 
minor triads. Minor triads conespond to rotated triangle-shapes. Like major triads, 
they arc maximally compact three-element objects^. The three secondary triads 
generate the natural miror (and major) scale (We could deal with the harmonic minor 
and melodic minor scales by introducing variant key window shapes, but we will not 
pursue this here). The space iiso gives a clear visual metaphor for the centrality of 
the relative minor triad among the secondary triads. The 'centrality of the tonic' 
argument as applied to the tonal centre of the minor mode is borrowed from Balzano 
(1980). (We will see in chapter 6 that it is not valid in the original Longuet-Higgins' 
space, but applies in the 12-note Longuet-Higgins version.) Completing tiie i jU set 

^ But see chapter 6 for a way of recovering these distinctions. 

^ Closeness is measured by the sian of the geometric distance between note-points. 

^ Note that this argument does not depend at all on how the key windows in the 12-fold space are 

'sliced up' - although this rnay help emphasise the relationship visually. The tonic is spatially and 

inicrvalicaliy central in any grouping of three major triads tliat are arranged in perfect fifths in any 

major key. 

^ But not all maximally compact tJuec c'^ment objects in this space are triads. For example, the 
constellau'ons CFE and CEB are comr ' a. .lot triads. 

Er|c 73 



Chapter 5: Harmony Space 



of scale-tone triads for the major scale, the diminished triad is a sloping straight line 
(two major thirds 'on top' of each other). Note that there is a simple, uniform 
correspondence between shape and chord quality for triads (as represented in their 
maximally compact form in tJie 12-fold space) for any triad, in any key. (We will see 
in chapter 6 that this is not the case in the original Longuet-Higgins' representation.) 



B 
L— E 

A 

D 




O B 
C E 
F A 




D 

O^B 
C 'e 



O B 
C E 
V A 




Major triads 
in C major 
I, IV and V 



Minor triads 
in C Major 
n, m and VI 



Diminished 
chord 

vn 



Fig 3 Triads in the 12-fold space 



Seventh and ninth chords (which are used consistently in place of triads in some 
musical dialects - e.g. jazz) have similariy memorable and consistent shapes in the 
space ( Fig 4). 



74 



Chapter 5: Harmony Space 



PL 

□ 

F a 



D 

G B 

C E 

F A 



Scale tone 
Major sevenths 
in C Major 
I and IV 



PL 



-iB 



G B 
C E 
F A 



D 



B 



C E 
Pv A 



G B 
C E 
F A 



Scale tone Dominant 
Minor sevenths in^^gj^^j^ 
C Major ^ ^ y 

II, III and VI ^ ^ 




Diminished 

chord 

VII 



Fig 4 Scale tone sevenths in 12 fold space 



3 A computer-based learning environment 

3.1 A description of the minimal features of Harmony Space 

We will now present the general design of a computer-based learning environment 
based on the theory as described so far. In chapter 7, we will discuss a restricted 
implementation of this design. A grid of circles is displayed on a computer screen, 
each circle representing a note. The notes are arranged as in Fig 2. There are two 
pointing devices such as mice (or one mouse and a set of arrow keys) and optionally 
some foot-operated switches or pointing devices connected to the computer. A 
mouse controls the location of a cursor. Provided the mouse button is down at the 
time, any note-circle the cursor passes over is audibly sounded. When the mouse 
button is released or leaves a note circle, the note is audibly released. More 
generally, we can set the mouse to control the location of the root of a diad, triad, 
seventh or ninth chord. (We will call the number of notes in the chord its 'arity\ 
borrowing from mathematical usage.) The arity of chord contit>lled by the mouse can 
be varied using a foot switch (or control keys). As the root is moved around, the 
quality of the chord changes appropi lately lor the position of the root in the scale: so 
fo' example, the chord on the tonic will be a major triad (or major seventh if tlie arity 
is .,et to 'sevenths') and the chord on the supertonic will be a minor triad (or minor 
seventh in the sevenths case). We refer to these chord qualities as the default chord 



75 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



qualities for the arity and degree of the scale. Of course, default chord qualities may 
sometimes need to be overridden, and this is controlled using a second pointing 
device and a menu of chord qualities (or a set of function keys). 

Although the qualities of chords are assigned automatically (unless overridden) as 
the root is moved by the user, there is a clear visual metaphor for the basis of the 
choice; the shape of the chord appears to change to fit the physical constraint of the 
key window. A second mouse or pointing device is assigned to move the key 
window7 Moving this pointer corresponds to changing key. If, for example we 
modulate by moving the window while holding a chord root constant, the chord 
quality may change. Once again there is a clear visual metaphor for what is 
happening, since the shape of the chord will appear to be "squeezed" to fit the new 
position of the key window. The environment is linked to a synthesizer and 
everything we have described can be heard as it hapi :ns. This general description 
constitutes the 'core abstract design' or minimal specification for the learning 
environment we shall refer to as Harmony Space. Let us now itemise and 
comment on the design decisions of the minimal specification in greater detail. 



3.2 Harmony Space design decisions 

In the minimal specification of Harmony Space, notes are arranged on a computer 
screen in ascending major tiiirds (semitone steps of size 4) on the x-axis. and in 
ascending perfect fifths (semitone steps of size 7) on the y-axis. As a pointing device 
(e.g. mouse) is moved around, a cursor moves on the screen. When the mouse 
button (or other momentary activator on a pointing device) is pressed, if the cursor is 
currentiy in a note circle, the appropriate note-circle lights up and sounds. Letting go 
of the button or moving tiie pointer out of a circle is like letting go oi a syntiiesiser 
key - depending on the timbre in question, the sound stops or decays appropriately. 
(Ideally, the trigger control should be pressure and velocity sensitive, like some 
synthesiser keyboards, to allow conti-ol of volume and timbre.) Similarly, if the 
button is kept depressed and the pointing device swept around, the appropriate 

7 The pointing device could be foot-operated (foot-operated pointing devices are known as 'moles' 
(Pearson and Wieser, 1986)). Alternatively, Uie same pointing device could be used at different 
times to overide chord quality and to move the key-window. 

ERIC 76 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



succession of new notes is sounded and appropriately completed (or held if an 
optional sustain pedal is depressed). 

Clearly it is useful to allow one button depression to control chords, as well as 
single notes. The interface is such that, depending on the position of a separate 
selection device coatrolling the number of notes in the chord (operated by tlie other 
hand or a foot slider) each button depression produces a note, diad, triad seventh or 
ninth chord. The pointer indicates the location of the root of the chord. However, in 
common chord sequences, the chord quality is continually changing. If this had to be 
carried out manually at each step, perhaps by selecting labelled buttons with a 
separate pointing device operated by the otiier hand, fluent use of the interface would 
demand considerable manual co-ordination and musical knowledge or experience that 
would be beyond most novices. 

A very simple design decision tiiat solves this problem involves treating the key 
window as a visible, constraint enforcing mechanism. We simply select whether we 
want (at any time, and until further notice) chords of arity one, two. tiiree, four, five 
etc. (i.e single notes, diads, triads, seventiis ninths). The quality of tiie chord is 
then chosen automatically on tiie basis of tiie arity of the chord and the location of the 
pointer relative to the key window - i.e on tiie basis of tiie degree of tiie scale.8 
Although in these circumstances tiie chord quaUty is being chosen automatically, the 
constraining effects of tiie walls of tiie key window provide a visible explanation for 
how tiie qualities are being chosen. The traditional rule for constructing 'normal' 
chord qualities of any arity on each degree on the scale, 'stacking thirds', has an 
exact visual analog in tiie space - the chords have to fit in the key window, start on 
the selected note, and are built up by extending 'East' (major thirds) or 'Northwest' 
(minor thirds), whichever is available (fig 3). The structure of the diatonic scale is 
such that there is only ever one choice. As alternatives to automatic selection of 
chord quality, the chord quality can be overidden at any time, or made fixed. 

The key window idea lends itself to another important design decision, the idea of a 
second pointing device controlling the position of the key window. This decision, 
in conju nction witii the visible constraint enforcing mechanism, gives rise to a s'ngle, 

8 To btt strictly accurate, the chord quality also depends on the mode and the chord quality 
scheme' in use. ITicse refinements are described in detail in appendix 1. 

Er|c 77 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



simple, powerful and uniform spatial metaphor for the intuitive physical control and 
visualisation of chord sequences. The presence of two pointing devices means that , 
for example, we can hold a chord root steady while moving the key window, and 
the chord quality will change appropriately. 

4 Representing harmonic succession 

So far, we have used Harmony Space to look at the representation of key areas and 
chords. Let us now move on to investigate and illustrate harmonic succession and 
progression as represented (and as playable using simple gestures) in Harmony 
Space. Comments in italics are used to summarise key points about the expressivity 
of the interface. (See Appendix 3 for the chord notation convention to be used.) 

4.1 Harmony with one chord 

One of the simplest harmonic accompaniments possible for a song is a tonic pedal or 
bass drone. (Note that we are talking about explicit harmonisalion of a melody rather 
than the harmony implicit in an unaccompanied melody). This harmony involves the 
repetition or holding of a single note, diad or triad as an accompaniment to a 
melody. This can be a very suitable accompaniment for countless songs (e.g. the 
French folk songs "Patapan" and "J'ai du bon tabac" (Campbell, 1985)). The 
repetition of the tonic chord (major or minor as appropriate) can also be used as a 
simpliHsd accompaniment to harmonically more complicated pieces when starting to 
learn about praciicd harmony (Campbell, 1985, chapter 1). Many examples of 
extended use of a tonic pedal by serious composers can be found. Campbell (1985) 
cites the 8th and 22nd of Brahms' variations on a theme of Handel and part of 
Mendelssohn's Variations Serieuses numbers 11 and 5. In Harmony Space, a 
repeated tonic accompaniment can be seen to stay in the 'home' position, at the 
centre of the three major (or minor) triads of the key window (Fig 3). 

4.2 Two-chord progressions 

A great many pieces can be played making use of just the tonic and dominant chords. 
For example, the children's songs "Michael Finnigan", "Oranges and Lemons", 
"Skip to my Lou" and the carol "I saw three ships" (Campbell, 1985). To pick 
some other examples more or less at random, Aldwell and Schachter (1978, page 



ERIC 



78 



Chapters: Hannony vSpace 



75) cite a sonata by Kuhnau (1660 - 1722) using only I and V. The same authors 
note (page 79) the frequent use of I V I in the minor in Bach chorales. If we widen 
our scope to include I, V and V7, (a four note version of the V chord) the harmony 
of a multitude of pieces and fragments can be covered. For example, Aldwell and 
Schachter (1978) cite part of the Haydn Symphony No. 97, III. The V I chord 
progression is the basic progression of westem music (Aldwell and Schachter, 1978 
page 75). In Harmony Space, the harmonically very important I VI progression can 
be seen as one tint begins on the central major triad of the key, and then moves to a 
maximally close neighbour before returning 'home' (fig 3). 

4.3 Three chord progressions 

The next vocabulary for chord succession we shall look at, (I IV V), major or 
minor, is adequate for a great many whole pieces. Cannel & Marx (1976) refer to 
this as the 'Elementary Classical Pattern'. It is also so widespread in popular music 
(e.g. Chuck Berry's (1958) "Johnny B. Goode" and Taj Mahal's "Six days on the 
Road" ) that it has a well-known vernacular name - the "three chord trick". It is also 
the vocabulary for an entire genre of vernacular music - the 12 bar blues. In 
Harmony Space, this sort of harmonic progression is seen to move either side of 
the tonal centre by the smallest possible step and then return 'home' to the centre. 

IV and V can provide different harmonic contexts give variety to similar melodic 
material. The sense of I as tonal centre is so strong that chord progressions 
frequently begin, and almost always end, on ! unless the composer is deliberately 
trying for a sense of incompleteness or shock. Note that this provides a way for a 
novice (or any other composer) to make it obvious that a chord progression is 
tt iiporarily pausing, but has not finished (by pausing on V or IV). 

4.4 Harmonic trajectories 
4.4.1 Cycles of fifths 

We now come to a type, of harmonic progression that is both widely used and of 
great theoretical importance in tonal music. This kind of progression involves 
establishing a tonal centre, jumping to some non-tonic triad and then moving back to 
the tonic in a straight line through al! intermediate triads along the cycle of fifths axis. 

Er|c 79 



CliapterS: Harmony Space 



We will use the term harmonic trajectory to refer to any straight line motion in 
harmony space to a tonal goal (normally the tonic). (This terminology is in deliberate 
imitation of Levitt's (1985) use of the term 'trajectory' to refer to the related 
phenomenon of melodic trajectory - i.e scalic passages (possibly decorated in 
various ways) towards hierarchically inportant notes.) Cannel aiid Marx (1976) label 
this kind of harmonic movement (expressed in different terms) as 'classical harmonic 
movement', and claim that it lies at the root of most popular music, as well as music 
in the classical and baroque periods. Depending on the length of the initial leap, 
some examples of this kind of progression are; 

nvi 
vinvi 
m VI II V I 

Pieces using such progressions are ubiquitous. The chord progression of Bach's 
prelude No 1 in C Major (i968/'-1722) begins; 

I 117 V7 I VI ndom7 V Ima7 

giving two harmonic trajectories in succession ( The sharpened leading note in the II 
dom7 chord indicates that the key window may have shifted. There is an ambiguity 
about whether the second trajectory is aimed at the initial tonal centre I or the tonal 
centre of V being prepared). The chord sequence of 'I Got Rhythm' by George and 
Ira Gershwin (1930) is made up of repeated trajectories of the form; 

VI II V I 

Conrad Cork (1988) in his Lego Theory of Harmony identifies the progression 
I VI II V I as a standard building block of popular songs which he labels the "Plain 
Old Turnaround". Trajectories can be elaborated or camouflaged. Cannel and Marx 
(1976) give a brief taxonomy of elaborations and camouflages for this basic 
progression, of which three variants are; seeming to miss harmonic points in the 
trajectory but going back to state them, starting a trajectory without having initially 
stated the triad of the tonal centre, and insertion of foreign non -related chords for 
surprise effect. Closely related chords (e.g diminished or augmented chords) are 



80 



Chapters-. Harmony Sp%ce 



sometimes substituted for particular chords. As the brief Bach example above hints 
at, variations can be introduced by moving the tonal centre in mid-trajectory. All of 
these progressions (II VI, VI II VI, 111 VI II VI, etcetera), correspond to straight 
lines vertically downwaid in tiie 12-fold space with the tonal centre as their target 
(Fig 6a). Harmonic trajectories vertically downwards in a cycle of fifths from tonic 
to tonic fall into two classes, as follows. (The same applies to all sufficiently long 
harmonic trajectories.) In 'tonal' cycles of fifths, only notes in the current key are 
played. This corresponds to a straight line that bends or jumps where necessary to 
remain in the key window (Fig 6b, and 6c excluding shaded points). In the key of 
C, for example, the jump is the diminished fifth from F to B. In the case of 'real' 
cycles of fifths, the root moves in a straight line down the perfect fifth axis, cutting 
across chromatic areas outside tiie key window (Fig 6c including shaded points). 




Fig 6 Cycles of fifths in 12 fold space 

In Harmony Space, we can play either kind of tonal cycle of fifths by making a 
EMC 81 < ; .^; 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



single vertical straight line gesture. The chord quality can be seen and heard flexing 
to fit within the key window (figs 3 and 4). Tliis works even if there are modulations 
(movements of the key window) in mid-chord sequence. To play a real cycle of 
fifths, we simply switch on the option allowing roots to be sounded in the chromatic 
area outside the key window. Note that for roots outside the key window, there are 
not necessarily any obvious default chord qualities. In some styles of jazz, these 
chords are more or less consistently played with dominant seventh quality, though 
more generally, the quality is influenced by the melody. To deal with this, either 
some suitable fixed chord quality must assigned to chords with chromatic roots, or 
chord qualities must picked manually. 

If we reverse the direction of movement on the cycle of fifths axis and consider 
chord sequences moving vertically upwards, we have, following Steedman's (1984) 
terminology, extended plagal sequences and cadences. Plagal cadences (i.e. 'IV I' 
endings) are commonplace, but extended chord sequences of this sort (i.e. chord 
sequences like I V II VI etc.) are rare, for reasons Steedman (1984) investigates. 
Extended plagal chord sequences are occasionally used as the basis for entire pieces 
of music, for example "Hey Joe" (popular arr. Jimi Hendrix). This kind of 
progression corresponds in harmony space to simple straight line gestures along the 
fifths axis, but in the upwards direction. 

I V II VI III Hey Joe (popuhir arr. Jimi Hendrix) 
4.42 Scalic trajectories 

Bjornberg (1985) has identified uses of modal hantiony in recent popular music 
where scalic progressions (i.e. progressions up and down the diatonic scale) play an 
important role. Bjomberg's theoretical insights may be well-suited to help novices 
using Hamiony Space understand the uses of modal m^^terials in current popular 
music. Bjornberg distinguishes between the following harmonic practices; 

• St^ndai'd functional harmony as used in the classical style. 

• Jazz hannony (closely related to functional hannony (Mehegan,1959)). 




82 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



. Unfunctional harmony, where a sequence of (typically major) triads is 
grafted onto a melody in a non-functional way. 

. 1960's modal jazz, (e,g. "So What?", (Miles Davis , 1959) where all the 
chords are based on a single (or "modulating") modal scale, but functional 
harmony may be repudiated by the use of non-triadic chords such as 
combinations of fourths. The modal scale is explicitly stated and consciously 
used to guide melodic and harmonic elaboration. 

• Contemporary modal rock harmony, as descTibed below. 

Contemporary modal rock harmony is typically triadic, with the modal scale not 
necessarily strongly present in the melody, but apparent from the chordal material. 
Modal harmony involves an attempt to shift the perceived harmonic centre from the 
major or minor tonal centres. Balzano (1980) has argued that the major/minor tonics 
tend to be 'built into' diatonic materials whenever triads are used. Consequently, to 
establish a modal harmonic centre, explicit counterbalancing measures must be taken 
This is usually achieved by devices such as: the use of pedal notes; repetition of the 
desired central chord or note; emphasis by prominent metrical placing; and 
sometimes by employing characteristic harmonic progressions that are typical of 
modal harmony. Described in teniis of Harmony Space imagery, these 
characteristic progressions arc typically scalic trajectories (fig 7) to the modal centre 
in question (e.g. VI VII I or III II I), or scalic oscillations away from and back to 
the centre (e.g. I VII VI VII I or I II III II I). Collectively, we can refer to these 
modal progressions as rwdal harmonic ostinati (Bjombcrg's term) or "mho's" for 
short. (An ostinato is a short, repeated musical pattern.) Bjomberg almost 
exclusively considers Aeolian rock harmony, which he notes has become 
increasingly prevalent in the last ten years^. Examples include; 

All along the watchtower (Bob Dylan, 1968), i bVI bVIU ^0 

9 Bjomberg suggests thai the goal oriented progressions of functional harmony symbolise the 
ideology of industrial capitalism, while the increasing use of aeolian harmonic ostinati reflects a 
more aimless, shifting atiiliidc on the part of youth, and a rejection of, or ambivalence towards, 
goal-oriented industrial culture. 

10 We have adopted the convention iliat chord sequences notaied using the classical convention (see 



ERJ.C 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



Layla (Eric Clapton, 1970), 



Fox (Hawkins, Holland, Clarke, 1980), 
Sultans of Swing (Dire Straits, 1978), 
Message in a botUe (PoUce, 1979), 



i bvi bvn i 

i iidim bill 
cadcntial bVI bVHi 
aeoUanlVIVniV 



In the Air Tonight (Phil Collins, 1981), 
Lets Dance (David Bowie, 1983). 



aeoUanlVIVilVII 



(aeolian, but not an mho) 



Not discussed by Bjombcrg, but also becoming increasingly prevalent is the use of 
Dorian rock modal hamwny. Recent examples include; 



Soft Machine (1970) "Out Bloody Rageous" MiU 

Like cycles of fifths, both kinds of modal harmonic ostinati, in whatever mode, 
correspond in Harmony Space to simple straight line gestures. However, the 
straight lines for modal harmonic ostinati arc on a different axis to cycle of fiftiis 
progressions: in the 12-fold space, scalic sequences (i.e. movement up and down the 
diatonic scale) correspond to diagonal trajectories constrained to remain within the 
key windows (fig 7 ). Clearly, the brief sequences of scalic progressions that occur 
ip traditional and jazz harmony can also be represented in the same way. (Note that 
scalic sequences can also be produced by moving down the cycle of fifths axis 
omitting every other note. This emphasises the relationship between cycles of fifths 
and scalic movement but is harder to play fluidly on the interface because of the 
jumps involved.) 



appendix 3) are underlined. Chord sequences using Md>egan's (1959) coinveiition m noi 



Michael Jackson's (1982) "Billie Jean" 
Keef Hartley's (1969) "OuUaw" 
Stevie Wonder's (1973) "Living for the City 
Steely Dan's (1974) "Pretzel Logic" 



i iiinii 
i ii in ii 
i iiniii 



i iimii 



ERIC 



Chapters: Harmony Space 




Fig 7 A scalic progression 



4.4.3 Chromatic progressions 

If the constraint is removed that the root must stay within the key window, scalic 
sequences become chromatic sequences (fig 8). Chromatic chord succession happens 
a lot in jazz and other vernacular styles influenced by jazz, although it would seem 
rather out of place in some traditional tonal contexts. Given our focus, it is an 
important and useful progression. Songs using this progression include, "Tea for 
Two" (Youmans, Harbach, Caesar, 1924), "I don't need another girl like you" 
(Walsh, 1976), All the things you are" (Kem-H :mraerstein) and "Girl from 
Ipanema" (Jobim and Moraes, 1963). Many more examples can be found in 
Mehegan (1959). Some progressions commonly found in jazz are given below in 
Mehegan's notation (see appendix 3 for notes on the notational convention). 



n bnx I 

III blllx il bnx I 



o 

ERIC 



«5 



Chapter 5: Harmony Space 



I #io II #no ni 

III bUIo II bHM I 

bV0 IVo ni bnio n bllx I (Mehcgan, 1959) 

This kind of chiomatic movement is strongly related to cycle of fifths, in that if 
alternate chords are ignored, the progressions coincide. For example:- 

m bino II bllM I (ciiromatic progession) 
in VI n V I (cycle of fx. Jis) 

Indeed, in jazz standards, chromatic progressions often stand in the place of cycles 
of fifths. Jazz players refer to the substitution of the chromatic chords for the chords 
in a cycle of fifths progression as "tritone substitution". This is so called because the 
root of the substituted chord (e.g. bH) is a tritone away from the root of the original 
chord (e.g. V). In Harmony Space, chromatic progressions can be played by the 
same straight line gesture as diatonic progressions, if the constraint is removed that 
the root must stay within the key window. Either some suitable fixed chord quality 
must be assigned to chords with chromatic roots, or chord qualities must be picked 
manually. 



ERIC 



86 1,,^, 



Chapters: Harmony Space 




Fig 8 A chromatic progression 

44^ Progression in thirds 

Harmonic progressions by thirds are not nearly as common as cycles of fifths in 
tonal music, but they arc sometimes used. The most common version is "diatonic 
progression in thirds", which can be identified with subsequences of the sequence 
VI IV n VII V III I. Such progressions can be visualised in Harmony Space as 
shown in fig 9. Such sequences are often used in the descending direction. This 
pattern is the same as the "chord growing rule" pattern going backwards. An 
example can be found in "Ballade" (Mehegan , 1960 Page 4), whose chord 
sequence is as follows; 

I m n / VI / VI IV II / VII / v in i / vi / 

ni IV V / VI IV II / V m I / IV II iii iv/ ii m/ 1/ 



ERIC 



87 I . 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



"Ballade" (Mehegan 1960, Page 4 ). 



Fig 9 "diatonic cycle of thirds" 

The importance of the major third interval in the definition of the 12-fold space may 
lead a novice to wonder whether a horizontal movennent in thirds unconstrained by 
key window has an important function in tonal music (Fig. 10). An example of such 
a progression is I III VIb I. This kind of progression does not appear to have an 
important role since the progression fails to establish itself in any particular key. 
Similar problems occur with any attempted progression in strict minor thirds (fig 
1 1). The pattern repeats itself every fifth chord (e.g. I lUb IV# VI I ). 



4 J General mapping of intervals in tlie 12-fold space 

Movement through arbitrary intervals in the 12-note space can be plotted on the table 
given in Fig 12. This table is based on Longuet Higgins' table for intervals in the 
original space (1962b). The table is an overlay that can be slid around in the 12-fold 
space, so t.at the square marked "unison" can be made to coincide with any desired 

ERIC 88 1 , i rv 



Chapter 5: Harmony Space 



starting note. The table of 12-fold intervals (Fig 12) repeats itself in all directions in 
the same way as the array of notes on which it is based (fig 2). 



1® ®H 






1® ®H 







Fig 10 Movement in major thirds unconstrained by key 




Fig 1 1 Movement in minor tliirds unconstrained by key 
ErJc 89 , 



Chapters: Harmony Space 



Our interest is the relative convenience of the different gestures involved in playing 
the different intervals in Harmony Space. Ideally, we would like all intervals 
between the 1 1 notes of the chromatic scale (under octave equivalence) to be playable 
by a single step in the appropriate compass direction witt out a discontinuous jump. 
This "'ould allow novices to play flrWfrary chord sequences by a simple change of 
direction of movement, without the need foi discontinuous leaps. In the 12-fold 
space, there are only twelve distinct intervals (under octave equivalence), as against 
thirty'five intervals in Longuet-Higgins' (1962b) table of natural intervals in musical 
use. The intervals form complementary pairs (two intervals are complementary if 
their successive application to a pitch yields unison or an exact number of octaves - 
e.g. major sixths and minor thirds). Complements can be found in the table 
diametrically opposite each other - i.e. by moving in the opposite sense along a radial 
axis. Nine of the possible 12 intervals in the 12-fold space can be specified by single 
vertical, horizontal or diagonal steps to adjacent ceUs in the table. Only the following 
three intervals involve movement to non-adjacent cells: the minor seventh and 
whole-tone (complementary to each other) and the tritone (complementary to itself). 
Due to the repeating pattern, there are three choices, more or less equidistant 
(depending on the metric), for representing each of these three intervals gesturally 
(fig 12). Fortunately, tones and tritones occurring naturally in a given key (i.c 
diatonic tones and tritones), can be made, in effect, a single continuous gesture away 
simply by making notes not in the key window 'out of bounds'. All that is needed is 
for trajectories to "skip" automatically over chromatic areas between diatonic key- 
window 'islands'. 

Given this arrangement, only progressions in chromatic intervals of tones and 
tritones (and their complements) ever require a discontinuous gesture (as opposed to 
a move to an 'adjacent' note) in order to be played with Harmony Space. Of course, 
discontinuous ways of playing intervals can be used anyway. Each different gesmral 
representation might be viewed as emphasising different ways of looking at the same 
interval (e.g. a tone as two semitones steps, or as two steps up of a fifth, etcetera). 
Harmony space allows the different ways of playing the intervals to be explored and 
discovered - and the different ways of viewing these intervals can be used to make 
compositional capital.l2 Note that the alternative ways of playing the intervals are 
^1 See appendix 2 for a way of implementing this idea. 

12 For example, Bach and Vivaldi someUmes seem lo explore the use of different sire interval 

ERIC 90 



Chapters: Harmony Space 

formally indistinguishable, since intervals of the same name really are the same 
intervals in this space. 



; ; 

(Down c iriionei 




•2:- 




' Up o minor ' • 
• 'seventh' • 

: ; './> : : ; 

(Dcwn^ione) • 




























. . » 




liliiiiiipF'r! 








Down^amtnor 






'Down-aminor 
sevehlh 




. , ieyenth . . 










' \Upahtie) * 


' (Dowh a tritbrie) 


' (Down a (pnej 


• (Up a tone) ' 


* (Down a tritoney 



Fig 12 Table of intervals in 12-fold space 



4.6 Summary of the "dynamics" of harmony 

We have now given an illustrated overview of how chord and bass (or melody) 
progressions can be described and controlled in Harmony Space. Root progressions 
have been represented as harmonic trajectories. Different spatial directions and 
observance or non-observance of key constraints have been used to distinguish 
different progressions. Tonal and modal centres have been represented as goals for 
trajectories. Direct spatial metaphors have been provided for common musical 
intuitions such as that a tonic is about to be sounded, that it will be re?ched in just so 

steps played in regular progressions by different voices to reach strategic targets at carefully timed 
intervals. This notion is illusu^tcd (in quite other terms) by (Rutter, 1977, page 17). 



91 I , 



Chapter 5: Harmony Space 



many steps and so forth. Notice that the ability to represent the staple diatonic 
progressions as goal-oriented straight lines is a gain resulting from our decision to 
use the 12-fold space, and simply is not possible in the original space. Straight line 
trajectories in the original space represent wild modulations. 

4.7 Harmonic Plans 

While we have described some of the building blocks of harmonic progression, 
composing an interesting chord progression involves far more than stringing together 
such blocks. One way of describing progressions at a higher level involves musical 
planning which is one of the matters investigated in Part HI. 

5 Analysing music informally in Harmony Space 

So far we have shown that Harmony Space can provide economical means of 
representing and controlling various low level aspects of harmony, but it turns out 
that Harmony Space can also be used to illuminate some higher level aspects of 
harmony in particular pieces. Longuet-Higgins (1962) has analysed Schubert, and 
Steedmiin (1972) has analysed Bach in the original space. In both cases, this 
involved assigning each note a tonal function, much as in conventional harmonic 
analysis, but we analyse in a different spirit here. To illustrate this, fig 13 gives the 
chord sequence of the jazz standard "All the things you are" (Kem-Hammerstein). 
For clarity, only the root of each chord is indicated, and chord alteration is indicated 
by annotation where the quality departs from the default quality for a seventh chord 
in the prevailing key. Note also that in fig 13, immediate repetitions of chords with 
the same root are shown as slightly staggered, overiapping dots. 

Let us examine the chord sequence in terms of Harmony Spice concepts and try to 
fmd a rationale for the chord sequence. Viewed from this perspective, the song 
appears to break into a small number of recognisable harmonic manoeuvres. In the 
first eight bars, the sequence begins on a VI chord and makes a trajectory towards 
the major tonal centre (jazz sequences in mine/ keys are very rare (Mehegan, 1959)). 
But the sequence plunges on past I at the fourth bar onto IV at the fifth bar. The song 
at this point is in danger of breaking a convention for the dialect. 

ERIC 92 ' ^' 



Chapters: Harmony Space 




III 



bars 1-5 

Starting key I 



bars 6-8 

Modulates itp a major third in bar 6 

(Arrow shows direction of key window shift) 




V!I 



bars 9-13 

Modulates up a minor third in bar 9 



bars 14-15 

Modulates up major third in bar 14 















+6 










L 








bV 



bars 16-20 



bars 21 - 24 

Modulate* down a minor third in bar 21 



4^ 



Ti 















r#3 



bars 24-28 

Modulates up a major third in bar 24 



bars 29-36 



►•f6 



(Chord sequence reproduced from 
Mehegan (1959)). 'All the things 
you are' by Kcm-Hammerstein 
<V> Chappell & Co.Jnc and T.B. 
Harms Co. 



(Ab) VI / II / V / I / IV / (C) V / I / 1+6 / 
(Eb) VI / n / V / I / IV / (G) V / I / VI / II / 
(G) V#3 / I / 1+6 / (E) II / bHx / I / 1+6 / 
(Ab) VI / II / V / I / IV / IVm /III / blllo / II / 
(Ab) V#3 bnx / 1+6 / 1+6 // 



Fig 13 "All the things you arc" traced iii the 12 -fold space 



93 



h.7 



Chapters.' Hannony Space 



In the chord sequences of jazz "standards" there is a convention that we normally 
expect to reach a tonal goal when we hit a major metrical boundary at the end of each 
line (normally eight bars). Subjectively, it is as though the chord sequence has been 
aimed at a tonal goal but has overshot it in some way. The resolution of this apparent 
violation of a c;onvention becomes in effect the harmonic motif of the whole piece - 
we move the 'goalpost'. This is achieved by a timely transient modulation allowing 
the progression to reach the tonal goal at the metrical boundary. Note that it is 
common in this dialect where all chords are routinely played as sevenths to 
emphasise arrival at the tonic (with the subjectively 'restless' or unstable chord 
quality major seventh) by repeating it as a more stable major sixth. Note also that in 
fig 13, to make it clearer how chord roots before and after a modulati ^n are related, 
hollowed out dots are used to recapitulate chords played before a given key 
window move. 

In Harmony Space, the 'moving goalpost' metaphor is demonstrated literally. The 
environment physically shows (fig 13) the 'goalpost' in the form of the key window 
being moved sideways so that the tonal cycle of fifths arrives at the goal or tonal 
centre just before the metric boundary is reached. A manipulation of the listener's 
expectations based on tlus idea seems to lie at the heart of the progression as a 
whole. After the move has been performed once, a transient modulation turns the 
tonic at the end of the first eight bars into a VI. This sets the stage for the moving 
goal post 'game' to be played again in the second line of the p'^ce. The first time, the 
'moving goalpost' may have been quite unexpected, but the second time we are 
more likely to expect it and if so, we have our expectations confirmed. The thini line 
is split into two parts. In the relevant jazz dialect the progressions involved are more 
or less stock material, labelled by jazz musicians as "tum-arounds". In Harmony 
Space these are seen as short harmonic trajectories along the fifths and chromatic 
axes respectively to temporary tonics. (There is a transient modulation before the 
chromatic trajectory, which we will not try to explain here, but which seems to 
function partly to position the fmal chord of the thiid line ready for the first choixi of 
the last line.) 



ERIC 



As the final line of the sequence begins, it appears to be a repetition of the first line, 

94 / ' . 



Chapter 5: Harmony Space 



so the listener may well expect the 'moving goalpost' manoeuvre to happen again. 
This time, the expected transient modulation docs not happen, and the chord 
sequence continues on. (In fact, a chromatic progression is used to substitute for 
part of the cycle of fifths progression.) Hence the last line requires 13 bars, rather 
than the normal eight bars for the chord sequence to reach the tonal centre and 
conclude the sequence. It is as though the song originally fooled us with an 
unexpected manoeuvre, performed the manoeuvre again to make sure we grasped it, 
and then finally fooled us again by not performing the manoeuvre where expected 
it. 

The broad outlines of this informal analysis, if not all the details, should be 
communicable to a novice with little musical kno wledge but experience of Harmony 
Space. It is important to note that a visual formalism is not being proposed as a 
substitute for listening. It is being suggested that an animated implementation of the 
formalism linked to a sounding instrument controlled by simple gestures may allow 
novices without instrumental skills and without knowledge of standard theory and 
terminology to gain experience of controlling and analysing such sequences. But 
such an environment might weU be a good place to learn music theory if the novice 
desired. 

6 Conclusions 

We have presented a theoretical basis and a detailed design for a computer-based 
tool, "Harmony Space", designed to enable novices to compose chord sequences 
and learn about tonal harmony. We have investigated the expressive properties of the 
interface in detail. Detailed conclusions for this chapter together with discussions of 
the educational applications of Harmony Space, notes on related interfaces and 
comments on the limitations of the design, can all be found at the end of Chapter 7 
(sections 6-10). 



o 

ERIC 



95 



Chapter 6: Adapting Longuet-Higgins' theory for Harmony Space 



"The theory described here [Longue. Higgins (1962) theory] is so simple that it 
is hard to believe that it has never been formulated before. The facts that it 
accounts for have been known at least since the time ofMorely (1597).... Some 
early formulations come rather close. Weber (1817).. produced a similar 
diagram. In his case, however, the diagram was of km rather than their notes. 

Steedman (1972) page 112 



"...the gulf between the logical science of acoustics and the empirical art of 
harmony has never been convincingly bridged..The theory of the generation of 
chords and harmony from the harmonic series .. must be discarded once and for 
all." Groves dictionary , entry on 'Harmony' Vol // (Colles, 1 940). 



".. it shocks me a little that music theorists should be, apparently, so ignorant of 
the two dimensional nature of harmonic relationships., the whole thing follows 
relentlessly from first principles" Longuet-Higgins (1962)page 248. 



In this chapter, wc outline the educational and human-computer interface design 
considerations that led to the use of an adapted version of Longuet-Higgins' theoiy 
in the design of Harmony Space, The structure of the chapter is as follows; 

1 Longuet-Higgins' non-repeating space 

1.1 Key areas, modulation and chords 

1.2 Minor and diminished triads 

1.3 Chord sequences 

2 Comparison of the two versions of Longuet-Higgins' space 

Er|c 96 



3 Direct manipulation and design choices 

4 Use of the 12-fold representation in Harmony Space 

5 Conclusions 



We begin by looking at the stiucture of Longuet-Higgins' original, non-repeating 
representation in more detail. 



1 Longuet-Higgins' non-repeating space 

The non-repeat'.ng space is by definition an array of notes arranged in three 
dimensions, with ascending octaves, perfect fifths and major thirds on the three 
respective axes (fig 1)1. For reasons explained earlier, the octave dimension is 
usually disregarded. 



1,1 Key {^y^ 'is, modulation and chords in the non-repeating space 

As the ax^iv are traversed, double sharps and double flats are encountered, in 
contrast with the twelve-fold space. Despite the repetition of note names, notes with 
the same name in different positions are not id'jntical, but notes with the same name 
in different possible key relationships. 



I 



Perfect 
fifths 



Db 


F 


A 


C# 


E# 


Gx 


Gb 


Bb 


D 


P# 


A# 


Cx 


Cb 


Eb 


0 


B 


D# 


Fx 


Fb 


Ab 


C 


E 


G# 


B# 


Bbb 


Db 


F 


A 


C# 


B# 


Ebb 


Gb 


Bb 


D 


F# 


A# 


Abb 


Cb 


Eb 


0 


B 


D# 



key 

window 
for key of 
C Major 



Major thirds 



Fig 1 Longuet-Higgins original non-repeating space 
(diagram adaptec'j from Longuet-Higgins (1962)) 



Fig i repeated from chapter 5 for convenience. 

I 1 



ERIC 97 



Cluster 6: Adapting Longuct-Hi^igins' theory for Hattnony Space 



An illustration may help to clarify the distinction. In a melody in the key of C 
major, for example, the note A must be represented in different positions depending 
on whether it is part of a harmony (actual or implied) using an A minor triad (ACE 
- fig 2), or whether it is part of a harmony using th(5 D major chord (D F# A - fig 3). 
In the first case, the A is identified with the note of the same name found in the key 
window in its C major position (fig 2). In the second case, the A is identified with 
the A that would be in the key window if it were in its G major position (fig. 3). 
This demonstrates that the spatial position of each note in Longuet-Higgins' original 
representation encodes not just its pitch class but also the possible keys to which it 
belongs^ (whether by a definite modulation or simply by a momentary harmonic 
"borrowing"). 



I 



Perfect 
fifths 



Db 


F 


A 


C# 


Ob 


Bb 


D 


F# 


Cb 


Eb 


0 


B 


Fb 


Ah 


© 


Q 


Bbb 


Db 


F 


® 


Ebb 


Gb 


Bb 


D 


Abb 


Cb 


Eb 


0 



C# VM Ox 



D# Fx 



G« B# 



key 

window 
for key of 
C Major 



Major thirds 



Fig 2: Triad of A minor in the key of C major in the non-rcpeating space 

In the non-repeating space, instead of there being only twelve distinct major tonics, 
each possible position of the key window (from a potentially infinite number of 
positions) theoretically represents a distinct key. 



ERIC 



Interestingly, much the same information can be encoded for each note in the apparently less 
expressive i2-fold space. Similar information can be encoded using the 12-fold representation by 
associating the following information with each note; an ordered pair consisting of a spatial 
positiori for the note and a spatial position for the key window. Under this scheme, the position of 
the key window for a given note may be different from the position of the key window for other 
simultaneously occurring events - for example, when one of notes is "boirowed' from a foreign key. 
This scheme is less ambiguous about key relationships than the non-repeating space, since a 
location in the non-repeating space encodes for several possible keys rather than just one key. 



98 



Chapter 6; Adapting Longuet-Higgins' iheoi7 for Harmony Space 



Perfect 

fifths 



Db F 0 C« E« Ox 




Ebb Ob Bb D F« A« 
Abb Cb «3> Ci B D» 



Major thirds 



key 

window 
for key of 
C Major 



Fig 3: D minor triad in the key of C major in the non-repeating space 



Major triads are represented in the non-repeating space in a way that is similar in 
many, but not all, respects to the way they are represented in the 12-fold space. As 
before, major triads correspond to triangular shapes (fig 4). Three distmct notes ai e 
maximally close in the space when they form a major triad. Major triads can be 
distinguished from other maximally compact three element shapes in that they are 
generated by selecting a note and choosing one more note along both axes in the 
outward-going ( i.e. intervalically ascending) sense. There is a clear spatial 
metaphor for the centrality of the major tonic - the tonic triad is literally the central 
one of the three major triads that venerate any major key. 



® B 

3® 



Cmgar 







Q B 






©E 




c e| 






- *i 


Fma^or 


OMajor 



ERIC 





FL 


m 








G B 




Q B 










©® 




C B 






F A 




F (J 











Ermnor 



Aminor 



Dnunor 



c 



Bdim 



Fig 4 

Triads in C major in the non-repeating space 



99 



Chapter 6: Adapting Longuet-Higgins' theory for Harmony Space 



1.2 Minor and diminished triads 

Differences between the representations come to light when considering the minor 
and diminished triads. Two of the three minor triads (III and VI) correspond to 
rotated triangular shapes (fig 4). These minor triads are, as in the 12-fold space, 
maximally compact three-element objects. However, the third minor triad (II) is a 
different shape from that of the other minor triads and its constituent notes do not lie 
contiguously in the key window (fig 4). The shape for the chord of D minor in the 
key of C, for example, is a different shape from the chords E minor and A minor in 
tlie key of C. This non-uniformity of shape in the minor triads is inescapable in the 
non-repeating space, since, as we have already seen, spavial position codes for 
possible key relationships. To use the sair>e shape for the D minor tiiad would be to 
mislcadingly suggest a transient modulation to die subdorainam or a related key. 
Furthermore, since the minor triads do not forai a uniform group of contiguous 
objects, the spatial metaphor for the perceived cenuaiity of the minor tonin falls 
down in the non-repeating space. To sum up, the differences in itie way minor triad^i 
are represented in the 12-fo).d and non-repeating spaces ave as follows. Firstly, m tlie 
12-fold space, but not in the non-repeating space, there is a one-to-one mapping 
between shape and chord quality for both major and minor triads. In the non- 
repeating space, the minor triads have more than one shape. Secondly, the 12-fold 
space, but not the non- repeating space provides a single metaphor for the centrality 
of both major and minor tonal centres. ^ A final difference between the 
representation of tiiads in the two spaces is that all tiiads in the 12-fold space are 
connected ^, v*hereas the scale-tone diminished chord (VII) in the non-repeating 
space has the non-connected shape shown in fig 4. 



1.3 Chord sequences in the non-repeating space 

In the 12-fold space, chord progressions in cycles of fifths, scalic and chromatic 

^ This 'inibalancc' txerwecn the major aiul minor n\odcs in the non-repeating space is uticlerwored 
by another relationship (occurring only in the non-repeating space) tliai emphasises, the centrality 
of the major tonic (l)ut not of the minor tonic), like relationship is as follows. The tonic position 
is the only position from wiiich all other notes in t.he key can be reached in a maximum of two 
moves - horizontal, vertical or a mixture (Sloboda, 1985). 

^ i.e. all notes in the set are horizontally, vertically or diagonally immediaiely adjacent to at least 
one other note in tlic set. 

ERIC 100 



Chapter 6: AdapUng Longuci-Higgins' theory lor Harmony Space 



progressions all appear a?; straight lines. In the non-repeating space, this is not the 
case, unless wild moduladons are taking place. Scalic and chromatic progressions 
are represented by a sequence of non-contiguous steps in constantly changing 
directions. Fig 5 compares a standaid chromatic progression in the 12-fold space 
with its equivalent in Ihe now-repeating space. (The precise details of the chromatic 
progression in the non-repeating space ai-e not important for our purposes.) 



1 Comparison of the two spaces 

m most important differences, for our purposes, in the way that basic harmonic 
relationships are leprcsented in the 12-fold space and die non-repeating space can 
be summarised as follows. 

• In the non-repeating space, notes with the same name in different positions 
have different key implications. In the 12-fold space, there are only 12 
distinguishable notes in a repeating pattern. 

• in the 12 fold space, tlicre is a one-to-one correspondence between ^hord 
quality and shape for the scale-tone triads. Th^re is not in the non-repeating 
space. 

• In the 12-fold space, tiie shapes of all of the triads are compact. In the 
non-repeating space, the chords 11 and VU do not have connected shapes. 

• The 12- fold space, there is a simple metaphor to account for which of ihe 
major and minor uiads are aurally perceived as 'central' - the non-repeating 
space only does this for the major triads. 

• Straight lines and .simple patterns in thf 12-fold space correspond to the 
basic chord progression of western tonal harmony; cycles of fifths, scalic 
pirogTes.sions, chromatic progressions and cycles of thirds. In general, the 
same chord progressions in the non-repeating spv. t are complex patterns. 
Straight lines in the non- repeating .space correspond to extreme modulations. 



ERIC 



101/ ' fj 



Chapter 6: AdapUng Longuet-Higgins' theory for Harmony Space 



ERIC 



3 Direct Manipulation 

We have now assembled nearly all of the information needed to explain why we 
mapped Longuet-Higgins' onto a 12-fold note set when designing Harmony Space. 
The final idea to be considered is the notion of 'direct manipulation'. 

Shneiderman (1984) noted the fact that some interactive systems seemed to promote 
"glowing enthusiasm" among users, in contrast with the more widespread reaction 
of "grudging acceptance or outright hostility". Shneiderman identified what seemed 
to be a central core of ideas associated with the 'felicitous' systems, and labelled the 
systems that used these ideas 'direct manipulation systems*. The three main ideas 
were (using paraphrases of Shneiderman (1984) and (Hutchins, loilan and 
Norman, 1986), 

• continuous representation of the objects of interest. 

. replacement of complex command language syntax by direct manipulation 
of the object of interest through physically obvious and intuitively natural 
means, including, where appropriate, labelled button presses. 

• rapid, reversible, incremental actions whose impact on the object of interest 
is visible. 

Many benefits have been claimed for f'irect manipulation, such as (paraphrasing 
(Hutchins, HoUan and Nomnari, 1986) 

• quicker learning by novices, especially where demonstrations are available, 

• knowledgeable intenniltent users can retain operational concepts. 

• eiTor messages are rarely ii.eeded, 

• users can see if their actions ate fuilhering their goals, and if not, change 
what they are doing, 



^- 102 ' ^ t> 



Chapter 6: Adapting Longuet-Higgins' theory lor Harmony Space 



♦ users have reduced anxiety because the system is comprehensible and 
actions are reversible. 

It can be hard to be precise about what does and does not constitute an example of a 
direct manipulation system, and there is not universal agreement about which of the 
claims are borne out and to what extent. 

4 Use of the 12-fold representation in Harmony Space 

We now explain (from an educational and human-machine interface design 
perspective) why we mapped Lx)nguct-Higgins' space onto 12 notes when designing 
Harmony Space. We could have constructed a direct manipulation learning 
environments for harmony using either version of Longuet-Higgins theory, but as 
we have just seen, it is only in the 12 -fold space that the most common chord 
progressions correspond to physically obvious and intuitively natural ways of 
moving objects in the space - i.e. straight lines. In the non-repeating space, a 
descending chromatic scale, for example, properly corresponds to a unique intricate 
path around a fixed key window that would not be physically obvious and 
intuitively natural at all, even to an expert musician. Since the ability for novices to 
manipulate common chord progressions in a natural way is one of our aims, the 12- 
fold space confers a relevant advantage. Traded '^ff against this advantage, the 12 
fold space ignores the distinction between, for example notes such as G and Abb. 
However, for novices at the level and for the purposes that we are considering, this 
distinction is one that we would rather not introduce anyway. There is a second, 
related reason for preferring the 12-fold to the non-repeating space as the basis for a 
direct manipulation environment. In an environment based on the non-repeating 
space, the notational distinctions (e.g. between Gb and F#) would be available, but 
it would be easy for a novice to make the wrong notational distinctions continually, 
for example when playing a given melody. A gi'eat deal of musical knowledge can 
be needed to choose the right version of the note, knowledge that novices could not 
be expected to possess. 



ERIC 



1C3 I ^ 



Chapter 6: Adapting Longuet-Higgins' theory for Harmony Space 





Fig 5 

Below: A chromatic progression in non-repeating space 
Above: Part of the same chromatic progression in 12-fold space 



Neither could (he interface embcxly the knowledge, since we do not yet know how 
to formalise it in the the general case (Steedman, 1972). The notationally 'wrong' 
notes would sound indistinguishable from the notationally 'right' notes. Hence, an 
interface based on the non-repeating space would introduce a distinction to novices 



ERIC 



104 I ? 



Chapter 6; Adapting Longuct-Higgins' theory for Harmony Space 



which tliey would be likely to continually confuse, yet which the interface would 
have no power to enforce or teach. The 12-fold space avoids this problem by 
presenting harmony at a level of detail at which the distinction need never be made. 

There is a third set of reasons why it is educationally useful to map the non-repeating 
space onto the 12 fold space. The designers of the Xerox Stir interface (Smith, 
Irby, Kimball and Verplank, 1982) emphasised the value in interface design of the 
unifomi and consistent representation of the more commonly used entities. This can 
reduce learning time, lessen the need fcH" memorisation and reduce cognitive load. In 
line with this approach, we wish to provide uniform and consistent visual analogues 
for the most commonly used musical entities appropriate to the level of user and 
task. By the simple measure of mapping the non-repeating space into the 12-fold 
space, we produce the following results; 

• The most commonly used entities (the various chord qualities) exhibit a 
one-to-one mapping between their most important attribute (chord quality) 
and their graphical shape. This is a good example of a uniform and 
consistent representation (Smith, Irby, Kimball and Verplank, 1982). 

• The one-to-one mapping between chord quality and chord shape, and the 
simple contiguous nature of the shapes are both likely to reduce cognitive 
load when trying to process quickly what is happening on the screen. 

• The contiguous, regular shapes of the triads are likely to be easier to 
recognise than the complex non-contiguous shapes of the non-repeating 
space. 



5 Conclusions 

We have now concluded the description of our reasons for mapping Longuet- 
Higgins' sp' :e onto 12 notes for the purposes of designing Harmony Space. The 
different representations are best suited for dealing with harmony at diff'^rent levels 
of description. We have chosen the representation to suit our purposes and 
prospective clients. The 12-fold representation allows us to describe harmonic 
relationships completely accurately at the level we have chosen to describe them. 

ERJC 105 f f . . 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



In this Chapter we show how Balzano's (1980) theory of harmony can l>e used as 
the basis for a version of Harmony Space. A prototype of this version of Harmony 
Space has been implemented. The chapter begins with a presentation of Balzano's 
theory. We then review the design decisions for Harmony Space in the light of this 
theory. Next, we discuss the relationship between Longuet-Higgins-based and 
Balzano-based versions of Harmony Space. The implementation is discussed. In the 
final sections (which refer to both of the Harmony Space designs together) the 
following topics are considered: Harmony Space's educational uses; the intended 
users; related interfaces; the limitations of the implementation; and final conclusions. 
The structure of the chapter can be laid out as follows; 

1 Balzano's theory of Harmony 

1.1 Basis of theory 

1.2 Co-ordinate systems for the diatonic scale 

1.2.1 The semitone space 

1.2.2 The fifths space 

1.2.3 The thirds space 

1.3 Some issues addressed by the theory 

2 Review of design decisions 

2. 1 Universal commands and consistency 

2.2 Core design decisions 

2.3 Other design decisions 
2.3 The 'shear' operation 

3 Harmony Space using Balzano's theory: design decisions 

3.1 Core design decisions 

3.2 Design decisions concerning the display 

3.3 Universal commands and consistency 

4 Expressivity of a version of Harmony Space based on thirds space 

4. 1 Statics of harmony 

4.1.1 Fifths axis and semitone axis 

4.1.2 Scales and triads 

4.1.3 Tonal centres 

4. 1 .4 Visual rule for chord construction 




106 l-m 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



4.2 Representing the dynamics of harmony 

5 Analysing a chord progression in the thirds space 

6 Relationship be^veen the alternative Harmony Space designs 

7 Implementation of Harmony Space 

8 Some educational uses of Harmony Space 

9 Intended users of the tool 

10 Related interfaces 

1 1 Limitations 

12 Conclusions 

12.1 Design decisions and expressivity 

12.2 Uses of Harmony Space 

12.3 Longuet-Higgins' theory and education 



I Bal/ano's theory of harmony 

Balzano's (1980) theory of harmony has a completely different starting point from 
Longuet-Higgins' theory, (mathematical group theory instead of overtone structure) 
but leads to a remarkably similar representation. Balzano's theory can be seen as 
addressing the following (among other) problems. 

• Why are the notes C and A in the set of notes A B C D E F G (for 
example) perceived to be ce^arc^i or tonic notes? 

• Why are major and minor triads perceived to be fundamental to tonal 
harmony (as opposed to chords with some other number of notes or interval 
structure)? 

• Why are just, Pythagorean and equal temperament perceived to work in 
"substantially the same way" (Balzano, 1980)? 



/./ Basis of Balzano's theory 

Balzano (1980) points out that any pitch set can be considered a cyclic group, by 
virtue of two observations. Firstly, frequency or (more practically) log frequency 
can be used to impose a total ordering on the set. (Later we will make use of the 
successor or "next" relation implicit in this total ordering.^ Secondly, octave 



Qiapter 7: Harmony Space using Bai/ano's theory 



equivalence can be used to provide an equivalence relation on the pitch set. The 
equivalence relation allows all pitches to be given e, .uivalents in each octave; it also 
allows us to take a set of representatives in the compass of one octave to stand for 
the entire pitch set. Once the pitch set has been extended by propagating it through 
the octaves in this way. it is clearly isomorphic to the set of positive and negative 
integers, and thus isomorphic to Coo. the cyclic group of infinite order. The set of n 
representatives from any giv > octave can be shown to be to be isomorphic to . 
the cyclic group of order n. If the pitches in one octave are labelled 0 to n-1 (where 
the note n is an octave higher than the note 0). we say that the pitch set exhibits 'n- 
fold octave division'. Two complementary and isomorphic ways of mapping the 
ei -rr rnts and operations for these groups onto the pitch set are possible. According 
to ihe first view, the elements are pitches, and the operation of addmg two pitches is 
taken to be equivalent to adding their displacements from some reference pitch as 
measured in terms of successive application of the successor function mentioned 
above. According to the second view, the group elements are the set of intervals 
between pitches (sized in numbers of steps), and the operation is taken to be 
interval addition. We will use both views, depending which is appropriate at a 
given time. 

Having established a relationship between pitch sets and cyciic groups, and bearing 
in mind that western musicians have long agrsed to divide the octave into 12 notes, 
it turns out to be possible to relate tonal harmony to the structure of C12 (the cyclic 
group of order 12). Just before we inve;mgate this, notice the generality of 
application of the theory. For example, the pitch set involved cculd be equal 
tempered, just tempered or irregularly tuned. For practical purposes, we will adopt 
equal temperament, since this has the advantage that we can specify interval size 
fully by counting steps between group elements. This will allow symmetry- 
arguments to be used - the set of pitch places will be unaffected by transposition. 

/ .2 Investigation of co-ordinate systems for the diatonic scale 
The key behind Balzano's theory is to investigate all possible well-definsd co- 
ordinate sy^^tems for the western pitch set.l CWell-defined' here Pimply means 

1 This is also the key to Longuel-Higgins' theory, but in terms of an entirely diucrent 
characterisation of pitch. 



ERIC 108 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's Uicory 



that each element in the pitch set must be specifiable and have unique co-ordinates.) 
Taking a pitch set with a 12-fold division of the octave, let us now informally 
investigate all possible co-ordinate systems that provide unique co-ordinates for all 
intervals in terms of successive applications of some interval. The first one- 
dimensional co-ordinate system is very straightforward: it is simply a semitone grid. 
(The 'grid' is circular because of octave equivalence.) In other words, an interval of 
any size less than or equal to an octave can be described trivially as being equivalent 
to some number (from 0 to 11) of successive steps of 1 semitone. This one- 
dimensional co-ordinate systen. gives unique co-ordinaies for each interval (Fig 1). 

8ve/unison 




tt 



Step size 1 or 11 

No of elements in cycle 12 

Elements in cycle (0,1,2,3.4,5.6.7,8,9,10,1 1 ) 

^12 

Fig 1 The semitone space. (Aftjr Balzano (1980)) 

An equivalent co-ordinate system is the one we obtain by describing intervals in 
terms of successive steps of size 1 1 (remaining in one "octave" since octave 
equivalence is in force). Steps of size 11 are, in effect, just steps of size 1 in the 
reverse direction (fig 1). Music theory and group theory are in unusual 
terminological agreement in calling such pairs of intervals "inverses ". The co- 
ordinate systems that pairs of inverses give rise to are essentially identical, so having 
identified the existence ot such pairs, we shall sometimes use one representative to 
refer to both in future. 




Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



We will now quickly investigate exhaustively the one-dimensional co-ordinate 
systems of other step sizes for C^. Steps of size 2 (tones), 3 (minor thirds), 4 
(major thiids) and 6 (tritones) and their inverses fail even to span the space of all 
intervals (figs 3 and 4). Successive steps of size 2 or 4 cannot describe intervals of 
odd numbers of semitones at all (figs 3 and 4). Successive steps of size 3 cannot 
describe all intervals of even numbers of semitones (fig 4). Successive steps of 
size 6 can only aescribc intervals of size 6 and 0 (fig 3). The only interval apart from 
semitones that spans the space of all other intervals is the perfect fifth (step size 7) 
(and its inverse the perfect fourth - r*ep size 5). This co-ordinate system turns out 
to provide unique co-ordinates for each interval, since after 1 1 applicaUons, all 
intervals have been described exactly once (fig 2). We have now informally 
demonstrated that in the case of one-dimensional co-ordinate systems (under octave 
equivalence), only steps of size 1 and 7 (ignoring inverses) have the property of 
spanning the space of all intervals. 




Step size 7 or 5 

No of elements in cycle 12 

Elements in cycle {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11} 

^12 



Fig 2 The fifths space. (After Balzano (1980)) 



Let us now look to see if any two-dimensional, or higher-dimensional arrays 
constitute adequate co-ordinate systems for C12. We have already seen that steps of 
size 2,3,4 and 6 are inadequate in isolation as bases on which to describe all 
intervals, but perhaps two or more of tliem could act in combination as adequate co- 
ordinate systems. Step sizes 2, 3, and 6 are not suitable to use in any combination, 




Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Bal2ano's theory 



since this would give rise to non-unique sets of co-oidinates for describing a step 
size 6 (e.g. 2 steps of size 3, 3 steps of size 2). This would violate our requirement 
for unique co-ordinates for intervals, yielding an unsatisfactory metric. 




Steps of tones or major sevenths 



Steps of tritones 



Step size 2 or 10 

No of elements in cycle 6 

Elements in cycle {0,2,4,6,8,10} 

C6 



Step size 6 only 

No of elements in cycle 2 

Elements in cycle {0,6} 

C2 



Fig 3 Steps c' tones and tritones 



Without using steps of size 1 and 7 (that wc already know can do the job by 
themselves), of all combinations of two step sizes this leaves only steps of size 4 in 
combination with steps of size 2, 3, or 6 (ignoring inverses). Combining steps of 
size 4 with steps of size 2 would lead to a non-unique specification of steps size 4. 
Steps of size 4 combined with steps of size 6 would be inadequate to specify steps 
of size three at all. lliis leaves a sole candidate for a two dimensional co-ordinate 
system - steps of size 3 in combination vkdth steps of size 4. 

A two dimensional grid with 4 steps of size 3 against 3 steps of size 4 spans the 
space uniquely. The search can be extended to the n-dimensional case and an 
existence result formally proved in group theory (Balzano 1980), giving us 
Balzano's central formal result:- 



ERIC 



In any pitch set with a 12 fold division of the octave and octave equivalence, 
the only co-ordinate systems capable of specifying every interval uniquely 
under octave equivalence are the following; 



111 1 ^-^ 



Chapter 7: Haimony Space using Balzaiw's theory 



0-11 minor seconds (step size 1) 
0-11 perfect fifths (step size 7), 

0 - 2 major thirds (steps size 4) and 0 - 3 minor thirds (steps size 3). 

No other distinct well-defined co-ordinate systems for C12 can be constructed even 
using arbitrary n-tuples of intervals (Balzano, 1980). The next key move in 
Balzano's theory is to investigate each of the three co-ordinate spaces in turn, as we 
will now do. 




Steps of minor thirds Steps of major thirds 

Step size 3 or 9 Step size 4 or 8 

Noofelemcntsincycle 4 Noofelerncntsincycle 3 

Elements in cycle {0,3,6,9,) Elements m cycle {0,4.8) 

C4 C3 



Fig 4 Steps of majcv thirds and minor thirds 



1.2.1 The semitone space 

The semitone spar, can be represented as in figure 1. Intuitively speaking, 
'closeness' in this space corresponds simply to the number of semitones separating 
two points. Balzano suggests that this measure is closely related to the notion of 
closeness in melodic motion. We have already seen that both the minor second (step 
size 1) and the major seventh (step size 1 1) generate the entire group C12 {0, 1,2, 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 1 1 ). It tums out that other elements of the group can be used 
to generate subgroups. The elements major second (step size 2) and, by symmetry, 
minor seventh (step size 10) can be used to generate the subgroup C5, 

ERIC 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



corresponding to the whole tone scale {0,2,4,6,8,10). The major third (step size 4) 
getierates C3, corresponding to the augmented triad (0,4,8), and the minor third 
(step size 3) generates C4, corresponding to the diminished seventh chord 
{0,3,6,9}. The tritone (step size 6) generates C2, {0,6) and is the only element to 
be its own inverse clcmetit. Hie group theoretic perspective in the semitone space 
thus provides some new perspectives on a number of traditionally well known 
harmonic structures, but we must look to the other co-ordinate spaces for the real 
impact of the theory . 



1.2.2 r fie fifths space 

The fifths space (fig 2) proves to be a rich source of insights, of which we will pick 
out three. Firstly, the cycle of fifths is shown to have a unique status among 
intervals irrespective of the pitch ratio used to represent it. As we have already seen, 
the perfect fifth (step size 7) and its inverse, the perfect fourth (step size 5) are the 
only intervals aside from the semitone (and its inverse) that span the entire space of 
intervals. (This fact is exploited by Pythagorean temperament.) Secondly, the 
diatonic scale emerges as a natural stmcturc in the fifths space, since it is connected 
in this space (Fig 5). Thirdly, properties emerge from the representation that, in 
combination, make the diatonic scale imiquefy privileged among possible scales as a 
system for communicating location and movement. (More information about these 
properties can be found in Balzano (1980).) 




Fig 5 Diatonic scale embedded in ^fths space (after Balzano (1980)) 
123 The thirds space representation 

Tliis leaves us with the fmal co-oidinatc system to explore, the cartesian product C3 
Er|c 113 1 



Chapter 7: Hannony Space usint lalzano's theory 

X C4 The usual graphic repi«scntation of this space is given in Fig 6. Notes arc 
indicated by semitone numbers, and the diatonic scale is picked out as a 
parallelogram. 

0 4 8 
9 1 5 
6 10 2 

3 7 11 

0 4 8 

9 1 5 

6 10 2 

3 7 11 
Fig 6 Balzano's thirds space (After Balzano (1980)) 

It should be evident that superficially, this can be viewed as the Lxjnguet-Higgins 
space having undergone a shear operation. This may be more obvious looking at 
essentially the same diagram displayed slightly differently (fig 7). Leaving aside for 
a moment the exploration of the thirds space in detail, we can already indicate how 
the Balzano space addresses the issue? noted at the beginning of this section. 

• Centrality cf major and minor tonics. 

In effect, we get the same characterisation as in the case of the 12-fold 
version of the Lx)nguet-Higgins' space - the major and minor tonic triads are 
revealed as spatially central in the major and minor triads respectively (fig 8). 

• Why are major and minor triads perceived to be fundamental to tonal 
harmony? 

Balzano (1982) points out that prior to the growth of the triadic basis of 
music, six of the possible tonics in the seven note scale had been extensively 



0 4 8 0 



8 



1 



6 

3 
0 
9 
6 



10 
7 
4 
1 

10 



2 6 10 2 

/I 

11 3 7 11 

/I/ 

8 0 4 8 
5 9 15 
2 6 10 2 



11 3 



11 



114 



*1 



Chj^tef 7: Harmony Spjce iwing Dalzano's theory 



used as tonics, the tonics being marked not structurally by the scale, but by 
repetition, emphasis etcetera. In the fifths space, no tonic is particularly 
marked out by its locition, Balzano speculates thjat the emergence of two 
structural tonal centres and the adoption of triadic textures were mutually 
dependent. Balzano (1980) quotes Wilding-White (1961) to the effect that 
the central notion behind a tonic is not a central note, but a central triad. 
Hence, the importance of triads may be due to the way in which tlieir use 
gives rise to structural tcxial centres 

• Why are Just, Pythagorean and equal temperament perceived to work in 
"substantially the same way" 

All three tunings on a Hxed tuning instrument have exactly the same 
configurational (i.e. group theoretic) properties. Balzano (1980) says, 

When we look at the Just, Pythagorean, and Equal Temperament 
tunings of our familiar major scales, it is evident that there is an 
important sense in which they all work in substantially the same way: 
we don't have to learn to compose or hear separately for each one. 
The ratios, which are different in all three tuning schemes, do not 
really affect this fundamental commonality. (Balzano, 1980, page 83) 



Balzano's theory also provides answers to other fundamental questions about tonal 
harmony, such as why the octave is divided into twelve pitches; why a seven note 
scale is selected from twelve pitches, and what other pitch systems are likely to be 
psychologically interesting from a harmonic point of view (Balzano, 1980)). 



It is sometimes objected that the Balzano's theory applies only to western music, and 
not to music based on various ethnic scales. There is evidence that Balzano's theory 
is much more universal than this objection might suggest. Sloboda (1985) gives 
three reasons why 12-fold scales may be much more widely used in other musical 
cultures than at first appears. Firstiy, pentatonic scales are simple subsets of the 
diatonic scale. Secondly, the diatonic scale is widespread both geographically and 
historically, although exact tunings may vary (Kilmer, Crocker and Brown, 1976). 
Thirdly, Sloboda (1985) cites Jairazbhoy (1971) to the effect that where scales are 
theoretically not 12-fold, such as the Indian 22-fold sruti scale, they may be used in 

ERIC 115 , 



Chapter 7: Hamony Space using Bahano's theory 



a 12-fold manner in practice. 

3 Harmony Space using Balzano's theory: design decisions 

3.1 Core design decisions 

We can now bring across all of the design decisions from the core abstract design of 
the 'thiids/fifths' Harmony Space tool of chapter 5, the only change being, in effect, 
a graphic shearing of the screen layout. We will now review the major design 
decisions. We have a direct manipulation environment using the thirds space that 
sounds in real time, with user-selectable chord arity. The chords have default 
qualities indexed by the degree of the mode on which they are based. The key 
window is visible and movable. The default qualities are made comprehensible by 
use of the key window as a visible constraint mechanism. At least two distinct 
pointing devices are required, one for moving notes and one for moving the key 
window. Extra pointing devices can be used, if required, to simultaneously control 
multiple voices, perhaps in different registers and perhaps with different arities. 
Different voices can be controlled by different users. Foot switches or pointers can 
be used to change chord-arity, enforce or relax key constraints, overide chord 
quality and assign rhythmic figures to voices. 

3.2 Design decisions concerning the display 

As in the previous version of Harmony Space, bearing in mind that we will be 
looking at trajectories of chord and bass progressions in the space, it makes sense 
for us to explicitly multiply the key window like a wall-paper pattern, in the same 
way that this has been done for the notes. To emphasise similarities with the 
Longuet-Higgins 12~fold space, we graphically pick out the diatonic scale using a 
box design (fig 7), rather than the equally possible paraUelogram (fig 6). 



ERIC 



1 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 




Major 3rds ► 

Fig 7 Harmony Space using thirds representation 

We slice up the diatonic areas (which could alternatively be left as continuous zig- 
zagging strips) into boxes (fig 7). This 'slicing' is a conscious design choice. The 
motivation for it is to make the display easier to "chunk" visually, and to make 
mental comparisons with the Longuet-Higgins non-repeating space easier. The slice 
as we have positioned it may help emphasise tiie stacking of the major thirds and the 
ccntrality of the major tonic, but equally, it may slightiy obscure tiie centrality of the 
minor tonic. (ITie strips could be sliced up horizontally between n and V instead of 
between VI and II, which would tend to give the opposite emphasis.) The placing, 
or absence of the slice in the display has no theoretical significance (see footnote 2 in 
chapter 5). Note spelling has no significance, following vernacular usage. Sharps 



ERIC 



117 • «' 1 



Chapter 7; Hamjony Space using Balzano's theory 



could be used consisten^'y, or neutral semitone numbers could be used in place of 
note names. 

3.3 Universal commands and consistency 

In a design for Harmony Space based on Balzano's theory, the seniitone and fifths 
space could have been chosen to feature equally prominently with tlie thirds space. 
For example, the current key could be controlled and displayed by the position of a 
dot in a circular display representmg the fifths space Gike fig 2). The thirds space 
direct manipulation area could be held fixed during modulation. Diagrams of all 
three representations (the semitone space, the fifths space and the thirds space) could 
be used both as display and direct manipulation control areas for chords or notes. 
This might make interesting alternative version of Hannony Space. However, we 
have decided to opt for a sniaU numb:;r of universal gesUires (commands) that work 
consistently for as many functions as possible. Thus the same diagonal displacement 
represents a note, a triad or a key moving through a perfect fifth, depending on 
which (easily distinguishable) entity the user has hold of. This has advantages of 
uniformity and consistency as advocated by Baccker and Buxton (1987, page 605). 
In our case, the uniformity allows die same gestures, localised in the same part of 
the screen, to be used to control all functions. It also allows ali of die relationships to 
be visualised in one place. The extra cognitive load, memory imposition and 
discontinuous gestures involved in moving between sub-displays with different 
styles of command gesture are avoided. This unifonnity is made possible without 
distorting die theory by die fact tiiat the thirds space representation subsumes the 
semitone and fifths spaces, which appear as diagonals in die tiiirds space (fig 7). ^ 
However, diis is not to argue diat dierc is any "right" answer to this design issue. A 
different argument might be that multiple alternative representations are educationally 
desirable. It is likely that both designs would have advantages for different 
purposes. We will concentrate on the version with a single uniform display. We 
have now arrived a Harmony Space interface based on the Balzano theory whose 
appearance is as in fig 7. We will now run through a compressed exjwsition of the 
elements of tonal harmony to see how they appear in the new design (of section 

2 The only aspect of the one-dimensional spaces the two-dimensional space fails to show 
explicitly is their circular aspects. But we can imagine addressing even tiiis shortcoming with 
toroidal or cylindrical representations on screen that rotate appropriately as objects on their surface 
arc moved about. 

EMC 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space ixsing Balzano's theory 



3.1), noting how familiar expressive features are emphasised in different ways. As 
we will see in a moment, the results are slightiy different from what a simple shear 
operation might lead us to expect. In any case, we have no way of getting an 
intuitive feel for which elements of tonal harmony may appear clearer in one 
representation or the other witliout expliciUy inspecting tiiem. 

4 Expressivity of a version Harmony Space based on thirds space 
4.1 Statics ofhannony 

The two axes of the display are the major and minor third (fig 7). As we have 
already noted, because of the circular nature of the chromatic scale under octave 
equivalence, the two dimensional grid (fig 7) really describes the surface of a torus. 
However, to make relationships easier for the eye to read, the torus has been 
unfolded and repeated like a tile pattern. Duplicate note names represent exactly the 
same note (unlike in Longuet-Higgins' non-repeating space). 



4.1.1 Fifths axis and chromatic axis 

From an educational point of viev/, two important dimensions that western 
musicians constantiy make use of (and novices need to learn about) have simple 
physical, spatial interpretations in Balzano's space. "North-East" diagonals 
correspond to cycles of fiftiis and the "Soutii-East" diagonals are chromatic scales. 
The thirds space can be viewed as subsuming the two one-dimensional 
representations. 



4.1.2 Scales and triads 

The notes of the diatonic scale clump togetiier into a compact window containing no 
non-diatonic notes. Moving the key window corresponds to modulation. If we 
slide die window up die diagonal cycle of fifths axis starting from the key of C, we 
will lose an A and an F at the bottom of die window, but regain the A and capture 
an F#. Clearly this corresponds to modulating to the dominant. The only maximally 
compact three element shapes that fit into the diatonic window are none other than 
die major and minor triads. (Fig 8) Either set of three triads span the diatonic space. 
Every degree of the diatonic scale has (selecting notes in a positive-going direction) 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



a major or minor triad associated with it , except for VII (the leading note) with its 
associated diminished triad (fig 8). 




Major triads Minor triads Diminished 
in C major in C Major chord 
I, IV and V II, HI and VI VII 

Fig 8 Triads in the thirds space 

4.1 J Tonal centres 

If we consider the diatonic scale as swept out by translating a major triad by two 
successive moves along the cycle of fifths diagonal, then we can see that the triad 
whose root is the tonal centre of the major nxxle is visually (and computationally) 
the central of the three major triads (fig 8). The strongly related (and harmonically 
next most important ) primary triads are immediately to either side of the tonic triad. 
The triad of the minor mode is centrally placed between the closely related secondary 
minor triads. This gives us a very simple story to tell to novices about the nature and 
location of the major and minor tonal centres. 

4.1.4 Visual rule for chord construction 

It turns out that the use of the thirds space may give us a gain, from an educational 
viewpoint, in the way tliat the building blocks of harmony (scale tone triads and 
sevenths, etcetera) can be seen to be built up. In the case of the fifths/thirds version 
of Harmony Space, the rule for choosing tlie next note as chords of higher arity 
were built was not as obvious as we might have wished. In the thirds space, the rule 
is clearer. Namely, chords are always built up expanding in an outward sense, 
treating the two axis (major and minor third) impartially (barring optional stylistic 




120 i } • 



Chapter 1: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



adjustments in the case of ninth chords, to avoid discord^^), The diatonic scale is 
such that from any degree in the diatonic scale, one oi ihcse choices is always 
available and one always blocked if we wish to remain in the scale. This rule 
accounts, for example for the shape of the diminished triad on VH (Fig 8). Sec fig 9 
for the appearance of scale-tone sevenths in the thirds space. 




Scale tone 
Major sevenths 
in C Major 
I and IV 



Scale tone 
Minor sevenths in C 
Major 

II, III and VI 



Dominant 
seventh 
chord V 



Diminished 

chord 

VU 



Fig 9 Scale-tone sevenths in the thirds space 



4.2 Representing the 'Dynamics' of harmony 

We can use the thirds version space version of Harmony Space to map out and 
control the possible movements of chord progressions. By moving along the cycle 
of fifths axis, progressions in fourths and fifths can be controlled. Trajectories of 
different lengths down this axis are shown in Fig 10. Depending on whether notes 
outside the key window are allowed or disallowed as roots of chords, real or 
diatonic progressions result. By restricting the chord vocabulary so that only some 
notes of the diatonic scale arc available to be sounded, many basic and important 
chord progressions can be played as straight line gestures (e.g. I IV V I). When 
roots lying outside the key window are disallowed as roots, straight line gestures 
along the chromatic axis produce scalic progressions (fig 1 1). 



ERIC 



191 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 




C'hapier 7; Hannony Space using Balzario's theory 



When the key constraint is relaxed, chromatic progressions can be played on this 
axis (fig 12). As in the thirds/fifths version of Harmony Space, arbitrary chord 
progressions can be played, with discontinuous jumps being called for only in 
exceptional cases involving non-diatonic tones and tritones. 




Fig 1 1 Chromatic trajectories 



5 Analysing a chord progression in the thirds space 

Fig 13 shows how the trace of "All ihe things you are" appears in the representation 
of the thirds version of Harmony Space. For clarity, only the root of each chord is 
indicated, and chord alteration is indicated by annotation. 



123 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 




bars 1-5 

Starting key I 




bars 9-13 

Modulates up a minor third in bar 9 




bars 16-20 




bars 24-28 

Modulates up a major third in bar 24 

(Arrows show direction of 
key window shift) 




ra 



bars 6-8 

Modulates up a major third in bar 6 




vn 



bars 14-15 

Modulates up major third in bar 14 




bVI 



bars 21 -24 

Modulates down a minor third in bar 21 




bars 29-36 



(Ab) VI / II / V / I / IV / (C) V / I / 1+6/ 
(Eb) VI / II / V / I / IV / (G) V / I /VI /II / 
(G) V#3 / I / 1+6 / (E) II / bllx / I /I+6 / 
(Ab) VI / II / V / I / IV / IVm / III / blllo / II / 
(Ab) V#3 bllx / 1+6 /I+« // 



Fig 13 Trace of "All the Things You Ar'»" in the thirds space 
(Chord sequence reproduced from Mehegan (1959) "All the things you are" by 
Kem-Hammerstein © Chappell & Co., Inc. and T.B. Harms.) 



Chapier 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



6 Relationship between alternative Harmony Space designs 

Alihough the Balzano thirds space and I-onguet-Higgins 12-told space have such 
different starting points, the resulting co-ordinate spaces are related by a simple 
shear operation. (Indeed, with suitable metrics, the two spaces can be treated as 
identical.) This means that the exactly the same design for Harmony Space can be 
implemented in either configuration with no differences at all bar a sheared screen 
display. This is not to say that the two theories are psychologically 
indistinguisiiable - indeed, psychological experiments have been carried out to try to 
find out which is the more accurate cognitive model by exploiting their underiying 
differences (Watkins and Dyson, 1985).^ Neither does it follow that interfaces 
based on the two configurations would necessarily be educationally 
indistinguishable: some phenomena appear to be more perspicacious in one version 
'^f Harmony Space than the other (as we will investigate in a moment). Neither is it 
by any means a foregone conclusions that all of the 'straight line' axes in the 
Longuet-Higgins 12-fold space will be mapped onto some equivalent axis in the 
sheared space. This is easy to demonstrate by a counter-example. For example, if 
the Longuet-Higgins space were to be sheared vertically upwards, the chromatic axis 
would be stretched out of existence.^ The following table shows how the four 
intervals that can form a well-defined co-ordinate system for the chromatic scale 
(perfect fifth, semitone, major third and minor third) are remapped into points of the 
compass if the Longuet-Higgins 12-fold space is sheared horizontally and vertically 
respectively. 



Interval 


LH 12-fold 


horizontal sliear vertical shear 


p5 


N 


NE 


N 


M3 


E 


E 


NE 


m3 


SE 


N 


E 


ni2 


NE 


SE 


Lost: SE axis becomes a whole- tone axis 



^ It appears to have been concluded that both theorieii have complementary roles to play as 
cognitive models. 

^ The 'northern' axis would be unaffected and the 'eastern' and 'south eastern' axes would be 

shifted anticlockwise through 45^. But the 'north-eastern' chromatic axis would be "stretched out of 
existence" northwards, and a whole-tone axis "squeezed" into existence from the south. See the table 
above for another way of representing the same t> in^ 



ERLC 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



ERIC 



The vertical shear illustrates the result of a shear operation in the general case, which 
is that proximity illations are destroyed on one diagonal axis A sideways shear on 
the Longuet-Higgins 12.fold space is an exception to this penerpl ruk, . " ' -ae 12- 
fold space repeats itself every three elements along ^ ..-n;:ontul axis (chapter 5 fig 
7X Due to this periodicity of three, ^vhen iiie Longuet-Higgins space is sheared 
sideways, the old chromatic axis is "stretched out of existence" but a new chromatic 
axis is sheared into being from the opposite direction. As a result of this state of 
affairs, all of the axes present in the Longuet-Higgins 12-fold space are preserved in 
the thirds space in some form. 

This means that all results in the thirds space are transformed versions of patterns 
previously explored in Longuet-Higgins 12-fold space. Despite the near equivalence 
of the two interfaces from such a point of view, they are well worth investigating 
separately, for at least three reasons. Firstly, the introduction of - new theoretical 
rationale for the interface has allowed us to review our design decisions and suggest 
possible theoretically motivated variations on the design. Secondly, some 
relationships may be visually more perspicacious in one representation than the 
other. Thirdly and finally, the different theoretical underpinnings of the two 
interfaces tend to make one or the other better suited for teaching particular aspects 
of music theory. For example, a comparison of the structure of die pentatonic scale. 
Guide's hexachord and the diatonic scale could probably be carried out more 
naturally in terms of Balzano's theory. 

We will now collect together phenomena that appear io be represented more 
perspicaciously in one version of Harmony Space than the other. 

. The "chord growing" algorithm is visuaUv t earer in Balzano's space - the 
chord always grows outward along one or other axis. 

. In the Longuet-Higgins 12-fold space, there are four maximally compact 
three element shapes that fit into the key window, only two of which are 
triads (see chapter 5). In the thirds space, the major and minor triads are the 
only maximally compact three element shapes that fit into the key window. 
This provides a useful story to tell novices about the unique importance of 



Chapter 7; Hannony Space using Balzano's theory 



triads. 

• The next point only holds in one variant of Harmony Space. In this variant, 
the notes along each axi<' ascend in the specified interval steps as normal, but 
without being mapped into a single octave - the notes just carry on 
ascending. In this variant tool, it tums out that the Balzano representation is 
better suited for playing melodies than the Lx)nguet-Higgins version, for the 
following reason. In the Balzano version, the chromatic diagonal really is, 
(and sounds like) a semitonal axis, since it corresponds to the following 
interval; 'a major third - a minor third = a semitone'. On the other hand, 
using the Longuct-Higgins representation, the cliromatic axis corresponds to 
and sounds like the following interval; 'a major third + a perfect fifth = a 
major seventh'. Hence in this particular variant of Harmony Space, the 
Balzano representation is a much more natural instrument for integrating the 
exploration of harmony and melody. 

• We speculate that the Longuet-Higgins 12-fold representation may have 
one very important general advantage. It may be easier for novices to 
remember and reproduce the key window shapes, chord sequences traces 
and chord shapes based on the Longuet-Higgins 12-fold space, due to their 
relatively straightforward rectilinear shapes, as opposed to the perhaps more 
deceptive slanting shapes of the thirds space. This speculation remains open 
to experimental testing. 

We might now ask which of the two representations gives rise to the 'best' version 
of Harmony Space. From an abstract point of view, if we consider the space we 
arc interested in to be a 12-notc pitch set (i.e. we are not interested in notational 
distinctions) then Balzano's is the canonical co-ordinate system for the space. We 
can easily see that the Longuet-Higgins co-ordinate system contains redundancy in 
this characterisation of pitch, because the fifths axis spans the space by itself. Both 
interfaces probably have unique contributions to make in different educational 
contexts depending on the characterisation of pitch we wish to use. However, 
experimental testing would be required to discover which version is educationally 
most successful; effects such as the different degree of memorability of differei-t 



Chapter 7: Hantiony Space using Balzano's theory 



Shapes might turn out to have a stronger bearing than such abstract issues. 



7 Implementation of Harmony Space 

A prototype version of Hannony Space has been implemented with the Balzano 
screen configuration. The prototype exhibits, in some form, all of the key design 
points described in the minimum specification of Harmony Space (given in chapter 
5). Some of the minor features aie either not implemented or have bugs associated 
with them. A full description of the prototype and its Umitations is given in appendix 
1. A sample screen dump from the prototype is shown in fig 14. 




Fig 14 Screen dump from Harmony Space prototype- 



ERIC 



The prototype implementation lacks proper menus and lafxlling, runs slowly and 
pauses frequently for garbage coUection. The addition of a small number of features 
such as labels and menus would undoubtedly make it very much more convenient tor 
novices. The prototype is clumsy to use because of these Umitations, but is adequate 
to demonstrate, in rudimentary form, the educational potential of the underiying 
design. A report on some experiences of novices with Harmony Space can be found 
in chapter 9. There we are more easily able to discuss ideas made use of in this 
chapter not introduced until Part III. In appendix 2, a specification for a less 

5 For technical reasons to do with the the difficulty of prinUng large expanses of black, we have 
presented all of the screen dumps of the prototype inverted black-for white. Since Uic actual screen 
dumps are over 1Mb each in size - too large to include in the Uiesis document - they have been 
redrawn manually. 

128 



Chapter 7: Hamiony Space using Balzano's theoi7 



rudimentary version of Harmony Space is given (referred to as the 'idealised' or 
notional version - able amongst other things to use the layout of either the Longuet- 
Higgins 12-note or Balzano theories). This idealised version of Harmony Space is 
only trivially different from the prototype in conceptual terms. Both the implemented 
and idealised versions conform to the minimal specification given in chapter 5. 



8 Some educational uses of Harmony Space 

Harmony Space has at least five classes of educational use; 

• sketching chord sequences, 

• experimentally modifying existing chord sequences, 

• exploring strategies for accompaniment 

• informally analysing chord sequences, 

• learning about music theory. 



Examples of each of these activities as carried out by novices are discussed in 
Chapter 9. 'Sketching' chord sequences encompasses two distinct activities: trying 
to reproduce chord sequences that are already known and making up new ones. 
"Experimentally nxxiifying' chord sequences involves taking existing sequences and 
modifying them in musically informed ways. For example: progressions that make 
use of long cycles of fifths can be modified making use of tritone substitution (see 
section 4.4.3); chord sequences that use a consistent chord-arity can have that arity 
experimentally changed; chords can be substituted for other chords, for example, VII 
for V or II for IV (experiments with dominant and subdominant function); notes of 
altered quality can be substituted for other altered qualities in different melodic 
contexts, and so forth). Each modification can be exploited educationally in at lea^t 
three ways. Firstly, the student can exercise aural imagination by trying to anticipate 
the musical result. Secondly she may Ui;e the modifications to try find out by trial and 
eiTor which aspects of the piece are essential, J».nd which parts can be altered without 
destroying the musical sense. Thirdly, she may try to decide whether or not changes 
are improvements, and if she considers they are, she has begun to compose 'new' 
pieces in a rudimentary way. Harmony Space is well-suited for exploring simple 
harmonic accompaniment strategies in combination with the human voice or other 
instruments. In particular, many of the strategies suggested by Campbell (1982) for 




Chapter ?: Hamtony Space using Balzano's theory 



exploring accornpanimeni; become relatively easy to try out using Harmony Space. 
For example, accompaniments using I alone, I and V alone, or I IV and V in 
combinatioa can be explored using a single bass voice, scale-tone fifths diads or 
conventional triads, depending on the chord-arity chosen. Harmony Space also 
allows melodies to be 'tracked' in diatonic thirds or sixths, by selecting a chord arity 
of two. Tracking in sixths is a fundamental accompaniment strategy used with great 
frequency by both classical and popular composers (for example, "Oh Lovely 
Peace", (G.F.Handel) and "I feel fme" (Lennon & McCartney). Typical jazz 
accompaniment techniques can be explored by setting the chore! arity to four (scale- 
tone sevenths) or five (ninths). Scale-tone sevenths are fundamental to the 
accompaniment of much jazz and form its basic harmonic raw material (Mehegan 
(1985), Scale tone ninths (chord arity 5) can give an accompaniment a distinctive 
jazz texture (cf. "The Nightfly" (Donald Fagen) and "Isn't She lovely" (Stevie 
Wonder)). 

Novices can "informally analyse chord sequences" in the sense that, by watching the 
playback of a chord sequence in Harmony Space (by a human demonstrator or 
hypothetical implementation with built-in sequencer), they can produce simple 
functional analyses of the harmony of the piece. (It may also be useful for novices to 
analyse chord sequences informally at a higher level, in which whole sections of the 
chord progression are grouped as single units, as in the analysis of "All the diings 
you are". In this approach to analysis, the interface is used as a notation which 
makes changes in direction of progressions, and their possible destinations 
graphically clear, lliese aspects of chord progression arc not obvious in conventional 
notations). Finally, aspects of the theory of harmony can be explained and discussed 
using visual, audible and kinaesthetic demonstrations. Possible theoretical topics 
suitable for illustration to novices using version of Harmcmy Space include versions 
of practically every piece of music theory discussed in this chapter, for example: the 
nature of triads and tonal centres, the structure of the key system, modulation, the 
relationship of chord quality degree to degree of scale, making sense of chord 
progressions, simple modal harmony, the relationship between the major , minor 
modes and other modes and so forth. Note that as currently designed, it is expected 
that novices would require guidance in the use of Harmony Space - there is no claim 
that simple exposure to Harmony Space without guidance would by itself teach 



no 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



novices to compose. 

9 Intended users of the tool 

The tool has been identified as being particularly relevant to the needs of those with 
no musical instrument skills, unfamiliar with music theory and unable to read music, 
but who would like to compose, analyse or articulate intuitions about chord 
sequences. Without such a tool, it is unclear how members of this group could even 
begin to perform these tasks without lengthy preliminary training. Thus the tool is 
not only an educational aid (though it can be used in this way) but an empowering 
tool that enables a group to perform tasks otherwise scarcely accessible at all. The 
interface can be used by novices to experiment with, compose, analyse, rnotlify and 
play harmonic sequences in purposive ways. (Some of these tasks might be easier to 
carry out using modified versions of the interface - discussed in the section on 
conclusions and further work below.) Harmony space may be able to give 
conceptual tools for articulating intuitions about chord sequences not only to noviais 
but also to experts. The graphic linear notation for chord progressions that emerges 
from Harmony Space when tracking chord sequences makes various aspects of 
chord progressions visible and explicit that are otherwise hard to articulate in 
conventional notations. 

10 Related interfaces 

To the best of our knowledge, the work described in this chapter was the first 
application of Longuet-Higgins' tlieory for educational purposes. Holland (1986b) 
appears to be the first discussion of use of Longuet-Higgins' representation for 
controlling a musical instrument, and the implemented prototype appears to be the 
first such instrument constructed. A number of interfaces, each I'elated in some 
way to Harmony Space are described below. Each, including Harmony Space 
(Holland 1986b), was designed with no knowledge of any of the other interfaces. 
The first device is Longuet-Higgins' light organ (fig 15). Longuet-Higgins (reponed 
in Steedman 1972 page 127) connected each key of an electronic organ to an square 
array of light bulbs illuminating note names. This device was the first to make 
explicit use of Ix)nguet-Higgins' theory. It allowea music played on the organ to be 
displayed in Longuet-Higgins' original (non-repeating) space. 




131 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



EpB^F C GDAF 
OGmA^BBkFC 



Fig 15 Longuet-Higgins' Light organ 
(from Steedman, 1972 page 127) 



However, tlie question did not arise of working in tiie opposite direction to allow the 
grid representation to control the organ. The key window does not seem to have been 
represented on the display. The first computer-controlled device using a 
generalised two-dimensional note-array (we will explain this in a moment) with 
pointing device to control a musical instrument seems to be Levitt's program 
Harmony Grid (Levitt and Joffe, 1986). Harmony Grid runs on an Apple 
Macintosh. It displays a two dimensional grid of notes where the interval between 
adjacent notes may be adjuste<i independently for the x and y axes to any arbitrary 
number of semitone steps (fig 16). The grid display can control or display the 
output of any musical instrument with a MIDI interface (Musical Instrument Digital 
Interface - an industry interconnection standard for musical instruments). Harmony 
Grid can be configured as a special case to the grid layouts of Balzano's space or 
LoLguet-Higgins 12 fold space. The question of key windows does not arise in 
Harmony Grid. This means that Harmony Grid docs not make explicit the bulk of 
the relationships and structures described in thh chapter. The mouse can control 
chords, but their quality must be adjusted manually - there is no notion of inheriting 
or constraining chord quality from a key window. Hence modulation can be carried 
out only by knowing and manually selecting the appropnafc chord quality as each 
chord is played. Hannony Grid i.s the first of ns kind and a useful educational tool. 
It is robustly implemented v/irh a gcxxi real- rime response nod has several useful 
performance-oriented features. 



132 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



4 File Idil Mouse LUIndou j> Si 

Ol: Ionic O2;moj (S)3:fn1n O 4: oug 0 5:d1m 

O6:dom7 Q 7: fi7 Q 8: ml 0 9: hdim7 QO: dim? 



□ q 

□ w 

□ a 

nr 

M 

0 


B 








s 




ft 5J 


3 










0 
















B 














8 


















6 






















B 






8 


8 










8 




8 




























































1 
































a 
































































MK 24f M'^ViVV SPS'S'VV MVMW }Vf 9Vf dV^MV 
EZ9CZIU}C3CZIuliI3^DQlCZiSiiZi ^iWM€T\rf7\n%iw%rdiw% 



k K /r\ /T\ /'K /K /N /K /N /\ /Ts /N /Tv /Tv /K /K /T\ /K /K /K /« 



Fig 16 Harmony Grid 



# fl may Out Help Pitch Content Options Controls Output 




Fig 17 Music Mouse 



Another related program is Laune Spiegel's (1986) "Music Mouse" (fig 17). Music 
mouse has two piano-type keyboards represented at right angles on a computer 
screen. Three vertical bars and one horizontal bar are displayed that extend over the 
height and width of the screen respectively. The horizontal bar sounds melody notes 
as it is moved up and down, brushing the vertical keyboard. Tlie vertical bars sound 




Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's Uicory 



chords as they are x-noved forward and back\\ards over tht* horizontal keyboard. The 
vertical bars move together, the horizontal position of the group controlled by the x 
position of the itiouse. These sound an inverted tiiad (or another selectable chord). 
Simultaneously, the y-position of the mouse controls tlie position of the single 
melody note represented by the horizontal bar. All four notes are constrained by the 
system to avoid black notes and play only white notes (other constraints are 
selectable). Hence key constraints can be enforced. Music Mouse is a highly original 
program, and a delightful and sophisticated instrument to use. Not surprisingly, it 
does not make harmonic relationships anything like as explicit as Harmony Space 
does. It is easy to play linear chord progre ^sions, but hard to control or recognise 
progressions in mixtures of intervals and there is no way of visualising inter-key 
relationships. Harmony Space is by far the most expressive of these interfaces from 
the point of view of of explicit control and representation of harmonic relationships. 
Balzano (1987) has recently been working on the design of computer-based 
educational tools for learning about music. One of the tools is based on his group- 
theoretic approach to harmony, with a two-dimensional visual display (Balzano, 
1987), but no details appear to be available in the litenture yet. 

Finally, a development of Harmony Space called Harmony Logo has been 
developed, in prototype, as part of tliis research. Hannony Logo is a programming 
language that moves a voice audibly .\round in Harmony Space under program 
control. It does this in a fashion analogous to the way the programming language 
"Turtle Logo" moves graphic turtles around on a computer screen. The voice or 
homophonic instrument is, by analogy, a "harmony turtle". Harmony Space has the 
potential to allow the structure of long bass lines and chord sequences to be 
compactly represented in cases where the gestural representation might be awkward 
to perform or hard to analyse. Harmony Logo plays a role in the architecture of 
Chapter 8. 



11 Limitations 

The current implementation of Harmony Space is an experimental prototype designed 
to show the feasibihty and coherence of the design. At the time at which the work 
was done, the graphics, mouse and midi programming in themselves required 

ERIC f J . 



Chapter?: Hannony Space using Balzano's theory 



considerable effort to undertake. The prototype served its intended purpose, but is 
too slow and lacks simple graphic and control refinements to make it easy to use. In 
particular, it suffers from the following limitations; 

• the prototype is slow to respond and garbage collects frequently, hampering 
rhythmic aspects of playing the interface, 

• the slow response of the prototype means that events that should emerge as 
single gestalts (such as smooth chord progressions and modulations) are 
broken up, 

• the response problems interfere with the illusion of a direct connfctior. 
between gesture and response, and can cause considerable frustration, 

• the secondary functions such as overiding chord quality, switching chord 
arity, contiolling diatonicism/chromaticism and modulating are controlled in 
the current prototype by function keys as opposed to pointing devices, 

• the 'state' that the interface is in, and the choice of states available is 
invisible, rather than indicated by buttons and menus on the screen, 

• it is not possible to view the grid labelled by roman numeral, degrees of the 
scale, note names etc., 

• output is not provided in Common music notation, 'piano kcyboarH and 
dot' animation or roman numeral notation to assist skill transfer (see 
appendix 2). 

Other liinitations of Harmony Space are described in detail in Chapter 10. 
12 Conclusions 

Tlie following conclusions all apply to both versions of Harmony Space we have 
presented (the Longuet-Higgins 12-fold version and thirds space version), except for 
those otherwise indicated. 

12.1 Design decisions and expressivity 

A theoretical basis and a detailed design for a computer-based tool for exploring tonal 
harmony have been presented. The design exploits recent cognitive theories of how 
people perceive and process tonal harmony. Design decisions have been exhibited 
which lead the representations underlying the theories to be incon)orated into the 

EBIC 135 ( J 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



interface in ways which give the interface particularly desirable properties. The 
design decisions and the properties that they give rise to are summarised below. 
Firstly, the relevant design decisions arc as follows; 

• use of the 12-fold (as opposed to non-repeating) space^, 

• replication of the 12-fold field and key window graphically to allow linear 
patterns to emerge, 

• use of the entire replicated pattern as a direct manipulation control and 
display area, 

• use of the same spatial metaphor for controlling and displaying notes, 
chords and modulation, 

• provision of scale-tone chord qualities by default, 

• visual metaphor for scale-tone default, 

• separation of control of chord-arity finom control of chord quality, 

• capability to overide default scale tone qualities, 

• synchronisation of three modalities (auditory, haptic and visual) for control 
and representation, 

• optional control of diatonicity (control of access lo chromatic notes as roots 
of chords), 

• .e f more than one pointing device. 

These design decisions and the underlying cognitive theories give the resulting 
interface the properties listed below. In some cases, three of the most elegant and 
ingenious traditional 'interfaces' are used as points of comparison: common music 
notation, the guitar fretboard and the piano keyboaid. 

1 Chord progressions fundamental to western tonal harmony (such as 
cycles of fifths and scalic progressions) are mapped into simple straight line 
movements along different axes. This makes fundamental chord 
progressions easy to recognise and control in any key using very simple 
gestures. (These progressions can be difficult for novices to control and 
recognise by conventional means.) 



ERIC 



2 The same property allows particulariy important progressions (such as 
Applies only to the version with the Longuet-Higgins' configuration. 

136 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 

cycles of fifths) to be controlled and recognised as unitary "chunks". A 
common problem for novice musicians using traditional instruments or 
notations is that they only deal with chord progressions chord by chord 
(Cork, 1988). 

3 Chords that are harmonically close are rendf visually and haptically 
close. This makes other fundamental chord progressions (such as IV V I 
and progression in thirds) easy to recognise and control gesturally. (On a 
piano, for example, these progressions involve gestural 'leaps' that can be 
particularly hard to find in 'remote' keys) 

4 Similarly, keys that are harmonically close are rendered visually and 
haptically close. This makes common modulations easy to recognise and 
control. (In common music notation, or on either traditional instrument , 
considerable experience or knowledge can be required to abstractly calculate 
key relationships.) 

5 The basic materials of tonal harmony (triads) are rendered visually 
recognisable as maximally compact objects with three distinguishable 
elements. (In other representations, the selection of triads as basic materials 
can appear arbitrary.) 

6 Major and minor chords are rendered easy to distinguish visually. (This is 
not the case, for example, in common music notation or on a piuno 
keyboaT-d) 

7 Scale-tone chord construction is rendered such that it can be seen to follow 
a consistent and relatively simple graphic rule in any key. (On a piano 
keyboard, for example, this is not true in remote keys, where semitone 
counting or memorisation of the diatonic pattern for the key is required) 

8 Consistent chord qualities can seen to be mapped into consistent shapes, 
irrespective of key context. (Again, this is not true, for example, on a piano) 

' • ' t. 

137 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 



9 The tonic chords of the major and minor keys are seen as spatially central 
within the set of diatonic notes, whatever the key context. (This relationship 
is not explicit in common music notation, guitar or piano keyboard) 

10 Scale-tone chords appropriate to each degree of the scale can be played 
(even when there is frequent transient modulation) with no cognitive or 
manipulative load to select appropriate chonl qualities (This is not the case 
with guitar or piano). 

1 1 The rule governing the correspondence of chord quality with degree of 
scale can be communicated by a simple, consistent physical containment 
metaphor. 

12 A single consistent spatial metaphor is used to describe interval, chord 
progression, degree of the scale, and modulation. (Not the case in the other 
three points of comparison) 

122 Uses of Harmony Space 

The following uses for Harmony Space and its possible variants have been 
identified; 

• musical instmment, 

• tool for musical analysis, 

• learning tool for simple tonal music theory, 

• learning tool for exploring more advanced aspects of harmony, 

(e.g. assessing the harmonic resources of other scales) 

• discovery learning tool for composing chord sequences, 

• notation for aspects of chord sequences not obvious in conventional 
notations. 



123 Longuet-Higgins' theory and education 

The report from which this part of the thesis stems (Holland, 1986b) appears to be 
the first discussion of educational use of Unguet-Higgins' theory (whether by 

ERJC 138 f 'r , 



Chapter 7: Harmony Space using Balzano's theory 

electronic or other methods), and its use for controlling as well as representing 
music. 

FuUcr conclusions about Haraiony Space are given in the final chapter of the thesis. 



EMC 139 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a Imowledgc-bascil tutor for music composition 



Part III: Towards an intelligent tutor for music composition 

Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music 
composition 

"You must explain what they can do. 
They don't understand so much freedom" 
Harpe(l976, Page 4) 

1 Introduction 

In this chapter, we present a fi-amework for a knowledge-based tutoring system to 
help novices explore mitsical ideas in Harmony Space. This framework is referred to 
as MC. This framework was presented at the Third International Conference on AI 
and Education (Holland, 1987d), with an extended abstract in Holland (1987c), and 
at the First Symposium on Music and the Cognitive Sciences (Holland, 1988). 
Aspects of it are also discussed in Holland and Elsom-Cook (in press). The 
framework is aimed particularly at providing support for composing chord 
sequences and bass lines. 

2 Tutoring in open-ended creative domains 

The motivation behind the framework can perhaps most clearly expressed by starting 
from elements of a working definition of creativity proposed by Johnson-Laird 
(1988). In many respects Johnson-Laird's view of creativity is similar to ideas 
expressed by Levitt (1981), Levitt (1985), Sloboda (1985) and Minsky (1981), 
though not stated in these earlier contexts quite so generally. For our puiposes, we 
need only consider tv/o elements from Johnson-Laird's definition. The first element 
of the definition is the assumption tiiat creative tasks cannot proceed from nothing: 
that some initial building blocks are required. The second element is the assumption 
that a hall-mark of a creative task is that there is no precise goal, but only some pre- 
existing constraints or criteria that must be met (Johnson-Laird, 1988). From this 



ERIC 



140 



Chapter 8: Aii architecture for a kiiowlcdge-based tutor for music composition 



starting point, the act of creation can be characterised in terms of the iterative posing 
and eventual satisfaction (or weakening or abandonnient) of constraints by the artist. 
The artist may at any time add new constraints to the weak starting criteria. 

Sometimes, and in some domains, it may be acceptable to sacrifice a pre-existing 
constraint or criterion in order to meet new constraints imposed by the artist: 
Sloboda (1985) puts this vei7 clearly; 

" ..we will find composers breaking .. rules [specifying the permissable 
compositional options] from time to time when they consider some other 
organisational principle to tak.e precedence." (Sloboda, 1985, Page 55) 

We will refer to creative domains in which pre-existing constraints and criteria may 
get broken in this way as "open-ended creative domains". 

Tt is scarcely new to describe artistic creation in terms of imposing, loosening and 
satisfying consd'aints of various sorts; perceptual, cultural, stylistic and personal. 
Artists have been using such descriptions informally for a long time. But most 
formal theories of music arc framed according to a different outlook: one based on 
grammars and rules. This choice may have subtly misled theorists and educators: 
grammars and rules are not normally geared for the dynamic devising and 
weakening or abandonment of mles in mid-application (though see, for example, 
Lenat (1982) and Holland (1984b)). A grammatical perspective may tend to 
encourage ns to think of each layer of consti^nts as existing as a more or less rlosed 
layer, devaluing the importance of interactions with the other levels. Worse yet, it 
may encourage us to think of some layers, such as the 'rules' of four part harmony 
as being especially sacrosanct, leaving us with no simple way to account for 
violations that inevitably occur. In reality, it appears that a composer may sacrifice 
constraints at any level if she feels that constraints at other levels are more important 
in a particular situation. 

2.7 The nature of constraints in music 

Consti-aints in music seem to fall broadly into three types: some based on fostering 
perceptual and cognitive conditions for effective communication, others based on 

ERLC 141 



Chapter 8: An archiieciiirc for a knowledge-based tutor for ntiusic composition 



cultural consensus and yet others introduced de novo by the anist. We will look at 
this distinction in a little more detail, as it has been a tnajor influence on the 
architecture of MC. Examples of the first kind of constraint appear in recent research 
on western tonal music, such as work by Balzano (1980), Minsky (1981), 
McAdams and Bregman (1985), concerned respectively with harmony, metre and 
voice leading. Each of these pieces of research emphasises how various widespread 
features of music appear to have an important role in fostering perceptual and 
cognitive conditions for effective communication of structure. (Work of this sort, 
such as Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1983) is typically couched in grammatical terms 
rather than in terms of constraint satisfaction, although there is no particular 
difficulty in re-expressing such considerations in terms of constraints.) 

The second class of constraints is more of a cultural, historical nature. The nature of 
music is not only affected by the structure of musical materials and how these 
interact with our perceptual and cognitive faculties, but also by listeners' familiarity 
with the way in which composers happen to have used these materials to date. The 
particular genres that happen to have evolved and the particular pieces of music that 
happen to have been written necessarily have powerful effects on modem listeners 
and composers. When listeners hear a new piece of music, cognitive theories of 
listening posit that the music must be chunked in various ways to cope with memory 
and processing limitations (Sloboda, 1985). The kind of chunking that can be done 
by a particular listener depends not only on the abstrac. ire of materials such as 
harmony, but on the practices, genres and particular pieces cf music with -vhich the 
listener is already familiar. Levitt puts the connection between stylistic c ' .straints 
and those introduced by an individual composer very well (Levitt, 1981 2.2.1); 

" Effective communication requires musicians to repeat structures frequently 
within a piece and collectively over many pieces. Usually we view "musical 
style" and "t*ieme and variation" as utteriy different. Computationally and 
socially tliey are similar t ^s with different time spans; style tries to exploit 
long term "cultural memory", while theme and variation exploits recent 
events. In eitlier case, the considerate composer uses an idea of what is 
already in the audiences head to make the piece understandable." 

(Levitt, 1981 p. 15) 

ERIC 142 



ChapU-r 8: An architeiUurc for a knowlalge-bascd tutor for music composition 



2 .2 Constraints and peda^ony 

The characterisation of creative tasks in temis of constraints fits well with 
commonplace intuitions and practices in creative domains, A ubiquitous techiUque in 
the arts to make a creative task easier is to impose more constraints • sometimes 
almost irrespective of the exact nature of the constraints. Many educators in the 
creative arts, such as Bill and Wendy Harpe (Harpe, 1976) use this thematic 
technique routinely and explicitly, for example, allowing mural painters to paint 
anytliing so long as it is entirely in shades of blue (Harpe, 1976) or commissioning 
a musique concrete composer to work with a free hand as long as no sounds were 
used except building site sounds (Great Georges Project, 1980). Paradoxically, 
approaching a highly constrained creative task can be subjectively much easier than 
approaching a tabula rasa, 

Johnson-Laird's characterisation illuminates pitfalls in the standard way of teaching 
four part haiTnony. The text book rules for teaching traditional four part harmony 
have been absu-acted from the historical practice of composers. These 'rules' are 
often treated as if they were privileged compared with any constraints that the 
composer herself might bring to the exercise. This may be an effective pedagogical 
device, but one with damaging side effects if it leads the learner to believe that 
composing music is mainly a matter of conforming to rules derived from previous 
practice. As we have noted, composers appear to work with many different kinds of 
constraints, some derived from previous practice, but many specific to the piece in 
hand. When it becomes impossible to satisfy all of the constraints, those derived 
from previous practice may have no particuUu-ly privileged status. 

Tlie foregoing has implications for the construction of tutoring systems for creative 
domains. When constructing an intelligent tutor for four part harmony or 16th 
Century counteipoint, it may be justified to follow standard pedagogical practice and 
adopt the fiction that there is some certified knowledge about the domain that can be 
applied more or less rigidiv in a prescriptive and critical fashion. However, in the 
case of still evolving popul;ii- music, this fiction is untenable. The recent history of 
popular music is littered with examples of naive musicians who have written 
successful pieces of popular music that obey internal constraints of their own yet 
depart markedly from exir,ting practice. A remedial tutor in this domain is 

Er|c m '7 



Chapter 8: An arcbitecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



inappropriate since its prescriptions run the lisk of being misguided and its criticisms 
of being misconceived. 

However, this docs not mean that a student is better left with no guidance at all. As 
Johnson-Laird's characterisation emphasises, initial building blocks are essential. 
Furthermore, infonnal observation of novices learning in informal situation suggests 
that many kinds of information can help a novice to leani to compose, for example; 

• pieces of music that exemplify a prototypical use of some musical material, 

• pieces of music that e;;emplify a prototypical use of some strategic idea, 

• ways of making a piece sound as if it is in a certain style, 

• ways of employing various musical devices or techniques 

• ways of employing various musical strategic ideas, 

• information about how a particular piece gets a particular effect. 

In general terms, the idea behind the MC architecture is to work at three levels to be 
illustrated shortly - song level, style level and musical plan level. Where possible, 
we represent musical knowledge in terms of constraints, so as to fit with notions of 
creativity as outlined above. However, in the case of the lowest level of 
representation, we work with Harmony Space-based representations, so as to ease 
the burden of communicating harmonic concepts to novices. An interlinked tutor 
and microworld is used in a way that fits well with the idea of Guided Discovery 
Learning (Elsom-Cook, in press). We will begin by outlining the broad architecture 
of the framework, and an example interaction style, before looking at each 
representation level in turn. 

3 Architecture of a knowledge- based tutor for music composition 

In broad terms, as we indicated in the introduction, our framework for providing 
guidance in the exploration of the learning environment involves linking a 
knowledge-based tutor to one or more musical microworlds (Fig 1). The harmony 
microworld in fig 1 is Harmony Space. Integrated microworlds for rhythm and 
melody are not presented in the thesis. Such microworlds would clearly be 
desirable. In the further work section of the thesis as a whole we will identify 
possible theoretical bases for such microworlds and outline the form that they might 

ERIC ' ' 



Chapter 8: An architectuie for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



take. Fortunate r , for our immediate purposes, a single microworld is sufficient to 
illustrate the issues to be discussed. 



One aim of the architecture is that the knowledge base should provide abstract 
knowledge for the more effective exploration of the tnicrowo/ld: the microworld 
should provide experience in several modalities; visual, gestural and auditory, in 
order to make this abstract knowledge concrete in a principled way. This kind of 
approach may be viewed as a special case of Guided Discovery Learning, proposed 
by Elsom-Cook (1984) as a framework for combining the benefits of learning 
environments with those of interventionist tutors. Guided Discovery Learning 
methodology proposes the framework of a microworld in which discovery learning 
can take place, integrated with a tutor diat is capable of executing teaching strategies 
that range from the almost completely non- interventionist to highly regimented 
strategic'^ that give the tutor a much larger degree of control than the student. 

Interventionist teaching strategies for providing individually relevant guidance are 
not presented in the thesis. The MC framework looks very well suited to supporting 
a wide range of active teaching strategies; for example, versions of all of those 
discussed by Spensley and Elsom-Cook (1988). However, the work on MC 
concentrated on finding solutions for the core problems that had to be solved to 
make a tutor possible at all: the devising of ways of characterising strategic 
considerations about chord sequences and the devising of fomialisms for the song, 
style and plan levels that were potentially suitable for communication with novices. 
Prototypes of the song and plan levels have been implemented, and various musical 



K-BASED 
ITJTOR 
FOR NfUSlC 



COhflPOSmON 




Fig 1 General architecture of proposed tutoring system 



145 



Chapter 8; M architecture tor a krtowlcdge basal tai,«' for mxsic composition 



plans have b<f.en devised «iid encoded. (See hi.er in thiy cliapter for an 
implementation suinriary of M.C) A very simple user- led strategy whicb, zhe 'il.udent 
could use to navigaJe tlirough a seiies of vransforinaiions in the hiowle^jge bayes is 
presented. Teaching strategies lo j^rovide individually relevant guidance in MC are 
not discussed exct;pt in the further work section of tiiis chapter. 

3.1 An interaction .itylc: ih^^ TauiSinwn' method 

Since we Ivave decidal ttiat a prescriptive, critical tutonng style is inappropriate for 
the domain under consideration, we need at lea.sf one iiori -prescriptive, idiora- 
indcpendent, gcncial-puipose strategy w^-, can offer novices for composii^.g music. 
One simple and time-honoured canciidajc approach to cor/iposing music is the 'Paul 
Simon', or 'intelligent tran.sfoixnation' method. The Paul SimoJi method takes ils 
name liecause according to Stephen f::il-ron (1985 page 181) it is one of S.irnon's 
present day methods of composition, Very si/nply, the rtjethod involves lalfing an 
existii'.g song tiiat is liked, and then modifying the w^ng successively. At a ceitain 
point, tl-ie result is no longer the ohginal song, and can \y^. claiiDcd as an 'ori^^inal' 
song. However, the meth*><i is not as simple a:i it looks. It woald Iv; quite 
inadequate for a novice to make piecemeal Kial and error tijodificadons blindly at 
note level. Without apprapriate musical knowledge the hit rale of musically' sensible 
modifications v/ould be low. Moss novices lack the musical knowkyjge to make 
changes that are predommantly musically i?ensible. The method can work for 
experienced musicians Ixicause they have extensive knowledge about what chruvges 
ai^ musically se;r.sible. but it is inhOTXtily jimiieii. An accomplished composer will 
have far more poweiful and flexib:ie approacheii at Ivcr (:omm».rai than adaption. 
However, it seems reasonable to assuiue that a novice v/hc began by using the Paul 
Simon method aJid gained enough iwusical knowlexige to apply the method well 
would have gained enough kitowledge about nmsical structures, processes and 
genres to be in a position to develop her owri compositional fivethods. It is not being 
suggested that this method is a particularly desirable composition meth(xi, not does 
the approach of this chapter demand its use. All. iliat is being chimed for now is that 
it is one example of a non -prescriptive strategy that can be used as a guideline to 
allow the user navigate herself through the knowledge base for the purpose of 
composing - any number of other suategies could substituted. Later in the 



ERIC 



146 



Cliapter 8: Aii architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



chapter we will discuss further kinds of interaction that could be supported within 
the same framework. 

Wliat a knowledge-based tutor requires to support tlie Paul Simon or "intelligent 
transformation" method is some way of characterising what constimtes a musically 
sensible change. This is the question that we now need to address. The idea behind 
the aichitecmrc is to work at three levels - song level, style level and musical plan 
level (fig 2). We will now consider more closely wb kinds of musical knowledge 
the architecture requires, taking each kind of knowledge in turn. 




PROTOTYPICAL 

MICROWORLD 

EXERCISES 



Fig 2 Kinds of domain knowledge in MC 



3.2 Representation of Pieces 

In music, case studies tend to have more weight than theory. Hence there is a clear 
need for an extensive net of examples to serve as a source of initial building blocks. 
The collection of case studies should include pieces likely to be known and liked by 
clients, and should include exemplars of a wide variety of musical styles, features, 
musical goals, techniques and devices. However, few novices could be expected to 
learn much by simply listening to or looking at pieces of music at note level. It may 
help if we can "chunk" music in various different ways and record interconnections 
between chunks. 



What representation fonnalisms should be used to chunk descriptions of songs? 
Given our focus on chord sequences. Harmony Logo might be a good candidate as 

ERIC 147 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

a representation fonnalism at the 'song' or 'piece' ^ level of description. We will 
argue that descriptions in Harmony Logo can be used to chunk chord sequences in 
ways that can correspond well with musicians' intuitions. Harmony Logo has the 
additional pedagogical advantage that absti-act, chunked descriptions of chord 
sequence structure framed ir its terms could be given direct principled visual 
illustration in Harmony Space. The expositions of part II of tiie tiiesis illusti^te the 
likelihood tiiat commonly recurring harmonic concepts could be illustrated to novices 
by suitably designed practical exercises in Harmony Space. Other candidate 
formalisms for 'piece' or 'song' level descriptions could be constraint satisfaction 
representations similar to those developed in Levitt (1985), or hierarchical 
descriptions similar to tiiose of Lerdahl and Jackendoff (1983). The latter two 
candidates are attractive in many respects, but appear to be less well adapted tiian 
Harmony Space to communicating basic harmonic concepts to novices (see Lerdahl 
and Potard (1985) and Levitt (1985)). Conceivably, several different formalisms 
could be used to complement each otiier, in line witii Minsky's suggestions about 
the use of multiple complementary alternative descriptions of complex phenomena 
(Minsky, 1981b), and the increasing recognition of the need for multiple 
representations in Intelligent Tutoring Systems research (Stevens, Collins and 
Goldin, 1982; Self, 1988; Moyse, 1989). 

Leaving aside the way in which they arc represented formally, one useful conceptual 
model for such chunks is tiie kind of terms some musicians use informally witii one 
another when discussing pieces semi-technically. Musicians are often able to 
communicate useful information concisely about a piece of music using a few 
"chunks" of information. 

Verse - repeated twice - (harmonic rhythm of one chord per bar.) 

Amin7 Dmin7 Emin7 Amin? 
Chorus (haimonic rhythm of two chords per bar.) 

Dmin7 G7 Cma7 Fma7 Bdim7 Edom7 A min7 

Fig 3 Chord sequence of Randy Crawfoid's (1978) "Street Life" 



ERIC 



^ We will use the lerms 'piece' and 'song' synonymously in Part III, 

148 u: - 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-bascJ tutor for music composition 

For example, to quickly communicate the essentials about the chord sequence of 
Randy Crawford's (1978) "Sm^t Life" (Fig 3) - a musician might say; 

"The verse is a three chord trick, but in an aeolian version, using jazz 
sevenths". Similarly, for the chorus a musician might continue; "The 
chorus goes from the tonic right round the chords in a diatonic cycle of 
fifths, with the cadence in the harmonic minor" .2 

We will see in a inoment that this kind of chunking is particularly useful in 
suggesting meaningful ways in which a song can be modified. Let us look at a 
slightly more detailed example of this kind of chunking, using a version of 
"Abracadabra" 1 y the Steve Miller Band (1984), given in standard notation 
below^; 




Fig 4 

Bass line and chords for a version of 
The Steve Miller Band's "Abracadabra" (Steve Miller, 1984) 



We can encapsulate knowledge about this piece of music as follows. (We do not 
claim that this represents the complete or only true picture of this piece, but we will 
argue that it does give one useful view): 

2 Some readers may consider this kind of description arcane, but recently when trying to establish 
whether copyright clearance was required for use of musical examples in a version of this chapter 
being prepared for publication, I found myself describing the extracts over the telephone to the 
university copyrights officer (a musician) using just such terms. 

3 The Ab in the third bar is strictly a G#, repiescnted as shown for notational convenience. 

149 



Chapter 8; An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music ccmpositioii 



• The chord sequence is a straight line down the 'fifths axis', 

• The piece has a three chord vocabulary, 

• The piece is in the minor mode, 

• The piece uses plain triads, 

• The dominant chord employs a variant jazz quality (a ma/mi 3rd +13th), 

• There is a motor rhythm in the right hand accompaniment, 

• The bass line is a four note triadic aeolian arpeggio. This is played once per 
bar with the arpeggio upward but reversed in the last bar. 

Chunking would not be very useful unless the chunks could be usefully 
manipulated. A feature of the MC architecture is a facility to ge lerate a playable 
fragment from any isolated chunk or collection of chunks. Broadly speaking, this 
involves having defaults available that can be over-ruled by more specific 
information when avidlablc - as in Levitt's (1981) default-based improvising system. 
With such a facility, a novice could get a very rapid idea of what particular chunks 
did, by resynthesizing the song through stepwise refinement using each chunk in 
tum. We will now illustrate in words the kinds of trar.sforraations involved. 

3.2.1 Illustration of elementary chunk manipulation 

Starting with no chunks at all, and asking for the system to use its defaults to play 
the song description so far gives the following result. 

(major) Till 

This is a rather dull piece of music. However, it accurately reflects the basic 
assumptions of the system, as we will now explain. The repeated major tonic chord 
reflects the built-in assumptions that we are dealing primarily with tonal chord 
sequences (as opposed to melodies, atonal chords, musique concrete etc.); that the 
basic stuff of tonal chord sequences is triads (as opposed to diads, sevenths, ninths, 
etc); that we are dealing with music in a metrical context (where events tend to occur 
with reference to regular pulses); that in the absence of any other inlormation about a 
chord sequence, the 'safest' thing to do in some sense is to repeat the toivlc (as 

ERIC ^50 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

opposed to a chord based on any other degree of the scale); that the default tonal 
centre is the major centre (as opposed to the minor or a modal centre). 

In order for verbal explanations of some sort to be available to novices exploring 
MC, we would need to associate canned text and pointers to a semantic net with 
each chunk and with each setting in the vanilla (default) setting. This is not 
implemented. However, it appears well within the range of standard ITS techniques 
(Stevens and Collins (1977); Wenger,1987; Elsom-Cook (in press)). 

Moving on from the system defaults, the first chunk of information associated with 
the piece is; The chord sequence is a straight line down the fifths axis'. Given this 
chunk"* and no other information save the system defaults, the description 
generates the following; 

(major) 1 IV VII HI VI H V I 

Let us now move onto the second chunk, which is as follows; The piece has a three 
chord vocabulary'. This indicates that the song uses only ;hree functionally distinct 
chords, and further more that these chords are I, IV and V. The effect of this chunk 
on top of the first chunk and the system defaults would be both aurally very marked 
and easy to demonstrate graphically in Harmony Space; the resulting chord sequence 
is as follows; 

(major) I IV V I 

The third chunk; The piece is in the minor mode' indicates that the song uses the 
minor (not major) version of the three chord trick. The four chunks together produce 
a change that would be both audible and visible in a Harmony Space trace. The 
corresponding chord sequence is as follows; 

(minor) I IV V I 

^ The use of Har^iony Space concepts in some chunks does not give rise to any technical 
problems irrespective of the representation used for chunks, since Harmony Space concepts are 
exprcssable in any general purpose programming language capable of dealing with mathematical and 
logical terms. 



151 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music compositioji 



The fourth chunk; 'The piece uses plain triads' merely explicitly confirms the 
default assumption that the song uses plain triads (and not seventlis or ninths etc). 
This would lead to no audible change, no change in a Harmony Space animation, 
and no change in the chord sequence generated. The fifth chunk; "The dominant 
chord employs a variant jazz quality (a ma/mi 3rd +13th)' indicates that the chord 
quality of the chord with root V is altered to a particular jazz variant. The chunks 
collected so far now yield the following slightly modified chord sequence; 



(minor) I IV V (ma/mi Srd +13th) I 



The sixth chunk; 'There is a motor rhythm in the right hand accompaniment' 
indicates that the three chords are delivered using a motor rhythm (Cooper, 1981 
page 57), with the collective chunks now producing; 




Fig 5 - "Abracadabra" under assembly - motor rhythm stage 

Finally, the seventh chunk: 'the bass line is a four note triadic aeolian arpeggio'. 
This is played once at the beginning of eacli bar (at the same metrical rate as the 
motor rhythm) with the arpeggio upward, but reversed in the last bar' finally yields; 



i n f f f M M mt f r T f f r M 




Fig 6 - "Abracadabra" reconstructed in seven chunks 



ERIC 



152 1 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



In seven chunks, this has built up a reasonable approximation of the chord sequence 
and associated bass line of a vcrrion of "Abracadabra". Furthermore, in principle 
most of the chunks could be explained and illustrated using Harmony Space without 
any need for extensive prerequisite knowledge about music. 

For a novice, the process of replacing each chunk in a chunked description of a 
piece with an appropriate alternative chunk has a number of possible benefits; the 
process provides a systematic opportunity to explore the chunks, explore the piece, 
and to search for musically sensible variations on the piece. In the present exatriple, 
each chunk implicitly suggests a space of potenti al alternative chunks, although the 
size of the space of altematives varies enormously among chunks and depends on 
the level of generality of class which a chunk is viewed as belonging to. For 
example, the minor 'mode' is a member of the set of modes, of which there are only 
a limited number. A choice of the major mode in place of the minor mode would 
yield the following; 




Fig 6a - Major version of "Abracadabra" 



Similarly, the triad chord arity is one of a limited number of standard chord arities; a 
choice of ninth arity would cause the fol wing changes; 



ERIC 



153 



Chapter 8; An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



1^ 




i 



Fig 6b -version of "Abracadabra" in ninths 

Working down the remaining chunks, the three chord alphabet is one of a limited 
number of possible restricted alphabets; an unrestriaed alphabet would yield; 





i 





Fig 6c - A version of "Abracadabra" with chord alphabet restriction lifted 



Finally, more variations can be obtained by replacing the chord sequence direction 
with another harmony space direction: for example, choosing an upward scalic 
trajectory, we would obtain; 



154 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for m i^ic composition 




Fig 6d - version of "Abracadabra" with chord vocabulary restriction lifted 

and trajectory direction changed 



Further variations could be made by requiiing the bass line to play an arpeggio on a 
chord of a different arity, in the opposite direction and at a different metrical rate. On 
the other hand, we can consider the alternatives according to wider class 
membership; for example, the chord sequence direction chunk could be replaced 
with a procedure that makes no particular reference to tiie concept of Harmony Space 
direction and generates an arbitrary chord sequence; the motor rhythm could be 
replaced by any arbitrary rhythmic figure; the variant chord quaUty scheme could be 
replaced by any arbitrary variant quality scheme, the bass line could be replaced by 
an arbitrary bass line, and so forth. Such choices could in principle be indicated to a 
student by making inferences about class membership from a semantic net. The 
scenario of varying tiie chunks could be carried out using the same underlying 
formal mechanisms as the scenario of adding and subtracting chunks. 



155 



Chapier 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

We are not claiming that any of the variations we have outlined have been achieved 
in particularly startling ways - although viewing a chord sequence as a emerging 
from the interaction of a harmonic trajectory and an alphabet restriction is a new 
approach. Neither do we claim that any of the outcomes have any particular musical 
merit (though the variation in fig 6c works well enough). However, several of the 
transformations, particularly the last two, seem to be highly suggestive of further 
possibilities. We will explore some of these possibilities in more detail in the section 
on musical plans. 

This nearly completes our outline of the description of pieces at song level in the 
tutoring framework. In a full implementation of MC, each description of an aspect 
of fragment of a song or piece as a sequence (or tree) of chunks could be assembled 
into a package or "frame", with pointers or links from particular chunks and from 
the frame as a whole to related information at various levels (Fig 2). Some links 
could Ix^ to canned text, much as in hypertext links (Nelson, 1974^, whereas others 
would be to nodes in a semantic net. This is not implemented, but is discussed in the 
further work section. 

The reader may be wondering whether manipulation of the piece descriptions, as 
implemented in Harmony Logo, is simply Harmony Logo programming. This is 
essentially the case, but manipulating descriptions of pieces could differ from 
Harmony Logo programming in at least five ways. Firstly, the chunks need not be 
encoded Harmony Logo at all; secondly, the architecture need not require a novice to 
learn Harmony Logo programming as such, since the knowledge-based tutoring 
framework could constitute a front-end for manipulating descriptions of pieces; 
thirdly, the architecture need not require a novice to formulate descriptions from 
scratch, since it could centre around manipulation of existing descriptions of pieces; 
fourthly, the arcliiteclure gives a framework in wliich a knowledge-based tutor could 
support teaching strategies informed by user models (not implemented); and fifthly, 
piece manipulation could be combined with with style manipulation and constraint- 
based planning (implemented in prototype). 

We now turn frx)m the representation of pieces to the representation of styles. 



ERIC 



156 ■ V.I 



Chapter 8; An archiiecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



3.3 Representation of styles 

The next requireiiteini for the tutoring architecture is to have knowledge available 
about a range of styles of niusic. We will use the words "genre", "style" and 
"dialect" synonymously and loosely to fiefcr to partial descriprions in common lo a 
range of pieces. For example, we might want desctiptions of styles such as jazz, 
reggae, rock, blues, heavy-metal etc. There could be several descriptioits associated 
witli each style. We might even want detailed descriptions of "styles" relating to the 
prototypical patterns of particular performers, e.g. Michael Jackson, Donald Fagen, 
Stevie Wonder, Phil Collins etc Note that for the purposes of this chapter, we arc 
limiting ourselves Co style as it applies to chord sequences and bass lines. 
Knowledge about pre-existing geiu-es is important to coinposers in several ways: if 
not to conform to, then react against. The choice of style can have a large effect 
when choosing materials or su-ategies to employ. Stylistic considerations can also 
have a major effect on a novice's motivation. Irrespective of the choice of 
knowledge representation, crude but recognisable approximations of styles can be 
achieved using very simple means. For example, if any chord sequence is played in 
the following way; 



it tends to sound as though it is in a reggae style. Clearly, this does not characterise 
the genre very deeply, but on the other hand, it is virtually universally applicable to 
any chord sequence, and so is useful as a caricatiu'e description. Similarly, a chord 
sequence played in sevenths in the following rhythm with the following bass pattern 
relative to the chord; 




Fig 7 prototypical reggae accompaniment texture 




Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



1 ^ m m m m 



m m m 



Fig 8: Prototypical Fats Domino arrangement (after Gutcheon, 1978, page 10) 

sounds reminiscent of Fats Domino (Gutcheon 1978 page 10). This gets boring very 
quickly, but alternative patterns could be stored for variety. Even simpler means can 
caricature some styles; simply playing a chord sequence in ninths or sevenths in a 
suitable voicing scheme tends to sound "jazzy*\ especially if played with 
syncopation. Levitt (1985) demonstrates that it is possible to devise more detailed, 
typical characterisations of a genre but often with the trade-off that they will only 
apply to a narrower range of raw material: for example, a more detailed 
characterisation of a reggae style might only apply to pieces with a particular metrical 
structure, chord arity, haniionic rhythm and so on. As regards the representation of 
styles in the MC architecture, we have three key points to establish, most of which 
have already been established for us. We have to show that; 

• Musical styles can be described in a variety of computational 
representations in forms that can be applied to styhstically alter existing 
melodies (or bass lines) and chord sequences. 

• Ccnslraints are a particularly good vehicle for describing styles. 

• Style descriptions in more or less any formalism can be arranged in such a 
way as to be compatible with, and applicable to, the piece level and plan 
level descriptions of the MC aichitecture. 



ERIC 



158 



Cliapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



The first two points can be established merely by reference to the literature. Firstly, 
Levitt's (1985) work, togetlier with notable work by Fry (1980), Jones (1984), 
Greenhough (1986), Desain and Honing(1986) and others has clearly established 
that important aspects of musical styles styles can be described in a variety of 
computational formalisms in a form that can be applied to transform existing 
melodies and chord sequences. Secondly, Levitt's (1985) work also established that 
constraint satisfaction is, in many ways, a formalism particularly suitable for 
describing musical styles. As Levitt (1985) demonstrates, such a formalism can 
characterise in a fairly natural way 'styles' which depend on intenelating chord 
sequences, melodies and rhythms. 

This leaves us with only one point to be established; that style description,*; in more 
or less any formalism can be arranged in such a way as to be compatible with, and 
applicable to, descriptions at the piece level and plan levels in the architecture 
proposed in this chapter. This can be done in a veiy simple way by agreeing to use 
what Levitt calls 'pitch schedules' (essentially lists of notes and lists of note onset 
times) as an 'interlingua' between descriptions.^ There is no problem about this 
from the point of view of the style descriptions; Ixviu's progi'ams take melodies (or 
melodies plus chords) as input described in just such terms. Programs by Fry 
(1984), Jones (1984), Greenhough (1986), Desain and Honing(l986), etcetera 
could easily be arranged to do the same. Neither is there any problem from the point 
of view of piece descriptions: note lists are tl»e descriptions that Harmony Logo 
ultimately produces, Similarly, at the plan kvel (to be introduced later in the chapter) 
the constraint-based descriptions produce their output as Haimony Logo prograrriS 
and hence ultimately as note lists, llius, provided we boiTOw, from any of the 
abc^ve mentioned sources, or establish style descriptions in a form wliich can take 
note lists or chord lif^ts as input, they will be compatible with, and applicable to, 
piece level and plan level descriptions in MC. The MC architecture is compatible 
with stylistic descriptions from any one of a number of soujx'es. 

In one sense, it is a pity that the constraint- ba.se<l descriptions for muj:icai plans (that 

5 In the case of chord sequences, the interiinguii consists of pitch scheriuics (describing roots of 
chords) jMid lists describing chord qinilities. The chord qualiiics may expressed z& semitone h.sts 
or in terms of symbohc pjimitives ca-o can be made interchiytgcablle by use of a loDk-up 
table). 

ERIC 159 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composiuoii 



we are about to introduce) have to be boiled down to note lists before they can be 
stylistically manipulated. It would be theoretically appealing if consiraint-based 
descriptions of styles, chunks and plans could be freely intermingled as constraints. 
This is left for future research. In practice, pitch schedules make an adequate 
interlingua, since style transformations of the type we are considering are essentially 
a matter of decoration and elaboration, rather than deep transformation. For 
example, typical ways of altering styles include; 

• changing texture (e.g. chord aiity or quality) 

• adding an accompaniment pattern 

• imposing distinctive rhythmic patterns 

• changing note or chord alphabet (e.g a change of mode or scale) 

• adding decorative notes to an existing melody 

Such changes can be carried out very adequately at pitch-schedule level, as Levitt's 
(1985) work demonstrates. To a certain extent, the MC architecture could allow 
intennixing of styles and chunks of pieces, both described directly as Harmony 
Logo code, if desired. Harmony Ix)go can easily characterise 'minimal' or 
caricature descriptions of styles, along the lines of those outlined above, by such 
means as changes of chord arity and rhythmic pattern. However, such 
characterisations do not run very deep. Informal experiments have shown 
Harmony Logo can be clumsy at describing styles in detail, since its predispositions 
for pitches to move in trajectories and events to occur at regular intervals need to be 
overriden rather frequently in some stylistic descriptions. This kind of informal 
experiment suggests tliat Harmony Logo is, as currently designed, a specialised 
language for harmony and education, rather than a general purpose music 
programming language. Still, this lack of suitability for describing styles deeply 
need not worry us, since we have shown that Harmony Logo descriptions are 
compatible with style descriptions firom elsewhere, and since Harmony Logo pulls 
its weight in chunk and plan descriptions, and in the link with Harmony Space. 

As in the case of descriptions of pieces, in a full implementation of MC, each 
description of an aspect of a style would need to be assembled into a package, or 
style "frame". Ideally, style frames should be organised in specificity/gen'»rality 

Er|c 160 ' 



Ctapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



hierarchies. For example, the reggae •characterisaticn' given above could be 
extended into several successively more specific versions, which could be arranged 
in a tree. 

In general, descriptions of pieces could be made both more economical and more 
informative by recording only skeletal information about the piece. The piece 
description would specify that, when the skeletal description had been re-constituted 
as a pitch schedulft.. parts of the the result should then be processed through 
specified style frames. In keeping with the MC approach, it would be acceptable if 
this produced an inexact reproduction of the original (tJiough differences should be 
noted, and perhaps an audio recording of the original kept available on computer for 
comparison). Some pieces might need processing in their entirety through a single 
style frame; others might be patch-works of stylistic references. Even when 
encoding something as simple as the chord sequence of "Abracadabra", it might be 
illuminating to encode the momentary departine from rock norms (to the jazz ninth 
on the V chord) by recording that this single chord should be processed by a 
specified jazz frame, rather than literally specifying its constituent notes in the song 
frame. Apart from the advantage of representational economy, such a practice could 
serve the important educational purpose of recording links between pieces of music 
and styles that employ related musical resources. For example, a novice with little 
knowledge of classical music exploring "Abracadabra" might suddenly find the 
work of Debussy and Ravel of intense personal interest on learning via chains of 
such links (perhaps augmented by hypertext or semantic net links) that Debussy and 
Ravel did much to pioneer the voicings and compositional use of such ninths 
(Mehegan, 1985). For this and other reasons, it would be useful to record on each 
style frame back-pointers to the songs that make reference to a particular stylistic 
description. This could allow a student taking a style as a starting point to explore 
songs thai were partially encoded in terms of that style. Similarly, it would be 
useful to record on song frames cases where a song was reminiscent of a style, 
even if it did not employ the relevant style directly. As in the case of descriptions of 
pieces, the collection of several alternative characterisations of a given style would 
be encouraged. Organisation of style frames along these lines is left for fuinre work. 

This completes our outline of the description of styles in the Uitoring framework. 



161 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



3.3.1 Applying the Paul Simon method to song and style levels 
It is useful at this point to consider how the resources we have ouUined so far - the 
chunked piece level descriptions and the style descriptions - could be used by a 
beginner limited to the Paul Simon method to compose new and interesting chord 
sequences. Given a collection of song frames of the sort we have illustrated, where 
descriptions of songs are already chunked in a way that accords reasonably well 
with musicians intuitions, a novice could select liked songs and then apply the Paul 
Simon method in a primitive way using subtractions, additions and substitutions of 
chunks. Any intermediate versions could be further influenced using a style 
description. 'Subtraction' simply corresponds to the process of creating new 
versions of the song with different combinations of chunks removed to find out 
which are vital, which are incidental and how they all work together. "Addition' 
refers to tiie addition of chunks from other liked songs - altiiough tiie results wiU not 
always be tenable. 'Substitution' refers to the substitution of a chunk witii one from 
a different song. We saw examples of each of these operations in the earlier 
"Abracadabra" example. 



3.32 Limitations of the Paul Simon Method 

We wiU begin with a Umitation affected by tiie technical means used to represent tiie 
knowledge, and then look at more general problems. This will help to motivate the 
next layer of the architecture. 

In a version of Uie knowledge base tiiat represented the piece chunks using low-level 
musical constraints, (as opposed to a version based on Harmony Logo) a process of 
combination of chunks could be very flexible but could be expected to produce 
useful results only some of the time. When adding chunks, a song could 'easily end 
up overconstrained and unsatisfiable. It could require tiie searching of a large space 
to satisfy a set of constraints. A furtiier limit on tiie usefulness of tiie method would 
be that when making substitutions of chunks between songs, tiiere would be no way 
in general of establishing an equivalence between chunks between two disparate 
songs. 

In a version that used Harmony I-X)go as tiie base representation for song chunks, 

ERIC i62l7l> 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

fragments of program would be manipulated rather than musical constraints. 
However, Harmony Logo programs can set up a context for later Harmony Logo 
programs by manipulating, mode, rhythmic figures, chord vocabulary, trajectory 
direction and so forth. In some cases, of course, a Harmony Logo chunk might 
simply nullify the effect of a previous chunk, or produce a grotesque result. 

In either case, when working at chunked song level, if we chose not to stick to 
obvious alternative values for chunks, we would run the risk of blindly swapping 
parts between perhaps quite dissimilar songs like an interspecies transplant surgeon. 
There would be no guarantee that any particular substitution would work. The lack 
of total reliability of the method need not constitute a major problem in this particular 
domain. Given the nature of the task, a process that succeeded even a small fraction 
of the time could be useful. 

However, v/hichever way the song chunks are represented, applying the Paul 
Simon or intelligent transformation method at song chunk level is clearly rather 
limited. The starting point is always a particular existing song. The final piece will 
tend to be derivative from this song. The process of mutation is unguided, except 
by intuition: but a novice's intuition may be too inarticulate to do anything except 
evaluate steps once they have been made. A large search space can be explored more 
effectively if promising paths can be fwseen in advance. 

Without the right kind of knowledge being available to co-ordinate the vast number 
of possible choices, it can be easy to get 'stuck' in a space in which all 'nearby' 
variations are unsatisfactory. One of the roles of the plan level is to provide explicit 
knowledge about how the different musical materials interact, and to provide 
sensible musical goals to help the novice co-ordinate choices. 




163 



Chapter 8: An architeciure for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



3.4 Musical plats 

When chord sequences are analysed in Harmony Space, some superficially quite 
dissimilar chord sequences appear to conform to common underlying plan-like 
behaviours or schemata. Several such 'musical plans' have been developed in detail, 
but we will limit ourselves to discussing two contrasted plans infomially; the "return 
home conspicuously" plan and the "moving goalpost" pbii. We will begin with 
"return home", as follows. 

Many chord sequences seem to begin by establishing a 'home area' that is 
perceptually distinguishable to a listener, after which they 'jump' elsewhere, and 
then 'return home' in such as way that it is evident to the listener that they are 
'returning home'. We will refer to *he postulated underlying plan as the 'return home 
conspicuously' plan or just the 'return home' plan. It is not being argued that 
composers necessarily plan out chord sequences consciously or unconsciously in 
this way. However, intuitively speaking, many musicians seem to agree that the 
general pattern described above is very widespread in music; it can occur with 
melodies, chord sequences, and to a lesser extent patterns of modulation. Clearly, 
there are several ways in which 'home' locations can be perceptually communicated 
in music. For example, in many ethnic musics, a melodic home area is 
communicated by means of a constantly sounded drone. In melodic traditions that 
use the diatonic scale, the "built in" major and minor tonal centres can act as 
perceptually discemable "homes". In modal harmony, the 'home area' may be 
marked by a pedal note, while in tonal harmony, the "built-in" major and minor tonal 
centres can act as 'home'. The degree of psychological validity of such plans is a 
matter for empirical research, but they are at least psychologically plausible. 
Generally speaking, musicians seem to agree that such 'musical plans' are a useful 
way of summarising information about chord sequences at a 'strategic' level. Here 
are several commonplace chord sequences that can be seen as instantiations of the 
'return home plan'; 

"I got rhythm ' (Gershwin, 1930) 
"Johnny B. Goode" (Berry, 1958) 

ERIC 



(Major) I VIII V I 
(Major) I IV V I 

178 

164 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



"Abracadabra"(Steve Miller, 1984) (Minor) I IV V 1 

"The Lady is a tramp" (Rogers and Hart) (M^or) I IV VII III VI II V I (chorus) 

"Street Life" (Randy Crawford, 1978) (Minor) , IV VII III VI II Vdorn? I (chorus) 

"Easy Lover" (Phil Collins, 1984) (Aeolian) VI VII I 

"Isn't she lovely" (Stevic Wonder, 1976) (Major) VI n V I 

"Out-Bloody-Rageous" (RaUedge, 1970) (Dorian + modal pedal ) m II I (coda) 

For these pieces to qualify as cases of 'return home', each needs to be able to 
communicate a sense of 'home' location and a sense of movement 'towards home' 
to a listener. This is achieved in the various cases as follows. In each case, the piece 
communicates to the listener a sense of different 'locations' simply by employing 
different chord degrees. One chord degree is distinguishable by the listener as a 
'home' location; in some cases this is communicated by tonal means and in other 
cases by modal means (e.g. using a modal pedal). In the tonal cases, movement 
'towards home' is expressed in a perceptually apparent way as movement down the 
fifths axis towards I, whereas in a modal context, movement 'towards home' is 
perhaps most apparently expressed as scalic movement towards I. This is reflected 
in the examples by the fact that the sequences with a major/minor home area 'go 
home' down the fifths axis, whereas the sequences with a modal home area 'go 
home' scalically. 



Given thes(* typical resources, the 'return home' plan typically involves four steps: 
first of all the home area is established, secondly the p;ece takes up a location away 
from the home area, thirdly the piece moves homeward in such a way that it is 
perceptually obvious that the location is getting closer to home, and finally, home is 
reached and the piece finishes. The home area may or may not need to be explicitly 
stated at the beginning of the chord sequciice, depending on what other musical 
resources are available to perceptually communicate its presence. 6 (in effect, this 
is a very simple example of sonata form (Jones, 1989).) 



ERIC 



^ In each of the la.st three examples, the home area is not initially explicitly stated. However, in 
each case we can think of the home area as being implicitly established in some other way. For 
example, in the Dorian example, the hone area is communicated throughout by a pedal note, which 
provides a constant statement of the home area whatever the 'locaaon' of the chord. Repciir 
rhytJimic and melodic means can also be used to establish a home area Vhome area is 

established iii some way, these examples qualify as cases of uie reUim ho. fined above. 

^ - 165 • 



Chapter 8: An archiieciure for a knowledge-based tutor tor music composition 



This basic skeleton plan can be instantiated with a great deal of variety depending on 
how tlie various elements of the plan are instantiated, and depending what external 
constraints arc imposed, such as limited chord vocabulary, chord arity and so forth. 

We can arrange a spectrum of cases of the "return home" plan corresponding to 
various choices in a tree, as in Fig 9. This is a simplified tree showing only a few 
of the plan variables, and only a few derived songs. The tree layout is perhaps 
slightly misleading in one sense, since amongst the group of elements in the plans to 
be instantiated, and amongst the group of external constraints, there may be no 
particular reason for any element to appear higher in the tree than any other element. 
The tree layout is a notational convenience for what is really a sparse n-dimensional 
array. Since an n-dimensional array would be inconvenient to display 
graphically, tlie tree notation is a convenient way to help us visualise the space of 
chord sequences satisfying the plan. In the diagram, the names of plan variables are 
given in bold with an initial capital letter; choices of values for plan variables are 
given in plain text starting with lower case; and names of chord sequences are given 



Musical plans such as "retum home" have several potentially powerful educational 
uses. One such interesting use is the 'replanning' of existing songs. A prerequisite 
for this kind of use would be for each plan to have pointers to existing songs that 

7 The retum home plan has variable elements such as ; 



and so on. We refer to these variab'? elements in the plans as plan variables. The plan may also 
be considered to be affected by optional external constraints such as chord arity, restricted chord 
vocabulary and so forth. We refer to these as external plan variables. If the number ol plan 
variables plus the number of external plan variables we wish to consider is n, then the space of 
chord sequences that satisfy the plan may be viewed a subset of tlie resulting n-dimcnsional array 
Each dimension of the array is a plan variable or external plan variable. Not all poii ts in tlic space 
will satisfy the plan, due to constraints on which combinations of values for plan variables are 
legal. In summary, tlie tree notation is a grapliic convenience. 



in italics. 



hometype which may have value 

mode which may have value 

iniU^^l non-home location which may have value 

route taken home which .nay have value 



tonal or modal 
major, minor, dorian, ... etc. 
any degree of the scale except I 
any suitable direction 



166 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



instantiate particular cases of the plan (i.e. pointers from plan to song level). 
Similarly, each song would need to keep pointers to each plan which it instantiates, 
and to record the corresponding values of the plan variables (i.e. pointers from song 
to plan level). Given these mechanisms, the student could start from a song of 
interest, and ask a series of "^Yhat if?" questions about the piece. The pointer system 
means in effect that each piece holds complementary or competing descriptions of 
itself or its parts as the unfolding of musical plans in particular ways. Having 
selected one such description for her chosen song, the student might pose, and get 
sensible answers to, a series of "What if?" questions as follows. For example, the 
student might ask how the chord sequence of 'I Got Rhythm', viewed as a case of 
'return home', might appear if it had used a different mode, a different chord 
vocabulary or if it had employed modal materials instead of tonal materials. This can 
be viewed as 'navigating the plan tree' of fig 9. In some cases, this simply relates 
the original chord sequence to an existing chord sequence already present in the tree. 
(For example, we can view the chorus of "The lady is a tramp" as a replanned 
version of "I got rhythm" but with a different trajectory length for the journey 
home). However, in other cases, replanning a song in some specified way will 
produce a new chord sequence not corresponding to some known existing song. 

But how exactly is r\ new chord sequence corresponding to a new leaf of the tree to 
be worked out in detail? For example, how is "f got rhytlim'* to be replanned using 
modal matrdals? In general this requires some musical knowledge abDut how to use 
particular material;^ to achieve particular effects: for example, to replan a song using 
a modal as opjx)sed to a tonal hometype may require knowledge about how to make 
modal hornetypes ijcr eptually apparent, and knowledge about the kinds of hamionic 
'route' hon^e that tend to emphasise perceptually the existence of a modal home area. 

An expert njus nian might tead to know thi.s kind of thing anyway, and could 
perhaps ise verbal d^jsc iptions of the plans and plan trees as "possibility" 
iifdicators, to give ideas for ncv/ interesting chord sequences that she might 
otherwise lend to overlc ok. I wever, this kind of knowledge is precisely one of the 
things that a novice might be expected to lack. Tht* implemented musical planner 
makes use of fonurJly sta ed versic^m^^ of the ilans that record just this kind of 
knowledge. 

ERJC 167 ^ 



'Return home conspicuously' plan 



Hme 

esUbiishiieflt 




Hone 

eftibliikiaait 



Qwnl 
Tocibttlary 



voctbuliry 



^ jokuij % goodt 
c(um 



Stmt lift chorus 



'Las\j (ffotr Out 'Bloody %e(W5 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



We will give some infonnal examples of the kind of knowledge we have been 
talking about in our next example, based on the "moving goal post" plan. We have 
seen how the "return home" plan is good at relating diverse commonplace chord 
sequences, but it gives little impression of the depth of transformation that the 
musical planner is capable of performing (while keeping the result musically 
intelligible, interesting and related to the original). The next example, using the 
"moving goal post" plan shows a deeper transformation based on an underlying 
plan, as weU as casting light on the notion of a plan based on a single existing song. 
This example is as follows; 

3.4.1 Plans based on a single chord sequence 

The notion of an underlying musical plan may make sense even when the plan is 
identified only in a single existing song. For example, consider the analysis of the 
chord sequence of "All the things you are" (fig 10), as discussed in chapter 5. The 
analysis was framed in terms of the movement of a 'goal post' that synchronised 
metrical and tonal arrival. This analysis is already couched to a large degree in high- 
level, 'strategic' terms. It is tempting to try to generalise this description and cast it 
abstractiy as a formal plan, and then find out whether we can use the plan to 
'recompose' the song in various different forms while retaining something of the 
effect of the original chord sequence. 




Ainin? Dmin7 G7 Cmaj7 Fmaj? B7 Emaj? Ema6 
Fig 10 Original chord sequence - furst 8 bars of "All the things you are", 
harmonic tempo one chord per bar. (Kem Hammerstein) 



To this end, we might hypotiiesisc a 'moving goal post' plan or. ,e basis of the 
former analysis, wliich we can outiine informally as follows; 

• In order to satisfy the plan, a chord sequence should communicate the 

ERIC /i<? , 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



presence of a definite, perceptually distinguishable home area. This could be 
done in a variety of ways, for example by means of a pedal note in the 
modal case, or in the tonal case, simply by the use of triads in typical tonal 
progressions with no accidentals and no shifting of key . 

• The sequence should begin with a perceptually obvious, regular movement 
directly towards the home area, for example, a trajectory down the fifths axis 
in a tonal case. 

• The plan assumes the expectation on the part of the listener ihat obvious, 
regular movement towards a home area will normally be synclironised with 
arrival at a strong metrical boundary. (This would tend to be expected as the 
norm in many musical contexts, for example in jazz chord sequences). 

• The chord sequence should communicate the location of strong metrical 
boundaries at appropriate points in the sequence, for example by the use of 
strong and weak emphases on chords to suggest the presence of a strong 
metrical boundary at, say, the 4,6, 8 or 12 bar mark. 

• The haraionic progression should continue past the home area with the 
original regular movement. The metre and regular chord sequence should be 
such that ihe harmonic progression will not reach a home area at the next 
strong metrical boundary after this overshoot in the absence of some 
intervention. 

• After the tonal goal has been initially passed, there should be a modulation 
such that the continuation of the original regular hannonic movement 
produces a synchronised arrival at the new '*home area'* and at a strong 
metrical boundary. 

3,42 Replanning an isolated chord sequence 

How exactly could a formal version of such a plan be used to *'replan" the chord 
sequence of *'A11 the things you are" in a musically intelligent way? For example, 



170 



Chapter 8: An architecuu'e for a knovledge-base<l tutor for music composition 



what might a modal reconiposition of the original chord sequence look like? ITiese 
questions have been investigated in detail using the implemented musical planner and 
a formalised version of the above plan. Wo will content ourselves for rhe purposes 
of this chapter by outlining how a modal transformation might proceed, in informal 
terms, for the first eight bars. 

Firstly, the plan requires a home area that is perceptually distinguishable. 
Substituting a modal home area for the tonal home area of the original requires a 
piece of musical knowledge for effectiveness. Namely, that to make a modal home 
area perceptually obvious to a listener, explicit measures (such as a modal pedal) 
must be employed, in contrast to the case with the 'natural' major/minor home areas. 
Hence, the transformation might begin with the picking of a typical mode such as the 
Dorian nxxle, and the specifying of a modal pedal note in the bass. 

The next requirement of the plan is for an obvious, regular movement towards the 
home area. In the original piece, the movement proceeds down the fifths axis, 
which gives a very strong sense of regular movement towards the tonal goal. To 
transform this most naturally into a modal version requires another small piece of 
musical knowledge. Namely, in the case of a modal home area, i sense of strong 
movement towards the home area is perhaps better expressed by scalic movement 
towards the home area. 



The next and final requirements of the plan concern synchronisation of arrival at 
tonal and metrical goals. To keep matters brief in this infomial account, we will 
simply 'borrow' the relevant timings from the original in a rather mechanical way. 
This way of tackling the synchronisation part of the task is not the way a composer 
would be likely to work. However, it will serve our purposes as an expositional 
device for reasons of brevity and definiteness. In the original piece, the timings are 
as follows: the strongest metrical boundary is at the eighth bar, the piece reaches 
'home' on the fourth event, the modulation occurs between the fifth and sixth 
events^, and the sequence arrives at the new home point on the seventh event. 
The eightli event is used to reiterate the home event and emphasise the arrival at the 
home area, making use of a common device in tonal music. 

8 In tlic first eight bars of "All the things you are" there is effectively one harmonic event per 
bar. 

ERIC 171 . , 



Chaiitef An archiux-.lure: for a knowledge-based tutor for nuisic compositicm 



To put these timings to use to complete the replamiing, we take the further small 
piece of musical knowledge that Dorian sex^uences lend no work better if they move 
down the iscaie towards the home ai-ea (in. contrast v/ith, say Aeolian sequences that 
tend to work better if they move iJ'p the scjiie towards the home m^a). 

...dng ever)'thing together, we plan the progres.sion by working back up the scale, 
to find out where in the scale a downv^ards descending Dorian progression would 
have to start to hit the home area on die foiinli event. The answer is G (in D Dorian). 
If vvc nov/ mimic exactly the timing of the original piece: "..the sU'ong metiicai 
boundary' is at the 8th bar, the piece reaches 'home' on the fourth event, the 
mcxlulafioii occurs between the fifth and sixth events, aiid the S'iquence arrives at the 
new home point on the scven'di event.."; wc arrive at the following chord sequence 
(fig IV); 



\'M'''Z"-W' 


— o 









r|i% — 

— — 




• 1 



(D dorian) An-lin Gmaj Fmaj Emin Dmin 

(B Dorian) C#?rdn Bmin Brnin 
(with a D Dorian pedal in the bass, changing to an B dorian pedal on tlie C# minor) 
Fig. 1 1 Example modal replanning of "All the th.ings you are" 



Note that the modulation has been interpreted in modal terms in the modal context. 
The reader may judge whether or not this has a similar effect to the original 
sequence. In fact this is not a particularly elegant modal replanning of this chord 
sequence. This is only to be expected, since for the purposes of brevity of 
exposition we used a mechanical, inflexible way of planning the timing of the chord 
sequence, As we have already noted, a composer might have carried out this part of 
the task in a far more intuitive fashion, and the implemented planner can carry out 
this part of the iisk much more flexibly. 




172 



Chapter 8: An architeciure for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

Stiil, we have at least demon soated informally the reasoning behind one possible 
example of a modal recomposirion of "All the things you are", guided by relevant 
musical knowledge. 

3.4.3 Furtlier work on musical plans: testing musical plans by experiment 

Ak in the "return home" examples, such plans might be used principally as ways of 
exploring how songs achieved theii effect, and as ways of carrying out the Paul 
Simon method at plan level. However, an interesting alternative perspective on the 
framing of musical plans is as follows: Let us suppose that we replanned several 
versions of a song, and these turned out to be different on the surface from the 
original, but were judged intuitively to produce a similar effect. We would then tend 
to feel that the original analysis and its formalisation had been justified to some 
degree by the experiment. To a limited extent, we would have an experimental tool 
fov testing our musical analyses. Conversely, if replanned versions failed to capture 
the same effect, this might give us concrete evidence of the flaws in our original 
analysis, in its formalis^ation, or in our conception of how musical materials 
interacted. This could either lead to the refinement of the original analysis, or its 
rebuttal. 

3.4.4 Represi-inraM of musical plans 

Most but not all of the musical plans that we will be presenting are easy to visualise 
when presented in terais of Harmony Space concepts: indeed, this is how many of 
them were originally ide-^^ified. For this reason, the musical plans are represented in 
terms of constraints applied to relationships expressed in harmony space primitives. 

3.45 Swnmary of educational uses of the plan level 

In outline, musical plans have three broad classes of educational use: as a way of 
concepuialising existing chord sequences, as a way of relating them in families and 
as a way of composing new sequences. In particular, musical plans may be used to 
pijifiue the Paul Simon MetFiod at plan level. An unexpected advantage is that since 
the return home plan can be framed inmitively in terms of everyday, extra-musical 
notions such as location, 'home' and spatial rnovenient, it can be communicated, at 
least in outline, to novices with no specialised musical skills at all but with access to 



173 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



a Hamiony Space interface. 

When learning to compose, the temptaaon to imitate existing works, or conversely 
the fear of imitating existing works can hinder a beginner's attempts: having clear 
su-ategic goals to pursue within chosen constraints can be very helpful. At the same 
time, the plans are not intended as a set of normative patterns to be learned for thek 
own sakes, but as a way of organising and illustrating knowledge about how 
musical means can be made to serve musical ends: it is hoped that like Wittgenstein's 
ladder (1961/1921), the plans would be discarded once the novice had learned how 
to use musical materials to satisfy workable musical goals. 

4 Intelligent Tutoring Systems' perspectives on the framework 

To give some perspective on our framework for a tutor, as it has been so far 
presented, we will quickly review some of the key points of Self s (1988) summary 
of recent developments in ITS architecture and describe how our framework relates 
in several ways to these wider trends . 

• The need for multiple representations of experti.se. 

Research on Guidon/Neomycin (Clancy, 1987) demonstrated clearly that 
competent explanation in different contexts may require more than one model 
of die expertise in question. One single model may be able to perform 
domain tasks adequately, but i3 unlikely to serve as a basis for adequate 
explanation in all contexts. A key feature of the conception of MC is the use 
of a series of multiple representations. Firstiy, the student may hear the notes 
of a piece aurally, or sec its trace visually as an animation in harmony space. 
Svjcondly, each song is also represented m a chunked fonnat, where each 
chunk has some intuitive meaning demonstrable in a microworld: a given 
song may be chunked in moTG than one way to reflect different possible 
analyses of the piece. Thirdly, pieces may be represented as some 
combination of a simple outiine and various styles. Finally, a piece may be 
represented as an instantiation of a musical plan or schema: some pieces may 
have several alternative descriptions in terms of different plan schemas. 



ERIC 



• A focus on strategic and metacognitive skills. A number of recent 

174 



Chapter 8: An architeciurc for a knowledge-based iiitor for music composition 



ITS systems (for example, Algebraland (Foss, 1987) and EPIC (Twidale, 
1989)) require or help the student to specify some activity in goal oriented or 
strategic terms. This can benefit in two directions; aiding the learner to 
develop appropriate metacognitive skills and helping the ITS to build up an 
appropriate student model. A key feature of the MC architecture is that it 
allows a student to work in goal-oriented or strategic terms. If the student 
starts from an existing piece, the architecture encourages the student to look 
at the piece as being goal oriented according to several competing plan 
descriptions. Alternatively, the student can take a schema or musical strategy 
as a starting point. Note, however, that the recognition of plans in songs 
that the student drafts from scratch has not been explored, nor the provision 
of means for the student to modify or create new musical plans. There is a 
strong emphasis in the architecture on metacognitive skills. Rather than 
concentrating on the low level elements of chord sequences, the student is 
encouraged to consider the ends that chord sequences serve and the kind of 
high level considerations that can influence their shape. 

• New interaction styles While early ITS research used a variety of 
interaction styles, e.g. Socratic dialogue, case-study based teaching, mixed 
initiative dialogue, coaching, etcetera, these tended to have a common aim of 
"remediation". In other words, each style tended, however tactfully or 
sparingly, to be bent primarily on transferring to the student an item of 
domain knowledge. By contrast, a more recent system, DECIDER (Bloch 
and Farrcll, 1988) used its domain knowledge to pick out evidence relevant 
to a student's hypothesis that might lead the student to elaborate or revise her 
opinions, but without reference to any preconceived target hypothesis on the 
part of the system. On a related note, Gilmore and Self (1988) experimented 
with machine learning techniques in a collaborative tutor aimed not at 
transferring pre-existing expert knowledge to the stuHfnt, hut at 
collaboratively discovering new knowledge. The framework of this chapter 
is certainly not remedial in the sense we explained earlier. Although the 
plans are, in one sense, normative, it need not matter whether the student 
'learns' any of the plans or any of the songs. Successful outcomes are 
essentially of two types: firstly that the student composes interesting new 

ERIC 175 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composiUon 



choni sequences - though the system has no targets for the exact form these 
may take, and secondly that the student comes to appreciate that chord 
sequences have a strategic dimension, and that various low level means may 
be used to serve various high level musical ends. 

5 Partial implementation of MC 

The following components of MC are implemented in prototype form; 

• song level descriptions, 

• plan level descriptions, 

• the song interpreter, 

• the plan interpreter, 

• the Harmony Space microworld, 

• the song descnption default providing mechanism. 

Links between the different levels are left for further work. These components as 
they stand appear to form the basis of a richly interacting educational toolkit. A 
toolkit based on these prototypes appears suitable to be used with the guidance a 
human teacher, or embedded within a hypertext-like system with supporting nets of 
textual information. However, to build a knowledge- based guided discovery 
learning system for music composition with active teaching strategies initiated by 
the system would require these core components to be augmented by further 
components such as a semantic network of musical concepts; user and curriculum 
models; stereotypical user models; appropriate teaching strategies and adaptive 
microworld exercises. Under the heading of "further work", we will outline ways 
in which this work could be approached. The primary concern of this chapter has 
been to establish an architecture that makes a tutor feasible at all: the aim has been 
to devise ways of characterising strategic considerations about chord sequences and 
find characterisations for the song, style and plan levels that are suitable for 
supporting novices' needs. 

6 Further work: supporting active teaching strategies 

Let us consider a novice who is musically uneducated anr! wishes to compose music 
but doesn't know how to set about it, or someone who is musically educated but 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



can't compose. A human tutor might begin by focussing on three questions; 

• What sort of music do you want to compose? 

• What sort of music do you like or are you interested in? 

• What musical skills and knowledge do you have? 

Answers to the first question could be given given in tertris of particular pieces, 
styles, composers, musical materials, musical techniques or some combination of 
these. This helps establish a provisional common goal or agenda for the teacher and 
novice, albeit iu a crude way. The teacher can use this information to infer target 
musical techniques and materials that may need to be learned. Asking the student 
what she likes can help to identify a pool of material liked by the student that can be 
used for illustrative purposes while moving towards some chosen goal. For 
example, if the answer is given in terms of a particular composer or group, 
whenever some concept or technique needs to be taught, a corpus of work is 
available to search for examples of the concept or technique in a form likely to 
motivate and engage the learner. Finally, the question about skills and knowledge 
allows the teacher to identify strategic gaps in knowledge or technique and to 
generally assess what the student already knows. 

On the basis of answers to these questions, renewed as appropriate, a human teacher 
could dynamically construct a teaching plan and exercises tailored to her pupil's likes 
and capabilities. Of course, the teacher might well be influenced by a notional pre- 
existing 'core curriculum' of generally useful compositional strategies, techniques 
and materials. Many broad strategies for teaching would be possible. One teaching 
strategy might be to provide intermediate goals based on the amateur's self - 
expressed preferences in music as given in answer to the initial questions. For 
example, a human teacher might think "Tlie student wants to compose like (say) 
Steely Dan, so she is going to need to know about voicing 9th, Uth and 13th 
chords, about using cycle of fifths progressions, about transient modulation, about 
use of rhythmic motifs, melodic trajectories, and so forth. She doesn't know about 
any of this yet. We could start with a simple blues, and then look at some simple 
Jazz standaixis using cycles of fifths before getting on to Steely Dan". This approach 
appears reasonable, provided the student is willing to settle for the intermediate 



ERIC 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

steps as enjoyable substitute goals for the time being, or is convinced of the 
rclev ancc of the intermediate steps to reaching her goal. A contrasting strategy might 
be to say " Composing like Steely Dan is beyond this student's capabilities as yet, 
but by playing with these simple components she could get a very rough 
approximation right now". A reasonable combined strategy might be to offer the 
amateur a continuing free choice between these two strategies. 

A first approxitnation of this teaching strategy appears to be well within the range of 
existing Intelligent Tutoring Systems techniques using MC as a knowledge-base: 
although laborious to implement for this domain. The task could be approached as 
follows. The first task would be to construct a domain-specific semantic net of 
concepts required. This would be little different in principle from semantic nets for 
other subjects, such as geography (Carbonell, 1970b). Broadly speaking, the role 
of the semantic net would be to interrelate musical concepts used in the song, style 
and plan knowledge sources to each other, and to relate these concepts to the 
concepts of standard music theory. In the present case, we would need to compile a 
network of concepts used in song, style and plan descriptions (including, for 
example, low-level concepts such as note, chord, chord-quality, chord-arity, chord 
sequence, key, metre, harmonic trajectory, mode, degree of scale, pitch, etc, as well 
as higher level concepts such particular songs, styles and musical plans). The 
relationships between the concepts would then be recorded using relations such as 
specialisation, generalisation, 'similar-to', and possibly domain specific 
relationships. Detailed examples of the use of semantic nets in ITS applications can 
be found in Carbonell (1970) and Wenger (1987), pas^/m. See Baker (in press) for 
a semantic net used for tutoring in a musical context. Having constructed such a 
semantic net, which typically is very laborious, answers to the three "user-model" 
questions outlined above can be used to construct three distinct overlays representing 
the learners goals, preferences and skills/knowledge. A simple technique to make the 
creation of a complex user model of this sort viable is to set up a set of stereotypical 
user models (Holland, 1984), ^Rich 1979), that allow a user to indicate her abilities 
or preferences in terms of a set of stereotypes. In addition to the three overlays 
already mentionexi a core curriculum overlay could be used to indicate items that are 
particularly important or useful to leam. 



Given a semantic net, a set of user models and a core curriculum, teaching strategies 

178 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



could be used to find paths dynamicaUy through the knowledge-base of songs, 
styles, chunks and plans. In essence, such paths would work towards an agreed 
goal via materials that the user liked, introducing not too many new concepts at 
once. At each step, the knowledge base could support a rich range of specific 
teaching actions such as 

• invitations to carry out the Paul Simon Method with particular songs, style 

and plans with special attention to particular chunks 

. presentation of explanator>' text associated with particular concepts 

. presentation of adaptive exercises associated with particular chunks or 

abstract plan steps to carry out in the microwo.ld instantiated with values 

drawn from particular songs or plans. Such exercises could include analysis. 

attempted reproduction of an unseen piece, modificarion of an existing piece 

and so on. 

This completes the section on further work on the MC framework. 
7 Problems and limitations 

Tlie "knowledge" in die knowledge base is not intended to have the status of items 
of certified music theory or accredited music psychology. Rather, the chunking of 
songs, characterisations of styles and musical 'plans' are intended to have the 
heuristic value of hints and ideas tliat musicians pass on to each other, f^articularly in 
informal situations. Hence, there has b<5en some simplifications of musical theories 
for educational reasons, and some musical technical tcmis have been used in unusual 
ways. In any case, psychological evidence about the process of composition is very 
sparse (Sloboda. 1985), and detailed psychological or music-theoretic discussions 
about suategic considerations for devising chord sequences in popular music is 
ahnost non-existent (for some of the nearest approximations, see Cannel and Marx 
(1976). Making Music (1986), Mehegan(1939). Cork(1988). Steedman(1984) and 
Citron (198.'))). 

Given suitable raicroworids for rhythiin and mekxly, and representation of melodic 
and rhythmic aspects of pieces at three levels, (perhaps represented in a constraint- 



179 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

like formalism), an interesting topic for further work would be to try to integrate the 
treatment of melody and rhythm within the MC framework. 

8 Summary and conclusions 

We have presented a framework for a knowledge-based tutoring system MC to help 
novices explore Harmony Space. The framework is aimed at proWding support for 
composing chord sequences and bass lines. In creative tasks there is no precise 
goal, but only some pre-existing constraints or criteria that must be met: in open- 
ended creative domains such as music, the creator may now and again drop any 
pre-existing constraint when she considers some other organisational principle to 
take precedence (Sloboda, 1985). The standard means of representing domain 
expertise (typically as rules) sits uneasily in a domain where the rules may be rapidly 
changing according to principles that may not be known in advance. An approach to 
thinking about creativity characterised clearly by Johnson Laird has been used to 
devise an ITS framework for dealing with open-ended domains. It appears that MC 
is flexible enough to support a very wide range of learning and teaching styles. 

The framework allows multiple alternative views of pieces to be explored by 
students. Pieces arc represented at three levels: at surface (note) level in a chunked 
fonn; with reference to common musical styles; and with reference to strategic plan- 
like or schema-like descriptions. At each level, alternative descriptions may be held. 
The three levels give multiple views of existing pieces, but they also allow aspects of 
songs to be stripped down, mixed, played in different styles or 'replanned' at 
different depths using new materials. Work on the plan level involved developing an 
original approach to describing strategic considerations about chord sequences, 
based on Harmony Space concepts and simple psychological considerations. 

Although the plans are, in one sense, normative, it need not matter whether the 
student 'learns' any of the plans or any of the songs. Successful outcomes are 
essentially of two types: firstly that the student composes interesting new chord 
sequences - though the system has no targets for the exact form these may take, and 
secondly that the student comes to appreciate that chord sequences have a strategic 
dimension, and that various low level means may be used to serve various high level 
musical ends. 



180 M)r^- 



Chapter 8: An architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 



When songs are represented in the form of musically meaningful "chunks", studying 
the effect of mutations is more likely to be illuminating for novices than altering 
individual notes. Example chunks have been exhibited based on Harmony Logo 
primitives, which seem close to common intuitions about pieces and similar 
informal terms used by musicians. 

Musical plans have been illustrated informally. A simple fall-back user-led strategy 
which the student could use to navigate through a series of transformations in the 
knowledge-base, the 'Paul Simon' method, has been presented.This method is one 
example of a non-prescriptive, idiom-independent general-purpose composition 
strategy that can make use of any knowledge sources. Teaching strategies to 
provide individually relevant guidance are not discussed. 

Existing or new pieces derived from the three layers could be explored aurally and 
visually in the Harmony Space microworld. The case studies and the plans could be 
used as material to guide the exploration of Harmony Space. Preferences, 
knowledge and goals could be used to constrain search. Reciprocally, Harmony 
Space could be used to elucidate the concepts used in the piece chunks, style 
descriptions and plan descriptions. MC provides a framework within which a 
complementary explanatory process could be carried out in both directions using 
canned text and set piece exercises in combination with more flexible adaptive 
exercises. The MC framework constitutes a good basis for a Guided Discovery 
Learning system (Elsom-Cook, in press). It can also be viewed as something , 
between a framework for an aural, generative hypertext system and a song 
synthesiser. 

It is argued that in the light of Johnson-Laird's (1988) characterisation of creativity, 
it is particularly appropriate, where possible, to represent musical knowledge for 
compositional purposes in terms of constraints. On the other hand, many mui;\cal 
plans and harmonic concepts seem particularly easy to visualise in harmony space. 
Hence partly to aid ease of communication with novices, and partly for practical 
reasons, prototypes of the three representation levels are implemented in terms of 
Harmony Space primitives, but in the case of the strategic or plan level with a 



181 



Chapter 8: /j» architecture for a knowledge-based tutor for music composition 

constraint satisfaction system implemented on top of the primitives. The song level 
is implemented in prototype as a Harmony Logo interpreter, (which indeed was the 
main motivation for implementing the Harmony Lo^o interpreter). 

Many features of the MC architecture may be appUcable to other open-ended creative 
domains. In particular the guiding metaphor of the Johnson-Laird characterisation of 
creativity, not previously used in an ITS context, use of constraint satisfaction as a 
representation, The guided discovery learning approach, the notion of object level, 
style level and strategic level of description, the Paul Simon or "intelligent 
transformation" method and the oudine ideas for active teaching strategies appear 
open to use in other creative domains. However, the particular form of the 
Harmony Space microworld, and the particular way its concepts permeate and give 
pedagogical leverage on the conceptual and strategic prioiitives is specific to tlie 
domain. 



ERIC 



182 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 

Part IV Conclusions 

Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



1 Introduction 

In this chapter we report on the experiences of some musical beginners carrying out 
various educational activities using Harmony Space. The aim of the chapter is to 
illustrate and illuminate the use of Harmony Space on the basis of a qualitative 
investigation. 

We report on five subjects, aged from 8 to 37, who had single sessions with the 
prototype version of Harmony Space. All of the subjects had negligible previous 
musical training and negligible musical ability. The sessions lasted for between 30 
minutes and ^o and a half hours, one session being broken by a 45 minute meal 
break. The author acted as instructor. The sessions were video-taped and audio- 
taped. Examples of the following activities were carried out; 



• playing the chord sequences of a variety of existing pieces, 

• composing new chord sequences in a purposive manner, 

• modifying existing chord sequences in musically 'intelligent' ways, 

• playing accompaniment for a singer, 

• harmonically analysing modulatory chord sequences, 

• discussing elementary aspects of music theory. 




1.1 Limitations of thj prototype effecting the investigation 

The prototype as implemented has many limitations that made it difficult to use for 
the investigation, which are documented in appendix 1.^ These limitations reflect 

^ In particular, although the prototype exhibits all of the key features of the core abstract 
design, the prototype is non-DM in secondary control functions; it features modes, inadequate 



l)elling, treacle-like cursor acUon and hidden states. 



183 ' V 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



the original reason for its construction. The prototype was originally implemented for 
the purposes of demonstrating the coherence and feasibility of the Harmony Space 
core abstract design: it was not intended to carry out experiments with novices. The 
decision to carry out an illuminative study was taken at a much later stage. Despite 
the limitations, the prototype proved adequate to support a useful qualitative 
investigation. 

2 Method 

The study was carried out as follows. From a group of around thirty potential 
subjects, some seventeen candidates were initially selected as having minimal 
musical ability or training. After detailed questioning, twelve of the candidates were 
rejected due to an ability at some time to play an instrument, or due to childhood 
musical training (irrespective of whether this had been forgotten). Only five 
candidates, with effectively no knowledge of music theory, and effectively no ability 
to play musical instruments remained. These five subjects were allowed to go 
forward to the investigation. Details of the subjects' backgrounds are discussed 
individually below. The instructor took the five subjects one at a time and taught 
them by means of informal demonstrations, er.planations, exercises, and theoretical 
discussions to carry out as many of the tasks described below as possible. To 
compensate for the lack of any labelling on the makeshift prototype, three diagrams 
showing the note circles appropriately labelled (figs 1, 2 and 3), were available for 
the subjects to refer to. (This introduced nothing not ah^ady an integral part of the 
parsimomous Harmony Space core abstract design: all three kinds of labelling should 
be available in any version of Harmony Space designed for practical use.) The 
selection of tasks that individual students were asked to perform varied according to 
the time available, the subjects' ability and interests, and the tasks remaining to be 
illustrated. The tasks fell into groups as follows; 

• To accompany, playing the correct chords, sung performances of various 

songs, for example; 

Transvision Vamp's "Baby I don't care". The Archies' "Sugar Sugar". 
The Kingsmen's "Louie, Lx)uie", Steve Miller's "Abracadabra", The 
Beatles' "Birthday", The "Banana Splits Show" theme song. Randy 
Crawford's "Street Life", Bob Dylan's "All along the Watchtower", 

ErJc 184 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with I-Iarmony Space 



Michael Jackson's "Billie Jean", Phil Collins' "In the air tonight", 
George and Ira Gershwins' "1 get rhythm", Stevie Wonder's "Isn't she 
lovely", Rogers and Hart's "The lady is a tramp" and whatever else was 
known to the sluder t and seemed appropriate to illustrate a point, 

• To harmonically analyse performances of the chord sequences of parts of 
pieces containing modulatory passages such as; 

• Mozart's 'Ave Verum Corpus' 

• The Rolling Stones' 'Honky Tonk Women'2 

• To learn simple strategies for composing chord sequences such as 

• return home 

• cautious exploration^ 

• retum home with ji modulation (to be explained below) 

• modal harmonic ostinato 

• To perform 'tritone substitutions' (see chapter 5, section 4.4.3) on examples of 
a class of jazz chord sequences, 

• To play on request and recognise a variety of abstractly described chord 
sequences, either diatonically or chromatically, for example: 

• major 'three chord tricks' and minor 'three chord tricks' (chap. 5, 4.3) 

• cycle of fifths progressions from major tonic to major tonic 

• cycle of fifths progressions from minor tonic to minor tonic 

• scalic progressions to and from modal centres 



'Honky Tonk Women' does not contain a true modulation - it merely 'borrows the 
resources' of another key. But it turns out that both concepts are easy to explain and 
distinguish to novices using Harmony Space - though apparently difficult to explain by 
conventional means. 

^ 'Cautious exploration' is a musical plan in the same spirit as 'return home' and 'moving 
goal post'. The essense of the plan is that almost any chord sequence that starts on the tonic, 
moves to 'nearby chords' (in one of various naive Harmony Space senses) and then finishes 
with a 'sensible' cadence will make a workmanlike chord sequence. This plan, and several 
others, has been analysed carefully with examples from the literature and implemented as a 
constraint based computer program. 

Er|c 185 o . 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



• To locate, recognise and distinguish examples of fundamental harmonic 
concepts, for example: 

• To locate and play the major and minor tonics 

• To recognise and control nearby modulations 

• To distinguish major and mincM* triads in various keys 

To learn about ' ^nal centres and chord construction 

• To learn the rationale for the centrality of the majcw and minor tonics 

• To learn the rule for scale tone chord construction (in any key) 

• To leam the link between scale-tone chord quality and root degree 

Further details about the tasks are given in the descriptions of the sessions. Not all 
tasks were introduced to all subjects. In some cases, where time was short, the tasks 
were presented as mechanical tasks, without much attempt to explain their musical 
significance. This was done solely for the purposes of the investigation, to make the 
best use of limited time. In other cases, every effort was made to make the student 
fully aware of the musical meaning and context of the task. No attempt was made to 
use standardised forms of wwds with each student; to the contrary, the demonstrator 
acted as an engaged participant. This was done for the following reasons; 

• It is unclear how novices with negligible musical training could be taught to 
carry out tasks such as those listed above (in arbitrary keys) in two hours by 
any other method, irrespective of whatever form of words a helpful teacher 
might use. 

• There is no claim that novices can leam to use Harmony Space effectively 
without initial guidance. 

• The puipose of the investigation was illuminative. 

We will now describe the five sessions in the order in which they were carried out. 



ERIC 



186 • ' I . 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Hannony Space 

3 Session 1: YB: Harmonic analysis by mechanical methods 

YB is a 26 year old first year research student in information technology and 
education with a Computer Science background, from mainland China. YB has been 
in the West for less than two years. He has no formal knowledge of, and very little 
exposure to, Western music, once memorably asking "Who are the Beatles?". YB 
does not play any musical instruments and has had negligible musical training (even 
in China with respect to Chinese music). He had not had any previous exposure to 
the research reported here. 

The session lasted about half an hour. This session was a preliminary trial, not 
originally intended as part of the investigation. Coii. u^uently, it was the only session 
not to be videoed or tape-recorded. Notes were made immediately after the session. 
The intention was to discover whether students could make sense of the display and 
thus perform a harmonic analysis task. 

YB was given a five-minute informal practical and theoretical introduction to the 
interface, being shown the relationship between degree of scale, chord quality and 
modulation. There was no attempt to explain the analysis task fully before it was 
carried out - due to the preliminary nature of the session and lack of time it was 
treated as a mechanical task. This violates the spirit of Harmony Space, but was a 
practical necessity for the purposes of the investigation. 

The task, in general terms, was as follows (we will give more precise detail as we go 
along). The investigator played a modulatory chord sequence on tiie interface. YB 
was asked to watch while it was played and identify the names of each chord and the 
direction of any key window movement. This was treated as a game in which the 
investigator made a 'move' and waited for the smden*: to respond with a chord name 
or direction of window movement before making the next move. (The situation may 
seem a litUe unnatural for harmonic analysis, but tiien perhaps so is sitting down 
with a pencil, manuscript paf>er and score.) 

As ah-eady indicated (since the prototype is unlabelled), YB had a diagram (fig 1) 
showing a lf.belled version of the key window pattern. To make sure that YB 
interpreted the screen movement from die screen and not the cursor keys, the cursor 



187 



CSiapU5r 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



keys were hidden from him. YB was played the fu*st few bars of the chord sequence 
of the Rolling Stones "Honky Tonk Women" as follows, played in triads, in root 
inversion, in close position, moving the key window to the dominant just before the 
#3 choid. Each chord was held until Y3 had responded in some way. 

C F C D#3 G 

Unsurprisingly, YB identified each chord more or less correctly (wc will note one 
mistake he made in a moment) with respect to its position in the key window, simply 
by referring to the labels on the diagram, and pointing to indicate the direction of 
modulation. YB's correct analysis was as follows; 

I rV I (North Easterly movement of key window) V I 




Fig 1 Harmony Space with chord function labelling 



In the conclusion of this chapter, we will comrneut on this procedure in more detail 

ERJC 188 - 



Chapter 9: Novices' expehences with Harmony Space 



aitd illuminate the relationship tliai it bears to conventional harmonic analysis. In 
descripttons of later sessions we will show ho ,v some subjects successfully carried 
out more refined versions of the same task, with a reasonably clear understanding of 
what they were doing. We will also show how some of the other students were 
taught to use more traditional vocabulary for describing nrxxlulations. But first of all, 
we will cover two points of dcti>.il. Firstly, YB mis-identified a I chord as a m in his 
first attempt because, performing this as a mechanical task, he didn't realise that he 
hati to look where the cursor was to name each chord - the cursor is not strongly 
visible on the prototype. (Due to time constraints, no effort was made to teach YB 
the rule for chord construction, which could have enabled him to label chords 
without needing to note the position of the cursor. ) 




Major thlrdi * 
Step itxe 4 

Fig 2 Harmony Space with semitone number labelling 

The second point of detail is as follows. The task had been put to YB as one of 
simply reading out the n^mes of labels and naming the direction of window shifts. 
However, it was explained to YB that this was equivalent try one form of traditional 
harmonic analysis. He became very interested and wanted to know what ham'»onic 
analysis was about. It was explained that this was equivalent to identifying the 
positions that chords occupied in the key window, noting what shape they were, and 
noting where the key window moved. YB then asked (referring to ideas mentioned 



ERIC 



o.i.: 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



during the five minute introduction) if the shape did not follow automatically from 
the key window position. It was explained that they did normally, but that the key- 
conforming chord shapes might be overidden at any time in ordinary musical usage. 
The problem of tracking modulations was to determine whether departures from 
default shapes were isolated or were most economically described in terms of a 
movement of the key window. This explanation appeared to interest YB and he said 
that it made sense to him, although he was unsure hov/ it fitted into the wider context 
of musical practice. 




Major thinU » 

Fig 3 Hamiony Space with alphabet name labelling 



4 Session 2: BN: 

an eight year old's experience with Hnrmony Space 

BN is an eight year old interested in music, but with essentially no musical ti-aining. 
He can play a single one-finger tune on keyboards, taught to him by a friend, but 
that is all. BN does not have any musical instruments in his house or taught to him at 
school. BN had a single two hour informal session with the makeshift prototype of 
Harmony Space. As in all of the remaining sessions, this session was videotaped 




190 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Hannony Space 



and audio-taped, but only the Harmony Space window was videoed (otherwise the 
most important information for most purposes - i.e the patterns on the screen would 
have been too small to distinguish). BN was given demonstrations and explanations 
and asked to perform various tasks. The session was informal, and the investigator 
taught BN in an opportunistic way, using a variety of approaches, trying to illustrate 
as many of the potential activities as possible, continuously reassessing what try 
next in the light of what BN seemed able to do. BN was enthusiastic about the 
interface and the (very long) session, wanting to carry on longer. Rather than report 
chronologically on this long and meandering (though highly energetic) session we 
will pick out the most interesting points. 

Playing chord sequences 

Towards the end of the session. BN was taught to play the chord progression of 
Sam Cooke's "What a Wonderful World": 

IVIIVVI 

which he learned in less than a minute, after being shown it twice. This was not too 
hard for him, since by that point he had more or less mastered the three chord trick 
after many demonstrations, though with a lot of difficulty. The main problem was 
that at first, he seemed to find it hard to differentiate the different note circle 
positions within the key window. As the session wore on, BN seemed to get more 
sense of place in the key window, though he never seemed to become entirely 
confident of remembering where "home " was. Initially, for example BN found it 
hard to play a cnord progressions such as I IV V I when it was demonstrated, 
although towards the end of the session he could do this with relative ease. 

The 'tritone substitution' game 

A game called "tritone substitution" was invented during the session. BN was 
eventually able to make accurate tritone substitutions, with some help when he made 
slips, through playing this game. For this game, the default quality of chords with 
chromatic roots was set by the instructor to dominant sevenths, in accordance with 
one widespread jazz practice with chromatic chords. The essence of the game, in the 
version played with BN was that the demonstrator would play chord progressions of 

ERIC 191 '^ii; 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



varying lengths, that were cycles of fifths ending on the major tonic. BN was asked 
to count the number of steps, then play a chord progression of the same length 
along the chromatic axis to the tonic, (More sophisticated versions of this game were 
invented in later sessions,) The two progressions are of course aurally and 
functionally very similar in certain respects, BN's way of carrying out the task was 
to count as the instructor made his move, then count away from the tonic along the 
chromatic axis, finally playing chords on the return journey. An example move in 
the 'game' was; 

Demonstrator VinVI 

BN nib Ildom? Ilbdom? I 

Distinguishing chord qualities, visually and aurally 

The demo: = ; ' i lor asked BN at various points whether the various chords with three 
notes in them ' triads) had different shapes or the same shape. At first, BN was 
unable to distinguish between the different triad shapes from memory (the 
investigator forgot to make use of the option to hold examples of the different shapes 
in different places on the screen, which would have simplified this), BN seemed to 
say in response to questions at various times that each degree of the scale had either 
the same shape chord, or that each had a different shape. However, as the session 
progressed, BN became able to distinguish between major, minor and diminished 
triads by shape, One of the most interesting points in the session was when BN 
spontaneously announced excitedly that isolated chords seemed to be 'saying' 
different things, apparently being particularly struck by the sound of a minor 
seventh, and claiming that some of the chord progressions as a whole seemed to be 
saying things like "I love you". It may be that BN was starting to distinguish chord 
quality aurally without being explicitiy taught to do so, but it is hard to be certain. It 
might be interesting for further investigations to concentrate on the development of 
chord quality differentiation. 

Harmonic analysis 

BN also tried doing some functional harmonic analysis. Much as in YB's session, 
this was billed to him as a game in which the demonstrator would make a "move" 




192 



Chapter 9: Novices' cxporktnces vith Haitnony Space 



that involved either playing a chord or moving the key window, after which BN 
would announce the name of the chord played or tlie direction of movement of the 
key window. As the root names on the prototype are not labelled, BN was given a 
labelled diagram (fig 1) to refer to. BN had quite lot of difficulty mentally 
transferring names from the sheet to the screen, but got better at it. It was also very 
difficult for BN to identify the direction in which the key window moved. (It can be 
difficult for adults as well, since the routines for moving the key window actually 
erase and redraw it, taking about half a second.) It would be far easier to carry out 
this task if the key window visibly slid through intermediate positions. 

Understanding the repeating nature of the key-windt)w pattern 

After initial confusion, BN had no difficulty realising that equivalent positions in the 
repeated pattern were functionally equivalent. He would happily move to a different 
area of the screen to continue the same task if a bug caused a collection of note dots 
to remain on after they had finished sounding, cluttering up the display (which 
sometimes happens on the prototype). 

Making straight line gestures 

BN had some difficulty initially in making straight lines along the semitone axis, 
veering off upwards or downwards, perhaps confused by the diagonal patterns of 
the key window. BN had some problems when asked to miss out notes outside the 
key window (chromatic notes), although he improved at this. (It can be difficult for 
adults to pick out this diagonal unerringly too. In informal paper a-jd pencil versions 
of this task, it appears to be easier to track straight lines against the background of 
the Longuet-Higgins rectilinear key windows than against the background of the 
diagonally sheared Balzano key-windows - a possible argument in favour of the 
rectilinear I^nguet-Higgins' based configuration).) BN's difficulty underlines the 
fact that it might be helpful to add a 'constrain' key to the design, along the lines of 
the 'constrain' key in Macintosh drawing programs. Depressing this key forces lines 
being drawn to conform to the nearest of the eight principal compass bearings. BN 
found it difficult to play cycles of fifths, often straying off the path, though he 
learned to do this eventually. He seemed to find this easier than following the SE 
semitone and scalar axis. 



ERIC 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



Establishing a common fund of example pieces 

One problem was finding songs that we both knew. Eventually we worked with 
"Hey Hey we're the Monkees", PhU Collins' "In the air tonight", Stevie Wonder's 
"Master Blaster", and Sam Cooke's "What A Wonderful World", all of which he 
more or less knew. BN seemed to find "Master Blaster" particularly interesting, as 
we played it as a scalar progression followed by a (dorian) three chord trick on the 
fifths axis. 

AeoUanlVnVIVIV IVni 
Following simple, general, compositional strategies 

Towards the end of the session, BN had no real problem "composing" and playing 
chord progressions that consisted of cycles of fifths of various lengths to the tonic. 
These were billed to him as 'routes down the diagonal towards home', ^or example, 
BN came up with the following chord sequence from following this genera^ 
instruction 

vinvi 

BN was interested to learn that Stevie Wonder (1976) had come up with this chord 
sequence independently ("Isn't She Lovely") We also discussed the idea that more 
or less any chord progression would 'do' that started on I and ended on I. BN was 
encouraged to make up his own chord progressions and spontaneously suggested 
some variants on the diatonic cycle of thirds, which does not seem to have been 
shewn to him. 

Black and white notes 

BN asked about the meaning of the black and white areas and this was explained to 
liim on the basis of black and white notes on the piano. 



ERIC 



Practical problems 

Some of the major problems encountered were as follows. Firstly, the cursor in the 

194 ' 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



makeshift prototype is difficult to manoeuvre even for a computer-familiar adult, 
because of its treacle-like response. BN had extra difficulty, as he did not properly 
learn to pick up the mouse and replace it when he ran out of space on the desk. 
Secondly, the registration between graphic and sensor areas is slightly out of 
alignment on the prototypev so without precise (but systematically off-centre) 
playing, the wrong chord often lights up and plays. We will call this 'mis- 
triggering'. BN taught himself to compensate for this during the session, though 
getting the position just right in the face of the treacle-like response was hard 
physical work. 

5 Session 3: RJ: virtuoso visual performance 

RJ, a 24 year-old research student with a psychology background, had a single 
session lasting 1 hour and 20 minutes. RJ has a lot of experence with computers 
and interfaces. He has no previous knowledge of the project beyond a fanadliariiy 
with its general aims. RJ has had more or less no previous musical experience thai 
made any impression. RJ abandoned an attempt to learn to play the tiombonc as a 
child, b^'ing unable to produce any notes. He learned to play a few tunes on a 
recordei at school by rote at ai\ elementary level, but has long since lost this ability. 
RJ has never sung (he wasn't allowed to join the school choir) or played my other 
instruments (except an attempt at drums). RJ has no knowledge of music theoi7. 
He never got as fai, tor example, as finding out what sharp and flat signs mean. 

Ploying and recogmsing chord sequences: fin(Ung landmarks 

RJ learned to "play" harmony space very rapidly, and had no difficulty in 
renocmbcring the position of the rcwjor and minor tonal centres throughout the 
scsf ion. He could name these as such. RJ found it easy (apart from mis- triggerings 
due. to the bad alignment of the interface) after an initial demonstration to play 'a 
cycle of fifths from major tonic to major tonic', (or minor tonic to oiinor tonic) when 
requested in these words. He did this several times on request at differeai point>} in 
the session, producing for example; 



ERIC 



Cma7 Fma7 B half diminished 7 Emi7 A mi7 D im7 G dom7 C ma7 
(a cycle of fifths from nvijor tonic C to major tonic C) 



Ciaptex 9: Novices' experiences with Harmcny Space 



Ami? D iri? G dom? C ma7 F ma? B half diminished ? Emi? Ami? 
^1 cycle of fjftlis from minor tonic A to minor tonic A) 

He could also play such progressions consistently on request diatonically or 
chromatically, after being explained the distinction. For example, 

Cxml Fma? Bbdom? Ebdom? Abdom? Dmi? F#dom? 
B half diiTMnislwd 7 E mi? A -^i? D n-ii? G dom? C ma? 
(chromatic cycle of fifths (torn a tonic major C to a tonic major C ) 

RJ also found it easy to play chromatic and scalic progressions on request, for 
example 

Bb major C minor D mina* Eb major .... etcetera 

(scalic progression in Bb major) 

Bb tnajor B major C tninor C# major D minor 

(chromatic progression in Bb major with chrcsnatic chords^ set to major) 

though he complained, with some justice, on discovering that progressions up the 
scale moved down the screen that this was "bad interface design" (though of 
course, there is no simple way around this without disturbing the other axes). RJ 
could identify a sequence played by the demonstrator in terms of whether it was 
diatonic or chromatic, and whether it moved on the cycle of fifths or scalar axis. RJ 
could distinguish major, minor and diminished triads on sight, and was able to 
reproduce the rule for "growing" chords easily. He built up a small vocabulary of 
progressions he could play easily in the session, namely the three chord trick, the 
cycle of fifths version of "return home", and simple oscillating modal harmonic 
ostinati. To give just one example of each kind of piogression: 

IIVVI 

ivnnvK II VI 

(AcoUan) I Vn VI VIU 



In this coiuext, iluj term "chromatit clMxds' is jsed to refer io chonis with chromatic roots. 

ERIC 1% 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



RJ learned to play many of these progressions from abstract specifications, rather 
than by demonstration. This is iUustrated by the fact that, when performing diatonic 
cycles of fifths, RJ used a different route for the tritone leap than the author 
habitually uses. 

Tritone substitution - a more sophisticated version 

Tritone substitution was explained to RJ, in more general terms than to BN, and he 
was invited to make tritone substitutions of a length chosen by him, starting from a 
point chosen by him within the sequence and ending on I in the following chord 
sequence. 

VII m VI n V I 

RJ's modified version was 

vn mvinnbi 

More than an hour after the investigation, in response to a question about the length 
of the tritone substitution route he had made, RJ was able to describe his chromatic 
route contctly as follows - "a short one - just one black note". 

Harmonic analysis 

RJ was able to carry out the functional harmonic analysis task easily o.i an 
improvised chord progression. 

Composing chord sequences 

When invited to make up some interesting chord sequences, RJ tried several 
different chord arities under his own initiative, particularly liking fifth diads, and 
complaining that some of the higher arities were "too jazzy". RJ composed the 
following chord sequence. 

nb IIVV I 

RJ was able to remember the order of chords in this progression an hour and a hilf 
after the session. RJ also spontaneously invented the idea of a tritone substitution 

ERIC 197 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



chromatically moving scalically upwards to the tonic in the tritone substitution 
goxr^, by taking a 'left turn' instead of a 'right turn'. 

Accompanying existing songs 

RJ played the chord progressions correctly (apart from occasional mis-triggerings) 
after brief demonstrations or abstract specifications, was able to accompany the 
demonstrator singing the choruses of Randy Crawford's "Street Life", Rogers and 
Hart's "The lady is a tramp", Phil Collins "In the air tonight" and Sam Cooke's 
"What a Wonderful World". This was not a self-indulgence on the part of the 
investigator; the role of singing in Harmony Space (or any other) musical instruction 
can play a vital role which will be discussed in the report on the next and last 
session. 

A visual approach 

The investigator tried to illustrate almost every claim in Part II in some form in this 
session, with little regard for RJ's wish to rest and go to lunch. This was too much 
to try to cover with a beginner in less than 90 minutes, and RJ complained of severe 
brain overload'. RJ said afterwards "Well, it was very interesting [..] cos y'know I 
couldn't do that on a keyboard [..] the nice thing is, you do see that it's simple." 
However, RJ said later (in contrast to BN and LA (the last subject), who both had 
longer sessions) that he approached the tasks visually and claimed that he hadn't 
absorbed the relationship between the visual and auditory patterns very much. 

6 Session 4 HS: Analysing Mo:^art's Ave verum 

Tlie next subject, HS, is a 37 year old from an Indian background who studied at an 
Indian school in Kenya. HS has never learned to play an instmment or studied 
music: either Western or Indian. She sang Indian music in her class at school. She 
has been exposed to Western pop music since school days. HS works 
professionally as a secretary. The session with HS lasted just 30 minutes. 

HS was taught by demonstration and instruction how to play I IV I V I chord 
sequences in the major and the minor. It was attempted also to teach HS slight 
variants of this chord sequence, natnely the chord sequence for Transvision Vamp's 

ERIC ,,o , 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 

'Baby I don't care' G I VV I) and the Archies' 'Sugar Sugar' (I IV I IV I IV V I) 
HS found it hard to remember the two different orderings, often confusing one with 
the other. Problems were greatly compounded by the mis-triggering problems 
discussed in the other sessicMis. There was no time to practise these to sort out the 
problems. HS was reasonably well able to remember the location of the major tonic 
but found it hand to remember the location of the minor tonic. 

After an initial introduction to the interface of five or ten minutes, HS was asked to 
produce a functional harmonic analysis of a reduced version of the chord sequence 
of the first part of Mozart's Ave Verum. This was done as follows. The 
demonstrator used Harmony Space to play a reduced version of the chord sequence 
(as triads, in root inversion, in close position), with the chord sequence taken to be 
that given below. The key window was moved to the dominant just before the first 
II#3. 

I II V I V I vn I V 
V n#3 m ii#3 V I ii#3 V 

HS was asked to identify the functional names (I, VII, etcetera) of the chords as they 
were played, by means of the labelled diagrams, and asked to identify the direction 
of the modulation when it occurred. HS produced the following analysis verbally, 
chord by chord. 

I n V I V I VU I V 

(key window moves on upward right diagonal ) 

V VI V I IV V I 

There was little effort to explain what the task meant, due to time constraints. Unlike 
RJ, who was taught to say things like "modulate to V", by looking up labels for 
points of the compass in terms of neighbours of I in fig 1 (e.g. NE = V E = III S = 
VI and so on), HS was not taught functional names for the modulations, being 
asked only to identify key window movement in temis of points of the compass. 



ERIC 



199 ' ' ** 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



7 Session 5: LA: putting it all together and making sense of the 
sounds 

LA is a French research student of age 29 with a computing background. LA had no 
knowledge of the project before the session, other than a general familiarity with its 
goals. To all intents and purposes, she has no formal knowledge of music or 
instrumental skills. She took part in class sol-fege singing at primary school and 
Ustens to pop music, but she has no theoretical knowledge about sol-fa. She learned 
very elementary recorder playing by rote at about age eight, but could only vaguely 
remember that she learned to read white notes and black notes and rests; she cannot 
now remember what the various signs mean. She is unaware of the meaning of 
sharp and flat signs. 

Playing and inventing chord sequences 

This was the most relaxed and least pressured session, since a little more time was 
available. The session was split into two halves with a break for LA's evening meal. 
The first session lasted nearly an hour, the second session one hour and forty 
minutes. In the first session, LA learned to play the major and minor three chord 
tricks, in the following forms: 

I IVVI 
vi ii iii vi 

LA learned that they could be played in different keys. She accompanied the 
demonstrator, who sang the 'Banana Split Show' theme song and Steve Miller's 
'Abracadabra'. LA played both chord sequences correctly, thus; 

IIVIVI 
vi ii iii vi 

LA found it easy to differentiate the major, minor and diminished shapes but did not 
always remember their names. She found the traditional vocabulary for chord size 
('triads, sevenths, ninths', etcetera) confusing and hard to remember, but found the 
chord-arity terms ('one, two, three, four') to be straightforward. LA learned the 



ERJC 200 



o 1 .1 



Chaptef 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



strategy for playing the "return home" plan (major or minor) in the cycle of fifths 
case. We discussed the fact that Cannel and Marx call this progression the " 
classical pattern" and that it is widespread in Westem tonal music. She made up her 
own instantiations of the return home plan, for example: 

vinvi 

Discussing music theory 

LA was conccmcd to find out the difference between the white notes and the black 
notes. She was given the same explanation as BN: that they correspond to the white 
notes and black notes of the piano, and that for many musical purposes, 
predominantly only the white notes are used. The investigator also explained the fact 
that the set of privileged notes can change in the middle of a piece of music. It was 
pointed out that only in Harmony Space arc such changes reflected by a shift in the 
black/white coding (there was a keyboard nearby to point to, although we did not 
play it). 

LA clearly wanted more theoretical background, so fig 2 was used to explain the 
arrangement of notes in semitone height. It was explained that there were only 12 
differentiable notes in an octave in the westem pitch set, that ocvave equivalence 
allowed these to stand for notes in whatever octave, and that notes on the semitone 
axis of Harmony Space were arranged in order of pitch, both numerically and 
aurally. To clarify things further, the circles were set to play single notes, and it was 
demonstrated that their pitch remained invariant when the key window changed 
position. (To be precise, the octave register of the notes sometimes changed, since 
the current major tonic is always assigned the lowest pilch, with the other 1 1 notes 
in an ascending chromatic scale above it, which was explained to LA. The 
investigator was worried that this extra detail would confuse LA, but she seemed 
happy with this explanation. An extra circle display such as discussed in section 3.3 
of Chapter 7 might well facilitate this kmd of explanation.) 



Practical use of the arguments for the centrality of the tonic 



201 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences wiih Harmony Space 



Early on in the session, LA seemed to leani the rule for construcung scale-tone 
chords VCT7 easily, and on request could show how to construct triads, sevenths 
and ninth chords for different degrees of the scale, irrespective of key. LA was 
taught the locations of the major aiid minor tonics not just by demonstration but by 
the 'centrality' arguments of part IL Later in the session, when asked to show the 
locations of minor doh, LA appeared to make use of both the chord construcuon rule 
and of ♦he 'centrality argument', tracing out imaginary minor triads with her finger 
on the screen, looking for the middle one. However, later in the session, LA was 
not able to remember the growing rule at one point (although she knew the sort of 
rule) and had to be reminded. 

Transfers 

After that, it was time for the meal break. After the break, LA learned to play both 
diatonic or chromatic cycles of fifths on request, starting from the major or minor 
tonal areas (sometimes she got confused about the location of the minor tonal centre, 
but mosdy had a good picUire of where it was). 

When she "ran out of screen" on the interface when moving in a straight line 
towards some pre-specified functional destination, she was taught to transfer to an 
equivalent position in the patte t», though she sometimes made mistakes on 
identifying an equivalent position. LA called these "transfers" (they didn't 
previously have a name). As a result of this instruction, and perhaps partly as a 
result of the fact it was explained verbally, rather than being demonsffated, LA came 
up with a slightly different way of playing diatonic cycles of fifths than eitlier RJ or 
the author. LA picked a representative of VII downwards and to the left where RJ 
picked a representative downwards and to the right (it is interesting to note that LA is 
left-handed.) 

The semitone axis 

LA learned to play progressions up and down down the semitone axis. She found it 
very easy to play the progression for Phil Collins' "In the Air Tonight" 

(Aeolian) I VI Vn I. 



ERIC 



202 o I 



Chapter 9; Novices' cxperic.ices with Harmony Space 



At first, given an abstract specification in place of a demonstration, LA tended to 
play 

(Aeolian) I VI I 

LA found it harder to play Dorian modal harmonic ostinati than their Aeolian 
counterparts - though she could play either. LA accompanied the investigator 
singing Michael Jackson's "Billie Jean" 

(Dorian) in mil I 
Triwne substitution 

LA was able to watch the demonstrator play a "return home chord sequence" and 
modify it using a tritone substitution; like BN, she t'oimd it easier to identify the 
tonic she was working towards and then work backwards rather than to work 
forwards. 



Composing musically 'sensible' chord sequences with a modulation 

LA also learned to play a version of Return Home that includes a modulation. This 
was billed to her as a special case of the general strategy that chord progressions 
should start and finish on the tonic. The instructions for the game are as follows. 
First of all one decides whether to play diatonically or chromatically, and major or 
minor. Then, one plays a home chord, chooses some other chord and begins a 
progression down the cycle of fifths axis from that chord back to home. One is 
allowed to make an arbitrary modulation at any point during the journey home. After 
the modulation, the same trajectory should be continued, observing key constraints 
if appropriate, to the new home. This game is quite complicated for a beginner, 
because it is necessary to realise that the trajectory should keep moving regularly 
with respect to the underlying note grid, and not relative to the functional positions 
(that shift with the key window). Also, one must learn to avoid progi^essions with 
'pointless' initial jumps and modulations, for example progressions which reach the 
tonic by the very act of modulation. LA played the game using chrom^^tic cycles of 
fifths rather than diatonic cycles of fifths. This game can very easily lead to long 

ERIC 203 o , . 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



progressions, and typically involved 'transfers', but after some practice, LA 
definitely got the hang of the game and could play the major or minor version of the 
games (making new choices of modulation point and direction each time) more or 
less reliably on request. 

Analysing Mozart's Ave Verum with apparent compreliension of the task 
LA analysed the Mozart "Ave Verum Corpus" and appeared to understand fairly 
clearly what the task was about. The task was billed to her as being to identify 
chords by location in the key window, to identify when they did not follow the 
"normal construction rule" and to announce modulations in forms of words such as 
"modulation to V " etcetera. She was asked to use Fig 1 to translate directions of key 
window move into this form, effectively using chord function names as labels to 
describe points of the compass. At first LA found it almost impossible to recognise 
which way the key windows were moving, but after we arranged the key window 
field so that the "edge" of the field was visible, the task became much easier. LA 
insisted that the task made good sense to her. 

Putting together two chord progressions 

LA learned to play the entire chord progression to Randy Crawford's "Street Life , 
(verse followed immediately by chorus then all repeated ). The task was given to 
her in the following terms: play the minor three chord trick followed by a diatonic 
progression down the fifths axis from minor tonic to minor tonic. LA made some 
slips at first but could soon play all of this quite p>ositively. 

(minor) I IV V I IV VII HI VI II V I 

As it happens, the chord progression was played in triads (not sevenths). The 
harmonic minor in the chorus was not introduced, as this seemed to be too much to 
deal with all at once. 

The role of singing .-fitting together melody and chords 

LA accompanied the demonstrator/investigator who sang while she played. Singing 
by the demonstrator was deliberately used to accompany chord sequences whenever 

ERIC 204 " 



Chapter Novices' experiences with Harmony Space 



possible. Jazz players often claim that the very best advice in learning to play is to 
'sing while you play' (Sudnow, 1978). All of the students were encouraged to sing, 
and all claimed to be too shy. But singing by both the investigator and student 
seemed to play important roles in LA's session. I.i earlier parts of the investigation, 
LA had complained quite strongly that she could not see how the investigator's 
singing of "Abracadabra" and the chords she (or he) were playing fitted together. 
This led to the investigator asking her to count as she played rhythmically, in order 
to make the chords and singing synchronise as well as possible. This was very 
difficult given the treacle-like cursor action. The investigator also tried playing 
Harmony Space himself while singing with as regular a delivery as possible in 
order to resolve this point. Once LA got the hang of playing with regular counts of 
four, (as far as the cursor action permitted), LA was much happier and agreed that 
she could sense the connection a little better, but said that the melody and chords still 
seemed somewhat unconnected. 

About half way through the second session, LA suddenly announced that the 
singing and the chords were starting to fit together, she also started spontaneously 
singing to herself as she played, often singing roots. She also announced that she 
could hear how the different shapes had different sounds. 

LA's reaction 

LA was due to go to a party half way through the second session, but kept two 
friends waiting for one hour despite protests from her friends while we finished the 
investigation. This was not due to the novelty of playing with a new interface - LA 
has played with very many computer interfaces. She said that the time flew very 
quickly and that she was really enjoying herself and learning a lot. She said such 
things as "I can see now it is very clear in my head", "I think I learned a lot", "Now 
I can see the pattern", as well as going over specific detail of what she had done. 
LA was sufficiently confident after the session to be convinced that the skills would 
transfer easily to the piano after, say, half a dozen sessions, even on the existing 
implementation of Harmony Space. Needless to say, this speculation remains open 
to empirical investigation, but it is note* 'orthy that the session produced this level of 
confidence in a novice. 




205 > "I 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences with Harmony Sr>ace 

8 Conclusions 

The investigation was a qualitative evaluation, based on single sessions with 5 
subjects. In practical tcnns, it has been demonstrated that musical novices from a 
wide range of cultural backgrounds and ages can be taught, using Harmony Space, 
in the space of between 10 minutes and two and a half hours to carry out tasks such 
as the following : 

• Perform harmonic analyses of the chord functions and modulations (ignoring 
inversions) of such pieces as Mozait's "Ave Verum Corpus". The harmonic 
analysis was performed on a version played in triads, in close position, in root 
inversion. This task was carried out by one subject after only 10 minutes 
training. 

• Accompany sung performances of songs, playing the correct chords, on the 
basis of simple verbal instructions or demonstrations. Songs were selected with 
a range of contrasting harmonic constructions. 

• Execute simple strategies for composing chord sequences such as the following 
'musical plans'; return home, cautious exploration, nxxlal harmonic ostinato and 
return home with a modulation. 

• Modify existing chord sequences in musically 'sensible' ways, for example 
performing tritone substitutions on jazz chord sequences. 

• Play and recognise various classes of abstractly described, musically useful 
chord sequences in various keys both diatonically and chromatically. 

• Carry out various musical tasks, such as to recognise and distinguish chord 
qualities; to use the rule for scale tone chord construction; to locate major and 
minor tonic degrees in any key; and to make use of the rationale for the centrality 
of the major and minor tonics. 



o 

ERIC 



In all of the sessions, bearing in mind the cultural diversity (China, France, 

206 



Chapter 9: Novices' experiences wiii-i Harmony Space 



Kenyayindia) and range of ages in the sample, popular music proved an invaluable 
lingua franca. The fact that the investigation made use of popular music proved 
useful in a number of ways: all of the subjects had heard some icok mwsic and 
seemed motivated to play it. Apart from YB's very unusual case, it was mostly easy 
to find musical examples familiar to the subjects to illustrate the tlieoretical points, ft 
is unclear how well classical music would have fulfilled the same role. 

Experience with Harmony Space bore out the jazz adage that singing while you play 
can be beneficial to learning (Sudnow, 1978). 

Although it was clear from expressivity arguments alone that complex musical tasks 
could be carried out mechanically in Harmony Space by people who can draw 
straight lines, etcetera, it was unclear before the investigation whether an intuitive 
'feel' for the tasks would be fostered by the treacly, clumsy implementation. 
Surprisingly, on the evidence of the session, at least one of the subjects appears to 
have started to develop such an inmitive 'feel' for some of the tasks. 

Conclusions about the interface 

• It has been demonstrated that non-musically trained users (including a child) can 
use and make sense of the interface. 

• The power of Harmony Space has been demonstrated for teaching and performing 
simple harmonic analysis. The analysis task has unquestionably become easy to do, 
whether mechanically or with understanding. It is unclear by what other 
parsimonious mechanism, useful for a wide range of other musical tasks, complete 
novices coulc AX)ducc similar analyses after five minutes training. 

• In harmonic analyses, we have ignored inversions (i.e. octave height information) 
and concentrated on identifying roots, chord qualities and shifts of tonal centres. 
With a variant versions of the interface, where octave height information (i.e. 
Longuet-Higgins' third dimension 5) is restored using colours or shading, the full 

^ In terms of Balzario's theory, the z axis may be seen in much the same way: the set of 
equivalence classes for C 12 stacked along C^, anwigcd in order of octave height. 

207 



Chapter 9: Novices' cxpenences with Harmony Space 

task could be carricsd out by comparing shadings to derive inversion information, 
wiihout ciianging the interface in any other way. For example, if octave height were 
to be mapped so that 'darker = lower', the 'place' of the darkest note in a chord (in 
terms of the scale-tone chord construction rule) would correspond to its inversion. 

• Using a musical terminology that re interprets traditional terms according to how 
they appear in Harmony Space i.e. "chord arity" may allow musically untrained 
novices to acquire a vocabulary for articulating intuitions about Harmony faster, and 
may help them retain the vocabulary longer. It must ultimately depend on the 
purposes of the leamei* whether it is preferable to learn the traditional vocabulary for 
Harmony, or the Harmony space neologisms on initial exposure to Harmony Space. 

• Harmony Space is more useful than, for example, a piano for enabling musically 
untrained novicus to perform the tasks we have considered. As a thought experiment, 
let us imagine a process of analysis, similar to YB's, being attempted by a novice 
watching a slow performance in root inversion, in close position, on a piano. If the 
keys were labelled, it appears vaguely plausible at first that the task could be done, 
until we remember that the labels would need to move when the pianist modulated. 
This could be remedied using back-projection and transparent keys, but would be 
fatally inadequate for control (as opposed to recognition) tasks, since, for example, 
chords are hard and irregular for a novice to play in remote keys on a piano. A 
modulating piano (a piano with a special lever for retuning the entire piano up and 
down a given number of .semitones) or its electronic equivalent, at first appears to get 
around this problem, but it is unclear how such an instrument could go very far to 
help novices perform most of other tasks discussed in this chapter (e.g. learning to 
play complex, varied chord sequences in a matter of minutes, learning to make 
tritone substitutions intelligentiy, distinguishing chord qualities irrespective of the 
degree of scale of the root, composing new chord sequences in a purposive manner, 
playing and recognising regular progressions while modulating, judging the 
harmonic closeness of modulations and so forth). These problems could no doubt be 
addressed in a piecemeal fashion, but we would be in danger of re-inventing 
harmony space: Balzano's uniqueness proof establishes that harmonic relationships 
are inherentiy two-dimensional , not just linear or circular. 



ERIC 



All of tiie above listed tasks, and many others, can be performed using the 

208 



Chapter 9: Novices' cxpcriei es with Harmony Space 



parsimonious Harmony Space control/display grid as it stands. The parsimony of 
the Harmony Space interface njeans that each different use of the interface for a fresh 
task has a chance to imbue the same few locations, shapes and movements m\h a 
fresh, but consistent, layer of musical meaning. The irregularity of the diatonic scale, 
noted by Shepard (1982) at the head of part II is reflected faithfully in the shape of 
the irregular key window shape of Harmony Space. This means that every location 
and shape in Harmony Space can come to have unique musical associations for users 
(similar to those that chord symbols and CMN symbols can come to have for 
traditionally trained musicians). The investigation suggests that this kind of musical 
meaning can start to emerge for novices in a matter of minutes to hours, e^ cn on a 
poor implementation. 

• Harmony Space's group theoretical principles, and Balzano's uniqueness 
arguments, give us general grounds for believing that Harmony space is particularly 
well suited for Harmonic analysis, whether by mechanical methods or with 
understanding. 

• Despite the mechanical style of presentation of the task of harmonic analysis to YB, 
his performance, and his query about the meaning of the task illustrate the fact that 
Harmony Space is not only well suited to the performance of harmonic analysis, but 
also well suited to suppcxt explanations to novices of the meaning of the process. 

9 Extensions 

A sti-aightforward extension of this study would be to take a small number of 
students, (perhaps some in pairs) for half a dozen weekly sessions and then find out 
the degree to which the composition, analysis, accompaniment and theoretical skills 
learned could be transferred to a keyboard. 

A useful part of such an investigation would be to invent more 'games' to play and 
to experiment with tasks to carry out in Harmony Space. 

A useful contribution to such a study would be to make a version of the key window 
display available in which the key windows arc graphically 'joined up', to see if this 
improves or hinders develc^ment of a sense of location in the key window. 

ERIC 209 " \i 



Chapter 9: Novices' e.xpeik'vcs with Harmony Space 



A simple inq)lemcntation project would be to implement the shading of notes on the 
display according to octave height, and the use of mouse buttons to control 
inversion. This would be a logical extension to the Harmony Space design, since it 
simply corresponds to making Longuet-Higgins's z-axis visible and controllable. 
Amongst other things, this would permit experiments with novices on the production 
of harmonic analyses that took into account inversion 

10 Further work 

An interesting research project in the light of the present research would be to 
implement Harmony Space in a npidly-responding, accurate, properly- labelled 
form, with DM secondary functions, smoothly sliding key windows and control and 
display of inversions. This would be more suitable for practical experimentation, for 
more refined harmonic analysis and might wcU help develop a better gestalt/intuitive 
feel for harmony. Since important proximity relationships arc preserved in the 
auditory/hapticA'isual mapping, we hope that a fast, accurate implementation of 
Harmony Space would engage perceptual gestalt grouping mechanisms in a similar 
way all three modalities, and that intuitions would start to 'seep into tlie fingers, cars 
and eyes' of some users, almost independently of what they thought about what 
they were doing. 

An interesting research question, that might be investigated in the light of the present 
research, would be to find out whether interfaces based on (ubiquitous) group 
theoretic characterisations of other domains might be designed that translated 
proximity relationships that happen to be hard to intuit in the abstract into haptic ^, 
visual, easily assimilable form. 



6 Balzano (1982) notes that the relationship of group theory to perception is close, and has 
^ been investigated by (Cassirer, 1944) 

E R^C " 210 :] .'^ 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



"..one must learn to argue with unexplained terms and to use sentences for 
which no clear rules of usage are yet available. " 

Paul Feycrabend p 256 (1975). 

In this final chapter, we will bring together the most important of the conclusions 
from throughout the thesis. We will also draw several new conclusions. 

1 Contribution 

1.1 Overview of contribution 

This research has produced a theoretically-motivated design for a computer-based 
tool for exploring tonal harmony. A prototype version of the interface has been 
constructed to demonstrate the feasibility and coherence of the design. A qualitative 
investigation has demonstrated that the interface can enable musical novices from 
diverse backgrounds to perform a range of musical tasks that would normally be 
difficult for them to do. In addition, the research has contributed towards the design 
of a knowledge-based tutoring system to assist novices in composing chord 
sequences. The approach is built on the exploration and transformation of case 
studies described in terms of ( ;iunks, styles and plans. Programs to demonstrate the 
feasibility of key parts of the knowledge-based approach have been implemented. 

As an organisational device, these contributions have been divided up into three 
categories: contributions to Human Computer Interface research, contributions to 
Artificial Intelligence and Education, and contributions to Music Education. 
However, many of the contributions belong under more than one heading. 

/ .2 Contribution to Human Computer Interface research 
12.1 Design of an expressive interface 



ERIC 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



An interface has been devised which makes use of representations derived from two 
cognitive theories of harmony. Design decisions have been discussed which employ 
the representations in the interface in ways which give the interface particularly 
desirable properties. The properties are given below. (Three of the most useful 
traditional 'interfaces' are referred to in the next few points for comparison, namely; 
common music notation, the guitar frctboard and the piano keyboard.) 

1 Chord progressions fundamental to western tonal harmony (such as 
cycles of fifths and scalic progressions) are translated into simple straight line 
movements along different axes. This renders fundamental chord 
progressions easy to recognise and control in any key using very simple 
gestures. (These progressions can be hard for novices to control and 
recognise by conventional means.) 

2 The same property enables particularly important progressions (such as 
cycles of fifths) to be manipulated and recognised as unitary "chunks". A 
common problem for novice musicians is that they only treat chord 
progressions chord by chord (Cork, 1988). 

3 Chords that are harmonically close are made visually and haptically close 
(fig 3 chapter 5). This renders other fundamental chord progressions (such 
as IV V I and progression in thirds) easy to recognise and play. (On a 
piano, for example, these progressions require gestural 'leaps' to be made 
that can be particularly hard to judge \i 'remote' keys. All keys are rendered 
equally accessible in Harmony Spac ^.) 

4 Similarly, keys that are harmonically close are made visually and 
haptically close. This makes common modulations easy to recognise and 
play. (In common music notation, or on either traditional instrument , 
considerable experience or knowledge can be required to work out key 
relationships.) 

5 The basic materials of tonal harmony (triads) are made visually 
recognisable as maximally compact objects with three distinguishable 
elements. (In other representations mentioned above, the selection of uiads 




212 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



as basic materials may seem arbitrary.) 

6 Major and minor chords are made easy to distinguish visually. (This is not 
the case, for example, in common music notation or on a piano keyboard) 

7 Scale-tone chord construction is made such that it can be seen to obey a 
consistent and relatively simple graphic rule in any key. (On a piano 
keyboard, for example, this is not the case in remote keys, where semitone 
counting or memonsation of the diatonic pattern for the key is necessary.) 

8 Consistent chord qualities are translated into consistent shapes, 
irrespective of key context. (Again, this is not the case, for example, on a 
piano) 

9 The tonic chords of the major and minor keys are spatially central within 
the set of diatonic notes, whatever the key context. (This relationship is not 
explicit in common music notation, guitar or piano keyboard) 

10 Scale-tone chords appropriate to each degree of the scale can be played 
(even when there is frequent transient modulation) with no cognitive or 
manipulative load required to select appropriate chord qualities (This does 
not hold with guitar or piano). 

1 1 The rule determining the correspondence of chord quality with degree of 
scale makes sense in terms of a simple, consistent physical containment 
metaphor. 

12 A single consistent spatial metaphor is sufficient to render interval, chord 
progression, degree of the scale, and modulation. (Not so in the other three 
points of comparison) 

122 General characteristics from an interface design viewpoint 

The interface also has a number of useful properties in terms of more general 
human-machine interface design criteria and viewpoints, as follows; 



213 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



Consistency and uniformUy of control and representation: 

Harmony Space exhibits a high degree of uiiiformity and consistency in the way that 
the phenomena it deals with are controlled and represented. This is held to be a 
useful trait in human-machine interfaces (Smith, Irby, Kimball, Verplank and 
Harslem 1982) from the point of view of encouraging ease of learning and use. The 
relevant consistencies and uniformities of harmony space can summarised as 
follows; 

• a single spatial metaphor is used to describe and control pitch, interval, 
and key-relationships, 

• a single movement metaphor is used to describe melody, chord 
progression and modulation, 

• a single spatial containment metaphor is used to describe and distinguish 
the diat(Miic scale, scale tc chord qualities and diatonic chord progressions 
from their chromatic counterparts, 

• a single spatial centrality metaphor is used to describe major and minor 
tonal centres, 

• chord qualities have consistent shapes in any key. Tlie shapes reveal their 
intemal intervallic stmcture explicitly, 

• a single proximity metaphor applies to harmonically close intervals, chords 
and keys. 

All of these metaphors can be seen as aspects of a single spatial metaphor. 
Reduction of cognitive load 

Cognitive load is reduced by the interface because relationships that have to be 
learned or calculated in other representations (such as common music notation, or 
notations based on the guitar or piano keyboard) are represented explicitly or 
uniformly in Hamx)ny Space. Example relationships include; 

• the location of the notes of the diatonic scale in different keys, 

• the shapes of different chord qualities in different keys. 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



• the internal intervallic structure of chords on different degrees of the scale, 

• the degree of note overlap between sharp and flat keys, 

• the structure of the cycle of keys. 

Examples abound of the way in which the interface can reduce cognitive load in 
particular tasks. To pick two more or less at random: when modulating between two 
keys, the number of notes in common does not have to be calculated using 
previously memorised knowledge - it can be grasped visually. Again, when 
inspecting chord progressions in roman numeral notation by conventional means, a 
considerable amount of implicit knowledge and processing or memorisation is 
required to recognise regular chord progressions. In harmony space, such 
progressions are trivially recognisable in a single mental 'chunk'. 

Use of existing knowledge and propensities 

Unlike most musical instruments, rather than requiring the intensive learning of new 
skills. Harmony Space exploits skills that most people ah^ady have, such as being 
able to; 

• recognise straight lines 

• make straight line gestures, 

• keep within a marked territory, 

• distinguish points of the ownpass, 

• recognise and find objects that are close to each other, 

and so forth. The design of the interface maps complex, unfamiliar skills, normally 
requiring extensive training, into commonplace abilities that most people abeady 
have. 

A principled mu{ti-media, multi-modality interface 

We have shown how harmony space exploits cognitive theories to give principled, 
uniform, synchronised metaphors in two modalities (visual and kinaesthetic) for 
harmonic relationships and harmonic processes occuring in a third modality (the 
auditory). 

Er|c 215 



Chap/tcr 10: Conclusions and further woric 



12.3 Design of a tool that gives access to otherwise inacces;!:iO''t experiences 

Harmony Space gives novices access to normally inaccessible experience in two 
distinct but related senses described below. 

Purposive control of normally inaccessible experience by novices 

On most existing musical instruments, (and even on most computer-based editors 
and interfaces), the gestures demanded of novices to allow them to experiment in a 
purposive way with the materials of tonal music cannot be performed in real time 
without considerable pre-existing instrumental skill or musical knowledge. These 
prerequisites can form a considerable barrier for novices, preventing them from ever 
carrying out meaningful musical experiments. Harmony Space makes the basic 
materials of harmony easy to recognise and control in a flexible manner using very 
simple gestures. 

Providing a vocabulary to analyse and articulate e^^rience 

Articulating intuitions about chord sequences requires a vocabulary of some sort. 
The traditional vocabulary is difficult to learn. Novices may have strong intuitions 
about chord sequences, but may have no vocabulary for articulating and discussing 
the structure of chord sequences. Harmony space gives novices a simple, uniform 
spatial vocabulary and notation for articulating and discussing such matters. This 
vocabulary and notation arc consistent and uniform across all relevant levels, from 
the chord constituent level, through the chord progressions level, up to the level of 
inter-relationships between modulations. Harmony Space need not cut novices off 
from traditional vocabulary, but to the contrary, could be used as a complement and 
means of access to more traditional vocabularies. 

1.2.4 Qualitative investigation of interface 

It has been demonstrated that non-musically trained users (including a child) can use 
and make sense of the interface to carry out a range of substantial musical tasks. 

It was not clear before the investigation whether an intuitive 'feel' for the tasks 
would come across with the limited implementation. Surprisingly, on the evidence 



216 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



of the session, at least one of the subjects appears to have begun to develop such an 
intuitive 'feel' for :orae of the tasks. 

7.5 Contribution to mu^ic education 

1.3.1 A new approach to music education in harmony 

It has been demonstrated with a small number of subjects using Harmony Space that 
musical novices from a wide range of cultural backgrounds and ages can be taught 
(in the space of between 10 minutes and two and a half hours) to perform tasks 
such as the following : 

• Carry out harmonic analyses of the chord functions and modulations (ignoring 
.nversions) of such pieces as Mozart's "Ave Verum Corpus". The harmonic 
analyses were done on a version played in triads, in close position, in root 
inversion. This task was performed by one subject after only 10 minutes 
training. 

• Accompany songs, playing the correct chords, on the basis of simple verbal 
instructions or demonstrations. Songs were chosen with a range of contrasting 
hannonic constructions. 

• Carry out simple strategies for composing chord sequences such as the 
following 'musical plans'; return home, cautious exploration, modal harmonic 
ostinato and return home with a modulation. 

' Modify existing chord sequences in musically 'sensible' ways, for example 
carrying out tritone substitutions on jazz chord sequences. 

• Play and recognise various classes of abstiactly described, musically useful 
chord sequences in various keys both diatonically and chromatically. 

• Carry out various musical tasks, such as to recognise and distinguish chord 
qualities; to make use of the rule for scale tone chord construction; to find the 
major and minor tonic degrees m any key; and to be able to use the rationale Tor 



ERIC 



217;' : >> 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 
the centrality of the major and minor tonics. 

132 Development of a hcw approach to teaching aspects of musical theory 
The power of Harmony Space has been illustrated for carrying out simple harmonic 
analysis. Analysis is relatively simple to do using Harmony Space, whether 
mechanically or with understanding. It has also been demonstrated that Harmony 
Space is not only well suited to carrying out harmonic analysis, but also well suited 
to support explanations to novices of the significance of the process. 

13.3 A multipurpose tool 

The tool has been identified as being particularly relevant to the needs of those with 
no musical instrument skills, unfamiliar with music theory and unable to read music, 
but who would like to compose, analyse or articulate intuitions about chord 
sequences. Without such a tool, it is unclear how members of this group could even 
begin to perform these tasks without lengthy preliminary training. 

Harmony space may be able to give conceptual tools for articulating intuitions about 
chord sequences noi only to novices but also to experts. The graphic linear notation 
for chord progressions that emerges from Harmony Space when tracking chord 
sequences makes various aspects of chord progressions visible and explicit that are 
otherwise hard to articulate in conventional notations. More expert musicians might 
also find Harmony Space and its variants useful for such tasks as assessing the 
harmonic resources of different scales, subsets of scales and so forth. The following 
uses for Harmony Space have been identified; 

• musical instrument, 

• tool for musical analysis, 

• learning tool for simple tonal music theory, 

• learning tool for exploring more advanced aspects of harmony, 

• discovery learning tool for composing chord sequences, 

• notation for chord sequences, 

• notation for high-level aspects of chord sequences (apparently not currently 
reprcsentable perspicacious ly in any other way). 



218 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



lA Contributions to Artificial Intelligence and Education research 

In open ended domains, there is no precise goal but only some prc-ex 'sting 
constraints to be satisfied, any of which may be dropped when some other 
organisational principle becomes more important To illustrate a way of dealing with 
such situations, a new framework for knowledge-based tutoring called MC, to be 
integrated with Harmony Space, has been described. The purpose of the framework 
is to support the learning of skills in composing chord sequences. Ways have been 
outlined of characterising useful forms of higher level musical knowledge about 
chord sequences and using it to transfcxm musical materials. 

1.4.1 Characteristics ofMC framework 

MC has various properties that make it well-suited to this kind of open ended 
domain, as foUows; 

• MC offers complementary, conceptual and experiential learning. The 
Harmony Space component offers opportunities for experiential learning. 
MC offers opportunities for more abstract, conceptual learning by providing 
representations of strategic musical knowledge. The knowledge can be used 
to transform chord sequences in musically intelligent ways, according to 
flexible specifications made by a user or teaching strategy. Examples can be 
explored expcrientiaily in one component and more abstractly in the other 
component. 

• A key feature of the conception of MC is the employment of a series of 
multiple modalities, representations and viewpoints. There are three 
modalities in Harmony Space: the student may hear the notes of a piece, see 
its trace as an animation in harmony space, or trace it using appropriate 
muscular movements. Stored pieces may be characterised from three 
different viewpoints, as a chunked note level description, in terms of styles 
and in terms of plans. A given song may be chunked in more than one way 
- corresponding to different analyses of the piece. 

• Ttie MC architecture promotes the use of goal-oriented, high-level strategic 
thinking. If a student begins from an existing piece, the architecture allows 



ERIC 



219 ) > 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



the student to look at the piece as being goal-oriented according to several 
competing plan descriptions. Alternatively, the student can start from a 
schema or musical strategy. There is a strong emphasis in the architecture on 
metacognitivc skills. Rather than encouraging a focus on the low level 
elements of choid se^quences, ihe student is enabled to consider the ends that 
chord sequences serve and the kinds of high level considerations that can 
affect their shape. 

• It does not matter whether the student 'learns' any of the plans or any of 
the songs. Successful outcomes are of two types: firstly that the student 
devises interesting new chord sequences - though the system holds no 
targets for the exact form these may take, and secondly that the smdent 
comes to realise that chord sequences have a strategic dimension, and that 
various low level means may be employed to serve various high level 
musical ends. 

• When songs are characterised in the form of musically meaningful 
"chunks", looking at the effect of mutations is more likely to be illun-iinating 
for novices than changing individual notes. Chunks based on Harmony 
Logo primitives, seem compatible with common intuitions about pieces and 
informal terms used by musicians. 



1.4.2 Wider applicability of MC framework 

The MC architecture has been shown to have a number of implications for future 
Intelligent Tutoring Systems reseai-ch in open-ended domains, as listed below. 

• It has been argued that the Johnson-Laird characterisation of creativity, not 
previously used in an Intelligent Tutoring Systems context, is particularly apt 
metaphor for use in representing expertise in any open-ended creative 
domain. 

• The use of object level, style level and goal-oriented or strategic levels of 
description appears to be potentially relevant in any domain which involves 
the exercise of open-ended thinking (e.g. engineering design and 

ERIC > ^ 220 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



architectural design). 

• The Paul Simon, or intelligent transformation nethcjd appears to be a 
useful, (though necessarily con^parativcly weak) tc. .or learning 
design skills in any domain which invf.Wey \h<: ii:j;rcise of creativity. 

2 Criticisms and limitations 

In this section, criticisms and limitations of the research are acknowledged. Many of 
these limitation are taken up in the extensions and further work secaon. 

2.1 Musical Limitations to the research 

There are some aspccs of harmony that Harmony Space does not represent well, for 
example, voice-leading, the control and representation of voicing and inversion, and 
the visualisation and control of harmony in a metrical context. Harmony Space 
emphasises vertical aspects (in the musical traditional sense) at the expense of linear 
aspects of harmony. To a large extent this is a built-in limitation of Harmony Space, 
although Harmony Space can demonstrate some special cases of voice leading rather 
well (Holland, 1986b). Some other musical limitations of the research are as 
follows; 

• Some musical terms and notations have been used in unusual ways. 

• Some musical neologisms have been coined for which traditional terms exist. 

• Harmony Space deals only with tonal harmony. 

• Harmony Space is not very well suited to dealing with melody and rhythm. 

• Inverted harmonic functions have been ignored. 

• The musical knowledge in MC is heuristic rnd informal. 

• MC characterisations of chord sequence* : 5 sometimes approximate. 

22 Shortcomings of the implementation of Harmony Space 
The current implementation of Harmony Space is an experimental prototype designed 
to show the coherence and practicality of the design. At the time at which the work 
was done, the graphics, mouse and midi programming in themselves required 
considerable effort to undertake. The prototype served its intended purpose, but is 

ErJc 221 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



too slow and lacks simple graphic and control refinements to make it easy to use. In 
particular, it suffers fiom the following limitations; 

• the prototype is slow to respond and garbage collects frequently, hampering 
rhythmic aspects of playing the interface, 

• the slow response of the prototype means that events that should emerge as 
single gestalts (such as smooth chord progressions and modulations) are 
broken up, 

• the response problems interfere with the illusion of a direct connection 
between gesture and response, and can cause considerable frustration, 

• the secondary functions such as overiding chord quality, switching chord 
arity, controlling diatonicism/chromaticism and modulating arc controlled in 
the current prototype by function keys as opposed to pointing devices, 

• the 'state' that the interface is in, and the choice of states available is 
invisible, rather than indicated by buttons and menus on the screen, 

• it is not possible to view the grid labeUed by roman numeral, degrees of the 
scale, note names etc., 

• output is not provided in Common music notation, 'piano keyboard and 
dot' animation or roman numeral notation to assist skill transfer (see 
appendix 2), 

• only the Balzano configuration has been implemented. 

2.3 Shortcomings in implementation ofMC 

The MC framework has not been fully implemented. Simple prototypes to 
demonstrate the feasibility of all of the innovative components required by the 
framework have been implemented. Song and plan level descriptions have been 
implemented in a rudimentary form using the prototype Harmony Logo interpreter. 
Diiect links to Harmony Space arc not implemented. The Harmony Logo interpreter 
as implemented uses a cruder version of Harmony Logo syntax than the programs 
synthesised by the planner. 

2.4 Limitations to the practical investigation 

The empirical investigation was a qualitative evaluation, not a psychological 
experiment or educational evaluation. The sample was small. Only single session^ 



222 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 

were used. The harmonic analyses were performed on reduced harmonic versions 
played in triads, in close position, in root inversion. 

3 Extensions 

3.1 Extensions to practical investigation 

• A simple extension of the empirical investigation would be to take a small group of 
students for ten or so weekly sessions and find out the extent to which the 
composition, analysis, accompaniment and music theory skills could be transferred 
to a keyboard. 

• A useful contribution to such an investigation would be to devise more 
compositional and other musical 'games' to play and tasks to carry out in Harmony 
Space. 

• Another helpful contribution would be to make a 'clone' of Harmony Space with a 
small adjustment in the key window display. The adjustment would be to graphically 
'join up' the key windows. The aim would be to facilitate experiments to see if this 
improves or hinders development of a sense of location in the key window. 

• Studies into the relative case of use of the two configurations (Longuet-Higgins 
and Balzano) would be facilitated if a version of Harmony Space was implemented 
in the Longuet-Higgins configuration. 

• A straightforward extension of the present research would be an in-depth 
educational evaluation of Harmony Space. It is suggested that 1 ?.urillard (1988) 
would form a good basis for such evaluation. 

32 Harmony Space and harmonic inversions: programming and experiments 

A simple but useful programming project would be to implement the shading of 
notes on the Harmony Space display according to octave height. The 
implementation of some means of controlling inversions and pitch register in 
Harmony Space would likewise be valuable and relatively easy. These simple 
projects would make possible experiments with novices using Harmony Space to 



223 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



carry out harmonic analyses that took inversion into account. Inversion could be 
controlled manually by means of mouse buttons (or, more ambitiously, a midi 
glove). It might be interesting at the same time to e^.periment with simple 'least 
change' algorithms to automatically choose inversions, for example so that 
constituent notes move in pitch as little as possible. 

3.3 Compiling a comprehensive Harmony Space dictionary of chord sequences 

Among the chord sequences so far transcribed into Harmony Space notation, tlie 
density of interesting, almost immediately apparent regularities has appeared to be 
high. However, the number of chord sequences so far been transcribed into 
Harmony Space notation and analysed has been limited. Consequently, many 
regularities that might be apparent in this notation may have been overlooked. For 
example, Johnson-Laird (1989) has pointed out that the chord sequence for John 
Coltrane's seemingly irregular "Giant Steps" (Coltrane, 1959) exhibits a regular 
herringbone pattern in Harmony Space. A straightforward extension of the present 
project, that could be done with paper and pencil (but more quickly and accurately 
using Harmony Space) would be to transcribe an extensive library of chord 
sequences, particularly jazz chord sequences, into Harmony Space notation and 
analyse them in order to taxonomise such regularities. Depending on what 
regularities were discovered, this might grow into a larger project with implications 
for music education. 

4 Further work 

4.1 An improved implementation of Harmony Space 

In the light of the present research, a very useful larger-scale design and 
programming project would be to reimplement Harmony Space in a rapidly- 
responding, accurate, properly-labelled form, configurable in Balzano's or 
Longuet-Higgins' configuration, with DM secondary functions, smoothly sliding 
key windows, constraint controls for drawing straight lines, and facilities for 
control and display of inversions. An implementation of Harmony Space along these 
lines would be more suitable for practical experimentation, suitable for more refined 
harmonic analysis, suitable for supporting a wider range of experiments and might 
well help develop a better gestaJt/intuitive feel for harmony. Such a version of 

ERIC 00 A 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



Harmony Space would be involve many small design decisions (e.g. menu layouts); 
therefore several design-and-evaluate iterations should be allowed for. This project 
would greatly facilitate many of the studies proposed above. 

4.2 Version of Harmony space with metric display features 

In order to understand a chord sequence it is often necessary to know about its 
metrical context (as in the analysis of "All the things you are"). A useful medium- 
sized research, design, programming and evaluation project could be based around 
combining a graphic notation for metre similar to that used by Lerdahl and 
Jackendoff (1983) with a Harmony Space display, to help keep track of how far a 
performance in step-time or real-time was progressing with respect to a pre-defmed 
metrical grid (fig 1). Once implemented, such a tool could be evaluated to discover 
the extent to which it promoted harmonic skill and understanding in metrical 
contexts. 




ihhh 



hhhhhhhh 



Fig 1 Suggested display to shoNv point in metrical structure of a piece 

of events in Harmony Space 



■4.3 Development of Harmony Logo 

A useful medium term design, programming and evaluation project would be to 
further develop Harmony Logo. Harmony Lx)go is a programming language that 
moves voices audibly and graphically around in Harmony Space under program 
control, in d fashion similar to the way the programming language "Turtle Logo" 
moves graphic turtles around on a computer screen. This potentially allows the 
stiiicture of long bass lines and chord sequences to be compactly represented in cases 
where the gestural representation might be awkward to perform or hard to analyse. 



ERIC 



225 , 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



A prototype version of Hamwny Logo has already been implemented which allows 
sounding objects to be moved around in Harmony Space under program control by 
means of a simple Logo-like language. The prototype has a number of major 
limitations: there is no graphic playback; the current syntax is clumsy and limited; the 
facilities for rhythmic control are poor, and it is unclear whether the embedding of 
harmonic trajectories into the interpreter cycle is helpful. A clean version of this 
language could be a useful educational tool. The outlines of the project would be as 
follows; 

• review the rhythmic aspects of Harmony Logo for possible redesign, 

• re-design and re-implement the language cleanly 

• provide a graphic interface to Harmony Space, 

• Assess Harmony Logo as an educational tool for exploring harmony. 

4.4 Improved implementation of key components of MC framework 
The following series of projects would constitute a single, sizeable, programme. 
The first step would be to re-implement the Harmony Logo interpreter, interface it 
to Harmony Space and build up style and song libraries. The next step would be to 
reimplement PLANC (the implemented constraint-based planner forming part of 
MC) using the new dialect of Harmony Logo and interface it to Harmony Logo and 
Harmony Space. Empirical investigations could then be performed on the re- 
implemented and mutually interfaced Harmony Space, Harmony Logo and PLANC 
to assess their usefulness as a teaching aid for the composition of chord sequences. 

4 J Evolving new curricula and teaching methods for Harmony Space 

A medium sized educational project (which could be begun with small pilot 
investigations, useful in their own right) would be develop new curricula and 
teaching methods to take advantage of Harmony Space's theoretical basis. The point 
of this project can l>e seen as follows. Harmony Space breaks new ground 
educationally ui the following ways; 

• using a new conceptualisadon of the domain treated, 

• teaching skills not normally taught (e.g. composition of chord sequences), 

• teaching skills to a group without the normal prerequisites (i.e. basic 
instrumental skills). 



ERIC 



' ' '2Z6 



Chapter 10; Conclusions and further work 



Considerable trial and error may be required to gain experience of the best ways of 
using Harmony Space effectively in education. Part of the project would be to carry 
out educational experiments to gain the necessary experience. 

• Harmony Space is based on theories that reconceptualise the domain in question. 
The reconceptualisations call for and give an opportunity to make radical changes to 
the curriculum and teaching approaches in this area. A second part of the project 
would be to teach students harmony experimentally in terms of Longuet-Higgins' 
and Balzano's theories, using Harmony Space and written teaching materials (as 
opposed to using Harmony Space to teach harmony in traditional terms). This would 
require developing a curriculum, teaching approaches and written teaching materials 
appropriate to the new conceptualisation. 

♦ Students with no knowledge of music theory, no musical instrumental playing 
skills and no music reading skills are not normally taught non-vocal tonal 
composition skills in any formal way. Consequently, there is little experience of how 
to teach such students such skills. The composition of chord sequences is not in 
itself normally taught to anyone as a subject, perhaps because there is a lack of 
accepted theory of how to do it or teach it. The thirds part of tlie project would be to 
use Harmony Space for building up experience of good practice in teaching this 
group and this skill. 



4.6 Graphic Harmonic analysis using Harmony Space 

An interesting medium-sized research project would be to experiment in the use of 
Harmony Space to allow users to perform a version of traditional harmonic analysis 
in a graphic, intuitive manner. This proposal would involve using Harmony Space 
to carry out graphically tasks performed algorithmically by Steedman's (1972) 
cognitive modelling programs using a variant of the same representation. Harmonic 
analysis of a piece of music into chord functions and modulations would be carried 
out by trial-and-error graphical 'b;st-fit'. This would involve positioning the key 
window on traces of pieces (polyphonic or homophonic) played back on the 
harmony space display to find keys wliich sections of the trace fitted best. In harness 
with this procedure, the key window would be used to to identify chord function by 

ERIC 227 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



looking for fairiliar chord shapes and identifying graphically the degree of the scale 
of chord roots by their position within the key window. Routines in Harmony Space 
to allow the notes to be 'clumped' together on the display in various ways could 
facilitate this process. It would also be necessary to have facilities for graphic 
playbacks of chosen sections of chord sequences, but with key window able to 
move freely (disconnected from control functions) so that the user could try 
experimental 'best-fits'. From an Intelligent Tutoring Systems viewpoint, this 
proposal is an interesting demonstration of the possibilit>' of using one and the same 
theoretical base to design interventionist tutors or to build open-ended theory-based 
tools. 

4.7 Use of Harmony Space for teaching jazz improvisation skills 

Cork (1988) relates that a major problem in teaching jazz improvisation is that 
students treat each chord as an isolated event and tend to have little conception of the 
direction and thrust of the chord progression at a higher level. Cork has tackled this 
problem in an ingenious and innovative way by analysing jazz chord sequences into 
commonly occurring moves ('Lego blocks') with evocative verbal labels such as 
'new horizon' and 'downwinder'. Each building block refers to a progression of 
chords (in some cases including a modulation and in come cases making reference to 
metrical context). Cork's system has been used with some practical success to help 
students conceptualise chord sequences at a higher level and make more fluent and 
assured improvisations. There appear to be a very strong correspondence between 
Cork's verbally labelled blocks and short segments commonly seen in harmony 
space traces. From one point of view, Cork's Lego blocks conespond to small 
'macros' in Harmony Space. Three pieces of further work are suggested. Firstly, as 
a simple pencil and paper exercise, it is proposed that a Harmony Space-Harmony 
Lego dictionary be drawn up to establish the exact nature of the link between the two 
systems. The second piece of work would involve empirical investigations to fmd 
out whether Harmony Space notation, like Cork's Harmony Lego, can help students 
conceptualise chord sequences at a higher level and make more fluent and assured 
improvisations. Thirdly, Cork's approach requires that the student can already play 
an instrument, read jazz chord symbols, and has experience of the basics of tonal 
harmony. The third proposal is to discover whether it is possible to help teach 
improvisational jazz singing, using Harmony Space notation, to novices able to sing, 

228 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



but with no formal or instrumental musical experience. 
4.8 Harmony Space, violins and guitars 

The fretboaid of a violin or a guitar can be viewed as the 12-fold vei-sion of Longuet- 
Higgins space sheared vertically downwards^. The following table shows how 
the four intervals that can form a well-defined co-ordinate system (perfect fifth, 
sciitone, major third and minor third) are remapped into points of the compass 
when the Longuet-Higgins 12-fold space is sheared vertically downwards. 



Interval LH T.H sheared v ertically downwards 

p5 N N 

M3 E SE 

in3 SE Lost: NE axis becomes a tritone axis 

m2 NE E 



The guitar has quite different abstract properties from Longuet-Higgins' 12-fold 
space. We shall give just four important differences. Firstly, the shearing of the 
space substitutes the major thirds axis for a tritone axis, gives the two spaces quite 
different configurational properties. Secondly, the firetboard of a guitar is not wide 
enough (six strings) for the straight line patterns that occur in cycles of fifths to be 
clear to beginners. Thirdly, the B string on a guitar breaks the regular grid of 
fourths, destroying the uniformity of chord and progression shapes. (On a violin, 
this uregularity does not occur, but the fretboard is too narrow (four strings) for the 
uniformity of chord shapes on the different strings to be at all obvious to beginners.) 
Fourthly, the key window is not represented explicitly on a guitar. Still, the special 
relationship between stringed instruments and Harmony Space does open up some 
interesting possibilities for future research. (The piano key board can similarly be 
seen as a thin, one-dimensional window on Harmony Space, running down the 
chromatic diagonal axis.) An interesting, long term project in instrument design 

1 The fifths axis in a guitar is inverted in sense compared with the convention for Longuet- 
Higgins diagrams, but this is purely a matter of convention. When the Longuet-Higgins space is 
sheared vertically downwards, the minor thirds axis is 'stretched out of existence'. The 'northern' 
(fifths) axis is unaffected and the 'eastern' (major thirds) and 'north eastern' (chromatic) axes are 

shifted one 'place' each clockwise through 45°. But the 'south-eastern' (minor thirds) axis is 
"stretched" out of existence southwards, and a tritone axis "squeezed" into existence from the south. 

ERIC 229 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



would be to construct guitars (technology permitting) with the sheared key window 
displayed on the fretboard in a moveable form, its location controlled by a foot 
switch to track modulation. An interesting empirical study would be ;o find out 
whether this was helpful when learning to improvise over rapidly modulating chord 
sequences (such as Frank 2^ppa audition pieces). 

We now come on to a series of larger scale proposed research projects. 

4.9 Microworlds for other areas of music 

An interesting large scale research project in the light of the present research would 
be to design microworlds based on appropriate theories of aspects of mi'.sic such as 
rhythm, melody and voice-leading to complement harmony space. It is suggested 
that the theories of Lx)nguet-Higgins and Lee (1984) and Lerdahl and Jackendoff 
(1983); Levitt (1981,1985); and McAdams and Bregman (1985) respectively would 
be good theoretical bases for such microworlds. These microworlds should be 
integrated with each other where possible. 

4.10 Research into interfaces based on group theory for other domains 

An interesting theoretical (and perhaps practical) exploratory research project would 
be to investigate whether interfaces based on (ubiquitous) group theoretic 
characterisations of other domains may be designable for translating proximity 
relationships that happen to be hard to inf lit in the abstract into haptic, visual, easily 
assimilable form. 

4.11 Expanding the MC framework into a full guided discovery tutor 
The MC framework for mtoring music composition relates the following 
components; 

• an interface (Harmony Space) 

• appropriate forms of knowledge at different levels (song, style and plan) 

• ways of manipulating the knowledge ( PLANC and Harmony Logo) 

However, MC lacks the components needed to turn it into a full guided discovery 



-230 



Chapter 10: Conclusiotis and further work 



tutor. In terms of the 'traditional' Intelligent Tutoring Systems trinity, the 
components already defined correspond to roughly to the "domain expertise", but 
student models and teaching expertise are lacking. An interesting research project 
would be to expand MC using such traditional components as; 

. a semantic network of musical concepts. 

• user and curriculum models. 

• stereotypical user models, 

• appropriate teaching strategies and 

• adaptive microworld exercises, 

in order to implemem active guided discovery learning teaching by the system. 
Suitable teaching strategies to investigate include the 'Paul Simon' method and 'most 
desirable path' method outUned in the third part of the thesis, as well as versions of 
some of the domain independent teaching strategies used in Dominie (Spensley and 
Elsom-Cook, 1988). 

4.12 More ambitious variant designs of Harmony Space 

An L te, ;sting large scale project would involve implementing and testing a number 
of variants of Harmony Space to explore various educational possibilities. A few of 
the most interesting variants are listed below. 

• Non-tonal versions. 

Versions of Harmony Space similar to the present design, but with 20, 30 and 42 
fold divisions of the scale. These divisions are identified by Balzano (1980) as being 
of particular theoretical interest. Such a version of Harmony Space would allow 
student composers to experiment with, and assess the resources of. these non-tonal 
scales. 

• Pentatonic version 

A version of Harmony Space similar to the present design but with the ability to 
•swap foreground and background' (Fig 2). This would make it possible to impose a 
restriction allowing only "black" notes to be played, as opposed to the current 



Er|c 231 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



optional restriction involving "white" notes. The aim of this version would be to 
allow student to assess harrTiOnic resources of the pentatonic scale (e.g. tendency to 
perceive tonal centres) and compare them with those of the tonal system. 

• Just-tuned, non-repeating space version 

It is proposed that a version of Harmony Space be conitr. ted based on Longuet- 
Higgins non-repeating space, connected via MIDI to a synthesiser capable of playing 
in just intonation (e.g. a Yamaha DX7 II), to help student compare different 
characterisations of pitch. 



minor third 
step size 3 




Major third - step m& 4 ' ' 

Fig 2 Assessing the harmonic resources of the f>entatonic scale: four perfect fifth 
diads; one major and one minor triad; no privileged harmonic centre. 



♦ Performance event version 

A versions of Harmony Space similar to the present design, but with note location 
controlled by the location of people in a room or on a grid. Optionally, note names 
and key windows could be displayed on the floor using appropriate technology. The 
aim of this versions would be to allow children and other students to experience and 

ERLC ) t 7 232 



Chapter 10: Conclusions 2>ncl fuiihcr work 



control chord progressions in a principled way using their entire bodies. 

• Multitrack version with graphic playback 

A versions of Harmony Space sinriilar to the present design, but allowing chord 
sequences to be stored and subsequently played back synchronised with 
synchronised sound and graphics. This version should also allow the building up of 
multitrack recordings by permitting new tracks to be recorded while old ones are 
played back. Editing facilities would be particularly useful. Note that melodies, bass 
lines and accompaniments could be built up in this way simply by setting chord arity 
and pitch register appropriately on successive passes. In fact, given a multitrack or 
collaborative (see below) versions of Harmony Space, there is no reason why it 
should not be used for the playing, analysis and modification of polyphonic, as 
opposed to homophonic music. 

• Collaborative version 

A versions of Harmony Space similar to the present design, with multiple mice to 
allow several students to perform together, for example splitting responsibility for 
melody, bass line and accompaniment, or performing polyphonic lines. 
Responsibility could be split in various ways using multiple limbs, multiple users or 
multiple tracking. 

• Rubber band version 

A version of Harmony Space similar to the present design, but allowing chord 
sequences to be generated by preparing 'rubber-band' line-and-arrow diagrams to 
show the chord sequence 'where to go'. ('Rubberbanding' is a technique for 
drawing with a computer and pointing device that allows sequences of straight lines 
to be drawn quickly and accurately without demanding continuous physical precision 
of gesture. (For example, MacDraw is well-known drawing program that uses 
'rubber-banding' techniques.) Such a version of Harmony Space could allow a 
sequence of chords to be di*awn directiy on the screen as a liue diagram like fig 13, 
and edited quickly and easily prior to being played back. This contrasts with the 
real-time, immediately sounding methods of gestural control described so far. The 




Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



line drawings could be annotatable to record additional control infonnation such as 
chord arity and rhythmic information. This could allow complex and fast chord 
sequences to be played without a need for great dexterity. It would also be valuable if 
chord sequences not necessarily prepared in this way could be modified and edited 
using this technique. This could greatly assist in the modification f " existing pieces 
as an educational technique. 

• Version with rhythmic controllers 

A version of Harmony Space similar to the present design, but allow' ng the 
performance to be modulated by rhythmic figures selectable from an on-screen 
palette. A useful addition would be an dnun interface to allow live, complex control 
of rhythm by a second player. 

4.13 Interface design techniques to promote accessibility 

Harmony Space exemplifies and combines an unusually high density of generally 
applicable interface techniques for making abstract or inaccessible entities and 
relationships accessible. Theories of interface design are scarce, but it is suggested 
that Harmony Space provides a useful precedent for future research on interfaces 
designed to promote accessibility. Four techniques simultaneously exemplified by 
Harmony space can be identified as follows; 

• Make visible a representation underlying a theory of the domain. In the 
case of Harmony Space, C12 (J^nd the structures implicit in it) are made 
concretely visible and 'iirectly manipulable. In TPM (Eisenstadt and 
Brayshaw, 1988), the proof trees underlying Prolog execution are made 
visible (but not directly manipulable). 

• Map a task analogically from a modality in which a task is difficult or 
impossible for some class of user into another modality where it is easy or 
at least possible to perform. Apart from Harmony Space, two other 
interfaces that use this technique are Soundtrack, (Edwards, 1986) and TPM 
(Eisenstadt and Brayshaw, 1988). Soundtrack maps a WIMP graphic 
interface into the auditory modality so that blind and partially sighted users 
can use it. TPM (The Transparent Prolog Machine) dynamically maps Prolog 

ERIC 234 



Chapter 10: Conclusions and further work 



proof Gees into graphical trees, to allow relative novices to debug programs 
and understand program execution more easily. 

• Use a single, uniform, principled meta phor to render abstract, theoretical 
relationships into a form that can be concretely experienced and 
experimented with. In the case of Harmony Space, the abstractions are 
those of music theory. A striking recent example of another interface using 
this technique is ARK (the Ahemative Reality Kit) (Smith, 1987). In ARK, 
all objects represented in the interface have position, velocity and mass and 
can be manipulated and 'thrown' with a mouse-driven 'hand'. The laws of 
motion and gravity are enfoTx:ed but may be modified, allowing students to 
perform alternative universe experiments. Much of the experiences it deals 
with cannot nomially otherwise be experienced in the original modality (due 
to travel restrictions, friction and the fixity of universal constants) and must 
normally be approached using abstract fonnulae. ARK uses the abstractions 
of physics to create a world in which such local barriers can be sumwunted, 
allowing students autonomous access to purposive experiences. 

» Search for and exploit a single metaphor that allows principles of 
consistency, simplicity, reduction of short term memory load and 
exploitation nf existin g knowledge to be used. The aim is to make a task 
normally difficult for novices easy to to perform. Harmony Space does this 
(as explained in detail above), but perhaps the best known example of such 
an interface is the Xerox Star (and latteriy Macintosh) interfaces, which 
exploit a shared office metaphor and uniform commands consistently across 
a range of contexts. 

We will summarise the distribution of these techniques^ in the collection of 
interfaces noted above, making use of a table. We will use the following 
abbreviations; 

TPM the Transparent Pix)log Machine (Eisenstadt and Brayshaw, 1988), 
ARK the Alternative Reality Kit (Smith, 1987), 

^' There arc other interface design techniques Uiat pronwtc accessibility, including some without 
generally agreed nanics. 

ERIC 



Chapter 10; Conclusions and further work 



ST Soundtrack (Edwards, 1986), 
HS Harmony Space (Holland, 1988) 

In some cases, a technique is given as not used where it is used only to a slight or 
doubtful degree. 

HS TPM ARK ST XS 

Theory-based representation visualisation Y Y 
Single nietaplior direct manipulation Y Y Y Y 

Cross-modality analogical mapping Y Y 

Exploiting existing knowledge Y Y Y 

An interesting research project would be to analyse these and other highly 
empowering interfaces, witli the aim of explicitly characterising and generalising the 
techniques they use, and establishing the extent to which they can be applied to wider 
domains. 

We have presented a number of ways of using artificial intelligence to foster and 
encourage music composition by beginners, particularly those without access to 
formal instruction. We have argued that the research has implications for artificial 
intelligence and education in general, because the support of open-ended approaches 
is relevant to any complex domain. We hope that the present work will contribute to 
the new research project that we have just outlined: whose ultimate aim would be to 
devise a theoretical framework for the design of highly empowering interfaces. 



' a 

Er|c 236 



References 



Aldwell, E. and Schactcr, C. (1978) Harmony and Voice Leading. Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, Inc., New York, 

Ames, C. and Domino, M. (1988) A Cybernetic Composer Overview. Pi-oceedings 
of the First International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Music, AAAI 
1988, St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Baily, J. (1985) Music Structure and Human Movement. In Howell, P., Cross, I. 
and West, R. (1985). (Eds.) Musical Structure and Cognition, Academic Press, 
London. 

Baeker, R.M and Buxton, W.A.S. (1987) Readings in Human Computer Interaction 
Morgan Kaufman, Los Altos. 

Baker, M.J. (1988) An Architecture of an Intelligent Tutoring System for Musical 
Structure and Interpretation. Proceedings of the First International Workshop on 
Artificial Intelligence and Music, AAAI 1988, St. Paul, Minnesota. 

baker, M.J.(in press) Arguing with the tutor: a model for tutorial dialogue in 
uncertain knowledge domains. In Guided Discovery learning Systems, Ed. Elsom- 
Cook, M. Chapman and Hall, (in press). 

Balzano, G. J. (1980) The Group-theoretic Description of 12-fok- iipd Microtonal 
Pitch systems. In Computer Music Journal Vol. 4 No. 4. Winter l^oO. 

Balzano,G.J. (1982) The pitch set as a level of description for studying musical 
pitch perception. In Clynes, M. (Ed.) Music , Mind and Brain: the 
neuropsychology of music. Plenum, New York. 

Balzano, G.J. (1987) Resti-ucturing the Curriculum for design: Music, Mathematics 
and Psychology. In Machi,:" ^"diated Learning, 2: 1&2. 

Bamberger, Jeanne (1972) Dev<».loping a new musical ear: a new experime. * Logo 
Memo No. 6 (AI Memo No. 264), A.I. Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. 

Bamberger, Jeanne, (1974) Progress Report: Logo Music Project. A.I. Laboratory, 
EKIC 237 ' • ' 2 



References 



Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Bamberger, Jeanne, (1975) The development of musical intelligence I: Strategies for 
representing simple rhythms. Logo Memo 19, Epistemology and Learning Group, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Bamberger, Jeanne (1986) Music Logo. Terrapin, Inc. Cambs. Mass. 

Barr, A. and Feigenbaum, E., Ids., (1982) The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence, 
Vol. II. Pitman, I^ndon. 

Beckwith, R.S. (1975) The Interactive Music Project at York University. Technical 
report, Ontario Ministry of Education, Toronto. 

Behan, Seamus (1986) Member of rock group "Madness". Quoted in 'Keyboard 
practicing hints', 'Making Music', issue 1, April 1986. Track Record publishing 
Ltd, St Albans. 

Bjornberg, Alf (1985) On Aeolian Harmony in Contemporary popular music. 
Unpublished manuscript. 

Bloch, G. and Farrell, R. (1988) Promoting creativity through argumentation. 
Proceedings of the Intelligent tutoring systems Conference, Montreal. 

Blombach, A. (1981) An Introductory Course in Computer- Assisted Music 
Analysis: The Computer and the Bach Chorales. In Journal of Computer-based 
instruction. Vol 7 No 3 Febmary 1981. 

Brayshaw, M. and Eisenstadt, M. (1988) Adding Data and Procedural Abstraction 
to the Transparent Prolog Machine. HCRL Technical Report 31, Open University. 
Submitted to 5th Logic Programming Conference, Seattle, Washington 1988. 

Burton R.R. and Brown J.S.,1982. An Investigation of Computer coaching for 
informal learning activities. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Sleeman D. and Brown 
J.S., Eds. Academic Press 1982. 

Buxton, W., Sniderman, R., Reeves, W., Patel, S., and Baecker, R. (1979). The 
evolution of the SSSP score editing tools. Computer Music Journal 4, 1, 8-21. 

Buxton, W. Patel, S., Reeves, W. and Backer, R. (1981). Scope in Interactive 
Score Editors. Computer Music Journal, Vol. 5 No. 3 p.50-56 

Buxton, W. (1987) The Audio Channel. In Readings in Human Computer 



ERIC 



^) 3 238 



References 



Interaction, Backer, R.M. and Buxton W.A.S., Eds. Kaufmaii, Los Altos. 

Buxton, W. (1988) The "Natural " Language of Interaction : A perspective on 
non-verbal dialogues. Invited talk, Nato Advanced Study Workshop, Cranfield, 
England. 

Buxton, W. (1987) "User interfaces and Computer Music: the State-of-the-Science 
of the Art". Seminar given at the Open University, Thursday 24th September in the 
Audio Visual Room. 

Camilleri, L. (1987) Letture Critiche. In Bequadro, numero 26, anno, aprile- 
guigno 1987. 

Campbell, Laura. (1985) Sketching at the Keyboard. Stainer and Bell, London. 

Cannel, W, and Marx, F. (1976) How to play the piano despite years of lessons. 
What music is and how to make it at home. Doubleday and Company, New York. 

Carbonell, J.R. (1970) Mixed-initiative man-computer instructional dialogues. 
BBN Report No. 1971, Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc., Cambridge, Mass. 

Carbonell, J.R. (1970b) AI in CAI: an artificial intelligence approach to computer- 
aided instmction. IEEE Transactions on Man-Machine systems. MMS 11 (4): 190- 
202. 

Cassirer, E. (1944) The concept of group and the theory of perception, Philos. 
Phenomenolog. Res., 5:1-36. 

Chadabe, J. (1983) Interactive Composing. In Proceedings of the 1983 International 
Computer Music Conference. Computer Music Association, San Francisco. 

Citron, S. (1985) Song-writing. Hodder and Stoughton, London 

Clancey, W.J. (1983) The advantages of abstract control knowledge in expert 
system design. Proceedings of the national conference on expert system design, 
Washington D.C., pages 74-78. 

Clancey, W.J. and Letsinger, R. (1981) Neomycin: reconfiguring a rule-based 
expert system for application to teaching. Proceedings of the Seventh International 
Johit Conference on Aitificial Intelligence, Vancouver, pages 829-835. 

Clancey, W. J. (1987) Knowledge- Based Tutoring. The GUIDON Program. The 
MIT Press. 

239 



RcfcrciKes 



Coker, J. (1964) Improvising Jazz. Prentice Hall, New Jersey. 

Cooper, Paul (1981) Perspectives in Music theory. Haiper and Row, London. 

Cope, D. (1988) Music: The Universal Language. Proceedings of the First 
International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Music, AAAI 1988, St. Paul, 
Minnesota. 

Cork, C. ( 1988) Hamiony by Lego bricks. Tadley Ewing Publications, Leicester. 

Cross, I., Howell, P. and West, R. (1988) Lineai Salience in the perception of 
counterpoint. Presentation given at the First Symposium on Music and the Cognitive 
Sciences, IRCAM, Paris. 

Desain, Peter and Honing, Henkjan (1986) LOCO: Composition MicToworlds in 
Logo. Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference. 

Desain, P. (1986) Graphical programming in Computer Music: A .Proposal. In 
Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference. 

Deutch, D. (1982) The Cognitive Psychology of Music. Academic Press, New 
York. 

Dowling, W.J (1986) Music Cognition. Academic Press, New York. 

DuBoulay, B. (1988) Towards more versatile tutors for programming. Invited talk, 
Nato Advanced Study Workshop, Cranfield, England. 

Ebcioglu, Kemal (1986) An expert System for Harmonising Four-part Chorale;s. 
Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference. 

Edwards, A. D. N. (1986) Integrating synthetic speech with other auditory cues in 
graphical computer programs for blind users. Proceedings of the lEE International 
Conference on Speech Input and Output, London, (1986). 

Edwards, A. D. N. and O'Shea T. (1986) Making graphics-based programming 
systems usable by blind people. Interactive Learning International, 2, 3, (1986). 

Edworthy J. and Patterson, R. D.,(1985) Ergonomic factors in auditory systems. In 
Brown I. D. (Ed.), Proceedings of Ergonomics International 1985, Taylor and 
Frances, (1985). 



ERIC 



References 



Eisenstadt, M. aiid Brayshaw, M. (1988) The Transparent Prolog Machine, (TPM): 
an execution nwdel and graphical debugger for logic programming. Journal of Logic 
Programming 1988 . 

Elsom-Cook, M. (1984) Design Considerations of an Intelligent Tutoring System 
for Programming Languages, unpublished PhD, University of Warwick. 

Elsom-Cook, M. (1986) Personal communication in a tutorial with Simon Holland, 
concerning 'People Mats'. Geoffrey Gowther Building, Open University, Milton 
Keynes. 

Elsom-Cook, M. (1988) The ECAL authoring environment. Third International 
Symposium on Computer and Information Science, Ismir. 

Elsom-Cook, M (in press). (Eds.) Guided Discovery Learning Systems. Chapman 
and Hall, London. 

Eno, Brian, 1978. Oblique Strategies. Opal, London. 

Fribcrg, A. and Sundbcrg, J. (1986), Rulle. In Proceedings of the 1986 
International Computer Music Conference, Computer Music Association, San 
Francisco. 

Fry, Chris (1984) Flavours Band: A language for specifying musical style. 
Computer Music Journal Vol. 8 No. 4. 

Foss, C.L. (1987) Lcaming from errors in algebraland, Technical report IRL 87 003 
Institute for research on learning, Palo Alto. 

Forte, A. (1979) Tonal Harmony in concept and practice. Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, New York. 

Fuerzeig, W. (1986) Algebra Slaves and Agents in a Logo-based mathematics 
curriculum. In Instructional Science 14 (1986) 229-254 

Fugere, B.J., Tremblay, R. and Geleyn, L. (1988) A model for developing a 
tutoring system in Music. Proceedings of the First International Workshop on 
Artificial Intelligence and Music, AAAI 1988, St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Fux, J.J. (1725/1965) Gradus ad Pamassum. Annotated and translated by A.Mann 
and J.Edwards, Norton, New York. (First published in Vienna, 1925). 

Gaver, W. W. (1986) Auditory icons: using sound in computer interfaces, Human- 



241 



References 



Computer Interaction, 2, 2, pp 167-177, (1986). 

Gilmour, D. and Self, J. (1988). The application of machine learning to intelligent 
tutoring systems. In Self, J. (ed.) Artificial Intelligence and Human Learning 
(1988), Chapman and Hall, London. 

Goldstein, LP. (1982) The Genetic Graph: a representation for the evolution of 
procedural knowledge. In Sleeman and Brown, (eds.) Intelligent Tutoring Systems. 
Academic Press. 

Great Georges Project (1980) The Blackie Christmas Oratorio: The Birth of a 
building: Symphony In Sea 

Greenberg, Gary (1986) Computers and Music Education: A Compositional 
Approach. Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference. 

Gross, D. (1984) Computer applications to Music theory: a retrospective. Computer 
Music Journal 8,4, Winter 1984. 

CoUes, H.C. (1940) (Ed.) Groves Dictionary of Music and Musiciaiis. Macmillan 
and Co., London. 

Gutcheon, P. (1978) Improvising rock piano. Consolidated music publishers. New 
York 

Harpe, W. (1976) (Ed.) 7»UP. Great Georges Community Cultural Project (The 
Blackie) Liverpool 1, England. 

Hayes, C, and Sutherland, R. (1989) Logo Mathematics in the classroom. 
Routledge, London. 

Hofstadter, Douglas R. (1979) Godel, Escher, Bach: an eternal golden braid. 
Penguin Books, London. 

Hofstetter, F. (1975) Guido: an interactive computer-based system for improvement 
of instruction and research in ear-training. Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 
Vol l,No. 4, pages 100-106. 

Hofstetter, F. (1981) Computer-based aural training: the Guido system. Journal of 
Comf)uter-Based Instruction, Vol 7, No. 3, pages 84-92. 

HM Inspectorate (1985). Music from 5-16 (Curriculum Matters 4). HMSO, 
London. 



^^')7 242 



References 



Holland, S. (1984) Unfolding explanations at appropriate levels of detail. 
Unpublished MSc Thesis. Department of Psychology, University of Warwick. 

Holland (1984b) Can machines really learn new knowledge? Unpublished 
manuscript. Department of Psychology, University of Warwick, 

Holland, S. (1985) "How computers are used in the teaching of music and 
speculations about how artificial intelligence could be applied to radically improve 
the learning of composition skills". OU lET CITE Report No. 6. 

Holland, S. (1986a) Speculations about how Artificial Intelligence could be applied 
to contribute to the learning of music composition skills. In MSB Quarterly, Spring 
1986. 

Holland, S. (1986b) "Design considerations for a human computer interface using 
12-tonc three-dimensional Harmony space to aid novices to learn aspects of 
harmony and composition" OU lET CITE report no. 7. 

Holland, S. (1987a) Direct Manipulation tools for novices based on new cognitive 
theories' of harmony, pp 182 -189 Proceedings of 1987 International Computer 
Music Conference. 

Holland, S. (1987b) Computers in Music education. In "Computers in Education 5- 
13" (1987) Eds. Jones, A. and Scrimshaw, P. Open University Press, Milton 
Keynes. 

Holland, S. (1987c) "A knowledge-based tutor for music composition" OU lET 
CITE Report No. 16. 

Holland (1987d) "A knowledge-based tutor for music composition". Talk presenced 
at the Third International Conference on AI and Education, LRDC, Pittsburgh, 
1987. 

Holland, S. (1988) "New issues in applying two cognitive theories of harmony" 
Poster presentation at International Symposium on Music and tlie Cognitive Sciences 
IRCAM (Institute de Recherche et Coordination Acoustique/Musique) Paris 14-18 
March 1988. 

Holland, S. and Elsom-Cook, M. (in press) Architecture of a knowledge- based tutor 
for music composition. In Guided Discovery Learning Systems, Ed. Elsom-Cook, 
M. Chapman and Hall, (in press). 



ERIC 



243 Idr^S 



Refcxences 



Honing, Henkjan (1989) Personal communication. Telephone call by Henkjan fiom 
Lewisham to the author at the Open University concerning a reference for Miller 
Puckette's Patcher. and comments on a draft of Part II. 

Howell. P., Cross. I. and West. R. (Eds.). (1985). Musical Structure and 
Cognition. Academic Press. Lx)ndon. 

Huron. David (1988) The perception of polyphony. Presentation given at the First 
Symposium on Music and the Cognitive Sciences. IRCAM. Paris. 

Hutchins. E.L.. Hollans. J.D. and Norman. D.A. (1986) "Direct Manipulation 
Interfaces" in Norman. D.A. and Draper. S. (Eds.). User Centred System Design: 
New perspectives on Human Computer Interaction. Erlbaurn. Hillsdale. NJ. 

Illich, Ivan. 1976. Deschooling society. Pelican. London. 

Jairazbhoy. N. (1971) The ragas of North Indian music. Wesleyan University 
Press. Middletown. 

Johnson-Laird. P. N. (1988) The computer and the mind. Fontana. London. 

Johnson-Laird. P. N. (1989) Personal communication. Intervention from the 
audience during seminar entitied"Harmony Space", given by S.Holland. 31st 
January 1989. in the Cambridge University "Seminai- on Music and Mind" series at 
the University Music School. 

Jones. Kevin (1986) Real Time Stochastic Composition and Performance with 
Ample. Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference. 

Jones. Kevin (1984) Exploring Music with the BBC micro and Electron. Pitman. 
London. 

Jones. Barry (1989) Personal communication. Criticisms of draft of chapter 9 kindly 
made' to the author by Dr. Jones in his office in tiie Music Department, Open 
University, third week of July 1989. 

Kasner. E. and Newman. J. (1968) Mathematics and the Imagination. Pelican 
Books, London. 

Kilmer. A.D.. Crocker. R.L. and Brown. R.R. (1976) Sounds from silence: recent 
discoveries in ancient Near East music. Bit Enki Publications. Berkely. 

Krumhansl, C.L. <1979) The psychological representation of musical pitch in a tonal 

ERIC ,^ 244 



References 



context. Cognitive Psychology, 1979, 11, 346-374. 

Krumhansl, C.L. (1987) Formal properties of various scale systems. Second 
Conference on Science and Music, City University, London. 

Kurland, D.M., Pea, R.D., Clement, C, and Mawby, R. (1986) A study of the 
development of programming ability and thinking skills in high school students. 
Journal of Educational Computing Research. Vol 2, No. 4 1986 pp429-458. 

Lamb, Miulin (1982) An interactive G aphical Modeling Game for teaching Musical 
Concepts. In Journal of Computer- Based Instruction Autum 1982. 

Laske, O.E. (1978) Considering human memory in designing user interfaces for 
computer music In Computer Music Journal 2,4, 39-45. 

Laske, O.E (1980) Towards explicit Cognitive Therry of Musical Listening 
Computer Music Journal Vol 4,2, pp73-83 

Laurillard D M, (1988) Evaluating the contribution of information technology to 
students' learning. In Proceedings of the Conference Evaluating IT in Aits and 
Humanities Courses, Birmingham, May 1988. 

Lenat D.B. and Brown J,S. (1984) Why AM and Eurisko appear to work. In 
Artificial Intelligence 21 31-59. 

Lenat, D.B. (1982) EURISKO: A program that learns new heuristics and domain 
concepts. In Artificial Intelligence 21, pp 61-98. 

Lerdahl, Fred and Jackendoff, Ray (1983) A Generative Theoi7 of Tonal Music. 
MIT Press, London. 

Lerdahl, F. and Potard, Y. (1985) A computer aid to composition. Unpublished 
Manuscript. 

Levitt, D.A. (1981) A Melody Description System for for Jazz Improvisation. 
Unpublished Master's Thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, Massachusetts In.stiiute of Technology. 

Levitt, David (1984) Constraint Languages. In Compute Music Journal Vol. 8, 
No.l. 

Levitt, D.A. (1985) A Representation for Musical Dialects. Unpublished PhD 
Thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts 



245 



References 



Institute of Technology. 

Levitt, D. H and Joffe, E. (1986). Harmony grid .Computer software, MIT. 

Longuet-Higgins, H.C. (1962) Letter to a Musical Friend. In Music Review, 
August 1962 pp 244-248. 

Longuet-Higgins, H.C. (1962b) Second Letter to a Musical Friend. In Music 
Review, Novembwr 1962. 

Longuet-Higgins and Lee (1984) The rhythmic interpretation of monophonic music. 
In Music Perception Vol 1 No. 4 424-441 
(chapter 1 page 7) 

Loy, G. (1985) Musicians make a standard: The MIDI phenomenon. Computer 
Music Journal 9(4), 8-26. 

Loy and Abbott, (1985) Programming Languages for Computer Music Synthesis, 
Performance and Composition. In ACM Computing Surveys Volume 17, No. 2 
June 1985, Special Issue on Computer Music. 

Mc Adams, S. (1987) "Organisational Processes in Musical Listening. Talk at 
Second Conference on Science and Music, City University, September 19th 1987. 

McAdams, S. and Bregman, A. (1985). Hearing Musical Streams. In The 
Foundations of Computer Music', Eds. Roads C. and Strawn, J. MIT Press, 
London. 

Making Music (1986) Three chord trick. Issue 3 June 1986 (and associated series) 
Track record publishing Ltd. London 

Mathews, M.V. with Abbott, C.A. (1980) The Sequential Drum. In Computer 
Music Journal Vol 4, No 4 Winter 1980. 

Mehegan, J. (1959) Jazz Improvisation i: Tonal and Rhythmic Principles. Watson- 
Guptil Publications, New York. 

Mehegan, J. (1960) The Jazz Pianist: Book Two. Sam Fox Publishing Company, 
London. 

Mehegan, J. (1985) Improvising Jazz piano. Amsco publications. New York 
Minsky, Marvin (1981) Music, Mind and Meaning. In Computer Music Journal 



References 



Vol.5 No.3 p.28 - 44 

Minsky, Marvin (1981b) A framework for representing knowledge. In Haugeiand, 
J. (Ed) Mind design, The ^*JT press, Cambridge Mass. 

Morely, T. (1597) A plain and easy introduction to Practical Music. (Ed. Harman, 
R.A. (1952) Dent, London. 

Moyse, R. (1989) Knowledge negotiation implies multiple viewpoints. Proceedings 
of 4th Intemational Conference on AI and Education. lOS, Amsterdam. 

Nelson, T. (1974) Computer Lib/Dream Machines. The Computer Bookshop, 
Birmingham. 

Newcomb, Stephen R. (1985) LASSO: An intelligent Computer Based Tutorial in 
Sixteenth Century Counterpoint. In Computer Music Journal Vol. 9 No.4. 

Orlarey, Yann (1986) MLOGO - a MIDI Composing Environment for the Apple He. 
In, Proceedings of Intemational Computer Music Conference. Computer Music 
Association, San Francisico. 

O'Shea, Tim and Self, John (1983). Learning and Teaching with Computers. 
Prentice-Hall, London. 

O'Shea, T., Evcrtz, R., Hennessey, S., Floyd, A., Fox, M. and Elsom Cook, 
M. (1987) Design Choices for an intelligent arithmetic tutor. Published in Self, J. 
(Ed.) Intelligent Computer Assisted Instruction. Methuen/Chapman & Hall. 

O'Malley, C.E. (in press) Graphical irteraction and Guided Discovery Learning, 
Ed. Elsom-Cook, M. Chapman and Hall, (in press). 

Papert, S. (1980) Mindstorms. The Harvester Press, Brighton. 

Paynter, J. (1982) Music in the secondary School curriculum. Cambridge 
University Press, London. 

Pierce, J.R. (1983) The Science of Musical Sound, Scientific American Books, 
New York 

Pope, S.T. (1986) The Development of an Intelligent Composer's Assistant 
Interactive Graphics Tools and Knowledge Representation for Music. Proceedings 
of Intemational Computer Music Conference. 



ERIC 



247 2r,'> 



References 



Pearson, G. and Weiscr, M. (1986) Of moles and men: the design of foot controls 
for work-stations. In proceedings of the International ^^onference of computers and 
Human Interaction (CHI) 1986. ACM/SIGCHI, Boston. 

Pennycook, B.W. (1985a) Computer-Music Interfaces - a Survey, In ACM 
Computing Surveys, Vol. 17 No 2 June 1985. 

Pennycook, B.W. (1985b) The role of graphics in computer-aided music instruction 
(part 1). In the Joumal of the electroacoustic msuc association of Great Britain, Vol. 
1 No 3 1985. 

Pennycook, B.W. (1985c) The role of graphics in computer-aided music instruction 
(part 2). In the Joumal of the electroacoustic msuc association of Great Britain, Vol. 
1 No 4 1985. 

Pratt, G. (1984). The Dynamics of Harmony. Open University Press, Milton 
Keynes. 

Puckette, M. (1988) The Patcher. Proceedings of the International Computer Music 
conference 1988. Feedback papers 33, Feedback Studio Verlag, Cologne. 

Pulfer, J.K. (1971) Man-machine interaction in creative applications. International 
Joumal of Man-machine Studies, 3, 1-11. 

Reck, David (1977) Music of the Whole Earth. Scribner's, New York. 

Rich, E.A. (1979) User Modelling via stereotypes. Cognitive Science 3 pp 329- 
354. 

Richer, M.H. and Clancey, W.J. (1985). GUIDON_WATCH: a graphic interface 
for viewing knowledge-based systems. IEEE Computer GRaphics and Applications, 
Vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 51-64 

Roads, C. (1981) Report on the IRCAM Conference: The Composer and the 
Computer. In Computer Music Journal Vol. 5 No. 3. 

Roads, C. (1984) An overview of mub.c representations. In Olschki, L.S., (Ed.) 
Proceedings of the Conference on Music grammars and Computer Analysis. 
Quademi della Rivista Italiana di Musicilogia, Firenze. 

Roads, C. (1985) Research in Music and Artificial Intelligence. In ACM Computing 
Surveys, Vol. 17 No 2 June 85. 



ERIC 



' ' ' J 248 



References 



Roads, C. and Strawn, J. (1985) (Eds) The Foundations of Computer Music. MIT 
Press, Cambridge Mass. 

Rodet, X. and Cointe.P. (1984) Formes: imposition and Scheduling of 
Processes. In Computer Music Journal 8,3 pp 32-50. 

Rosen, C. (1971) The Classical Style. Faber, London. 

Rutter. J. (1977) Principles of form. (The Elements of Music, Unit 13). The Open 
University Press, Milton Keynes. 

Sanchez, M., Joseph, A., Dannenberg, R., Miller,P., Capell,P. and Joseph,R. 
(1987). Piano tutor: An Intelligent Keyboard Instruction System. Proceedings of the 
First Intemational Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Music, AAAI 1988, St. 
Paul, Minnesota. 

Schoenberg, A. (1954) Structural functions of Harmony. Ernest Benn Ltd, London. 

Schoenberg, A. (1967) Fundamentals of music composition. Faber and Faber, 
London. 

Scholz, Carter (1989) Notation software ahead: proceed with caution. In Keyboard, 
April 1989. 

Self, J. A. (1974) Student models in computer-aided instruction, Intemational 
Journal of Man-machine studies. Vol. 6, pp. 261 - 276. 

Self, J. (1987) (Ed.) Intelligent Computer Assisted Instruction. Methuen/Chapman 
& Hall, London. 

Self, J. A., (1988) The use of belief systems for student modelling. Internal 
CERCLE report. University of Lancaster 

Self, J. A. (1988a) (Ed) Artificial Intelligence and Human Learning. Intelligent 
Computer- Aided Instruction. Chapman and Hall, London. 

Shai-ples, Mike (1983) The use of Computers to Aid the Teaching of Creative 
Writing. In AEDS Journal 

Shepard, R.N. (1982) Structural representation of musical pitch. In The psychology 
of music (D. Deutch, Ed.) Academic press. New York. 



ERIC 



Shneidcrman, B. (1982). The future of interactive systems and the emergence of 

249 



References 



direct manipulation. Behaviour and Information Technology 1 237-256. 

Simon, H. and Sumner, R. (1968) Pattern in music. In Formal Representations of 
Human Judgement. B. Kleinmutz, Ed Wiley, New York. 

Sleeman D. and Brown J.S.(1982) (Eds) Intelligent Tutoring Systems. Academic 
Press 1982. 

Sloane, B., Levitt, D. Travers, M. So, B. and Cavero, I (1986). Hookup 0.80. 
Prototype undistributed computer software for the Apple Macintosh. Media 
Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge, Mass. 

Sloboda, J. (1985). The Musical Mind: The Cognitive Psychology of Music. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford. 

Smith, D.C., Irby,C., Kimball, R., Verplank, W., and Harslem, E. (1982) 
Designing the Star User Interface. Byte 7(4), April 1982 242-282. 

Smith, R.B. (1987) "Experiences with the Alternate Reality Kit: An example of the 
tension between literalism and Magic". Proceedings of the Conference on Human 
Factors in Computer Systems, Toronto, April, 1987. 

Smoliar, S. (1980) A computer aid for Schenkerian analysis. In Computer Music 
Journal 4,2. 

Sorisio, L. (1987) Designing an Intelligent Tutoring System in Harmony. 
Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference, Computer Music 
Association, San Francisco. 

Spensley, F. and Elsom-Cook, M. (1988). Dominie: Teaching and assessment 
sti-ategies. Open University CAL Research Group Technical Report No. 74, Milton 
Keynes, Great Britain. 

Spiegel, L. (1981) Manipulations of musical patterns In Proceedings of the 1981 
Symposium on small computers in the arts. IEEE. 

Spiegel, L. (1986) Music Mouse (Computer software for Apple Macintosh). Opcode 
systems. 

Steedman, M. (1972) The formal description of musical perception . Unpublished 
Phd, University of Edinburgh, 



ERIC 



Steedman, M. (1984) A generative grammar for jazz chord sequences. Music 

i , ; ) 250 



References 



Perception 2:1. 

Stevens A., Collins A. (1977) The Goal Structure of a Socratic Tutor, in 
Proceedings of the ACM Annual Conference. 

Stevens A., Collins A., Goldin S.E. (1982) Misconceptions in Student's 
Understanding , in D.H.Slecman, J.S.Brown (eds) Intelligent tutoring systems, pp. 
13-24, Academic Press. 

Sudnow, D. (1978) "Ways of the hand: the organisation of improvised conduct." 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, Lx)ndon. 

Sussman, G.J. and Steele G.L. (1980) Constraints: A language for expressing 
almost hierarchical descriptions . AI Journal, Vol 14 (1980), pi -39 

Tanner, P. (1971) Some programs for the computer generation of polyphonic 
music. Report ERB-862, National Research Council, Ottowa, Canada. 

Tobias, J. (1988) Knowledge Representation in the Hannony Intelligent Tutoring 
System. Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence 
and Music, AAAI 1988, St. Paul, Minnesota. 

Todd, N. (1985) A model of expressive timing in tonal music. Music Perception, 
3:1 

Thomas, Marilyn Taft (1985) VIVACE: A rule-based AI system for composition. In 
Proceedings of the 1985 International Computer Music Conference, Computer 
Music As.'>ociation, San Francisco. 

Truax, B. (1977) The POD system on interactive composition programs. Computer 
Music Journal 1,3, 30-39. 

Twidale, M.B.(1988) Explicit planning and instantiation as a means to facilitating 
student-computer dialogue. Proceedings of the European Congress on Artificial 
Education and Training, Lille. 

Twidale, M.B. (1989) Intermediate representations for student error diagnosis and 
support. Proceedings of 4th International Conference on AI and Education . lOS, 
Amsteniam. 

Vercoe, B. (1975) Man-Machine interaction in creative applications. Experimental 
Music Studio, Massachussetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass. 



ERIC 



251 <!f;n 



References 



Watkins, J. and Dyson, Mary C. (1985) On the perception of tone sequences and 
melodies. In Howell, Peter, Cross, Ian, and West, Robert (Eds.) Musical Structure 
and Cognition, Academic Press, London. 

Weber, G. (1817) G'rans. 1851) Theory of Musical Composition London: Cocks. 

Wenger, E. (1987) Artificial Intelligence and Tutoring Systems. Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers Inc., Los Altos, California. 

Wilding- White, R. (1961) "Tonality and Scale theory". Journal of Music Theory 
5:275-286. 

Winograd, T. (1968) Linguistics and the Computer Analysis of Harmony. Journal 
of Music Theory, 12. Pages 2-49. 

Winsor, P. (1987) Computer a;isisted music composition. Petrocelli Books, 
Princetown. 

Winston, P. (1984) Artificial Intelligence. Addison-Wesley, London. 

Wittgenstein, L. (196 1/1922) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, London. 

Wright, J.K. (1986) Auditory object perception: counterpoint in a new context. 
Unpublished MA Tliesis, Faculty of Music, McGill University. 

Xenakis, 1. (1971). Formalised Music.Indiana University Pre^s, Bloomington. 

Xenakis, I. (1985) Music Composition Treks. In Roads, C. (1985) Composers and 
the Computer. Kaufmann, Los Altos. 

Zicarelii, D. (1987). M and Jam Factory. In Computer Music Journal, Vol. 1 1, No. 
4, Winter 1987 

Zimmerman, T.G., Lanier, J., Blanchard, C, Bryson, S. and Harvill, Y. (1987) 
A Hand Gesture Interface Oevice. In proceedings of the Conference on Computer 
Human Interaction, ACM. 



252 



Referefices 



Musical references 



Bach, J, S.(1968/~1722) Bach's prelude No 1 in C Major from the 48 Preludes and 
Fugues. Kalmus, New York. (Written around 1722.) 

Berry, Chuck (1958) "Johnny B. Goode". Jewel Music, London (Chappell). Chess 
1691. 

Bowie, David (1983) "Let's Dance". EMI Mu.sic, London. 

Clapton, Eric (1970) "Layla". Tliroat Music, London. 

Collins, Phil (1981) "In the Air Tonight". Hit and Run Music, London. 

Collins, Phil (1984) "Easy Lover", (Phil Collins, Phil Bailey and Mason East) 
MCA, Wamer-Chappell, Hit and Run, London. First released 1985. 

Coltrane, John (1959) "Giant Steps". Atlantic 1311. 

Crawford, Randy (1978) "Sti«et Life". Performed by Randy Crawford and The 
Crusaders, MCA 513. Written by Joe Sample and Will Jennings. Published by 
Rondor and Wamer-Chappell, London. 

Davis, Miles (1959) "So What" on LP "Kinda Blue". Columbia, CL 1355 

Dylan, Bob (1968) "All along the Watchtower". Feldman, EMI, London. 

Dire Straits (1978) "Sultans of Swing". Su^ght-Jacket/ Rondor, London 

Gershwin, George and Ira (1930) "I Got Rhytlun". New World Music Corporation, 
New York. 

Lcnnon McCartney (1968) Birthday. The White Album. BIEM 8E 164 04 174A 

Jobim, C.A. and Moracs, V. 0 963) "Girl from Ipanema". MCA Music, I^ndon. 
Gn Getz, S. and Gilberto. A. (1963) Verve 68545. 



References 

Hartley, Keef (1969) "OuUaw" on LP "Half-Breed". Deram SML 1037. 

HeiKirix, Jiini (1980 re-issue) "Hey Joe" (popular arr. Jimi Hendrix). Polydor 
2608001. 

Hawkins, P., Holland, S., and Clarke, C. (1980) "Fox". © Ex post Facto. 8, 
Second Avenue, Liverpool 9. 

Jackson. Michael (1982 ) "BilHe Jean", on "Thriller". CBS Inc/Epic. 

Kei-n-Hammerstein "All The Thmgs You are". Chappell & Co. and T.B. Harms. 

Millei-, Steve (1984)"Abracadabra", Wamer-Chappell (music publishers), London. 

Soft Machine (1970) "Out-Bloody-Rageous" (Ratledge, M) on LP Soft Machine 
"Third". CBS 66246. 

Police (1979) "Message in a Bottle" (Sting). Virgin Music. Issued on LP "Regatta 
de Blanc". 

Rogers, R. and Hart, L.(~1934) "The lady is a tramp". Chappell, London. First 
Frank Sinatra recording, 1956. 

Steely Dan (1974) "Pretzel Logic" on LP "Pretzel Logic". ABC, ABCL 5045 

Taj Mahal (-1968) "Six Days on Tlie Road" on "Fill Your Head with Rock" 
(various artists) CBS records. 

Youmans, Harbach, Caesar (1924) "Tea for Two". Harms, Inc. 

Walsh (1976) "I don't need another girl like you" © John Walsh, 54 Bradbury 
Road, Solihull. 

Wonder, Stevie (1973) "Living for die City" on LP "Inner Visions". Tamla Motown 
STMA 8011. 

Wonder, Stevie (1976) "Isn't she lovely" Jobete Music Co. Inc. and Black Bull 
Music Inc. On LP 'Songs in the Key of Life', Motown STML 60022. 



ERIC 



254 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 



This appendix describes the prototype implementation of Harmony Space. 

Apart from the limitations and bugs discussed, the prototype satisfies the core 
abstract design of Harmony Space given in Chapter 5, in the Balzano 
configuration. But the abstract design is only concerned with design decisions at 
the level of abstraction of chapter 5 section 3.1. To build a particular 
implementation that satisfies the abstract design, decisions must be taken about 
such matters as the layout of menus used to conuol secondary functions and what 
controller is used to control particular pointing functions. 

Since the prototype was originally intended to demonstrate the expressivity of the 
core abstract design, and not to carry out investigations with novices, the 
secondary functions in the prototype were implemented in a relatively easy-to- 
program fashion, regardless of their user-hostile, non-DM style. 

We begin with an illustrated overview of the appearance and method of use of the 
prototype!. We then quickly summarise technical details of the implementation 
(hardware employed, etcetera). FoUowing this, we look at the limitations and 
scope for improvement of the interface. Finally, we give a summary list of all of 
the commands supported. There are numerous iilustrations and diagrams referred 
to, to be found at the end of this appendix. 



1 General appearance and operation of prototype. 

Wc start with a quic k general overview of the appearance and metliod of use of 

! Note - the material in this appendix inevitably overlaps to some extent material 
already seen in Chapter 5 and appendix 2. Identical or almost identical wording is used in 
parts, although the descripUon is carefully tailored here to refer to the prototype 
implementation as opposed to the notional or minimal version. 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 

the Harmony Space prototype. This overview draws on the account of Harmony 
Space already presented in Chapter 5, but with changes to tailor the description to 
the prototype exactly as implemented. Note that the prototype employs the 
Balzano theory of Chapter 7 rather than the Longuet-Higgins' theory of Chapter 
5. This makes a difference to the configuration of notes on the screen and the 
shape of the key- windows. 

A screen dump of the Harmony Space window in the Harmony Space prototype 
is shown in Fig 1. The Harmony Space window consists of a two-dimensional 
grid of circles, each circle representing a note. The notes are arranged in 
ascending major thirds (semitone steps of size 4) on the x-axis, and in ascending 
minor thirds (semitone steps of size 3) on the y-axis. As described in chapters 5 
and 7, the notes of the diatonic scale 'clump' into box shaped regions on the 
screen. 'Key windows' are used to mark out these diatonic areas on the screen in 
white (Fig 1) 2. The key windows can be slid as a group over the fixed grid of 
circles by means of the vertical, horizortal and diagonal arrow keys. (Figs 6,7 
and 8 are screen dumps showing three different positions of the key window 
corresponding to the keys of the tonic, mediani and dominant of the starting key 
re<'pectively.) A mouse is used to move the cursor around in the window. If tlie 
mouse button is pressed while the cursor is over a note circle, the circle lights up 
and the corresponding note sounds audibly. Letting go of the button normally 
causes the circle to go dark again, and is like letting go of a synthesiser key - the 
sound stops or decays appropriately (depending on the synthesiser voice currently 
selected ^ and how it responds to a midi note-off command). Similarly, if the 
button is kept depressed and the mouse is swept around, the appropriate 
succession of new notes is sounded and appropriately completed as the mouse 
enters and moves the note circles (but see the section on limitations, below). 

2 This is how the key areas are shaded in the prototype. Other tilings being equal, it 
appears to be a good rule to shade the key windows white and the chromatic areas dark, so 
as to echo the arrangement of black and white keys on a piano. This might marginally 
help skill transfer from Harmony Space to keyboards, given a keyboard display as in 
appendix 20. For technical reasons to do with the the difficulty of printing large expanses 
of black, wc have presented the screen dumps here inverted black-for white. Since the 
actual screen dumps are over 1Mb each in size - too large to include in the thesis document 
- ihey have been redrawn manually. 

3 This is done externally at the synthesiser, though it would be trivial to arrange for 
patch selection to be done in some other way. 



Appendix 1: liarmony Space prototype unplementation 



More generally, the mouse can be set to control the location of the root of a diad, 
triad, seventh or ninth chord. (We have called the number of notes in a chord the 
chord 'arity', borrowing from mathematical usage.) For any given chord arity, 
depressing the mouse button on a root causes all of the notes of the appropriate 
chord to light up and sound. (Fig 1 shows a I major triad being sounded in this 
way on the prototype.) 

Apart from the mouse and arrow keys, other functions in the prototype are 
controlled by a set of function keys. (See figs 2 and 3 for diagrams showing the 
functions of the various control keys. Ing 2 is an overview of the layout, while 
Fig 3 shows the function of each key. There is also a summary list of key 
functions at the end of this appendix.) For reasons already indicated, the key- 
function mappings in the prototype are more or less arbitrary, cushioned by token 
attempts to make mncmonically helpful mappings. The prototype allows the user 
to select (by pressing the appropriate buttons - see figs 2 and 3) whether she 
wants (until further notice) chords of arity one, two, three, four, five, etcetera, 
(i.e., single notes, diads, triads, sevenths, ninths). In normal use, the prototype 
chooses the quality of each chord automatically in accordance with tlie prevailing 
chord-arity and the current location of the root relative to the current position of 
the key window. As different chord roots are triggered, the qualities of the 
chords vary appropriately according to the position of the root within the scale. 
So, for example, the chord on the tonic is normally a major triad (or major 
seventh if we have a prevailing chord-arity of sevenths) and the chord on the 
supertonic is normally a minor triad (or minor seventh if the arity is sevenths). We 
refer to chord qualities assigned in this way as the default chord qualities for the 
relevant arity and degree of the scale. This automatic assignment of quality to 
chords can be overridden in the prototype at any time by selecting the desired 
quality using the function keys (see figs 2 and 3). Such a manually selected 
quality affects only a single chord event - the very next one. After that, the 
assignments revert to die prevailing defaults, unless overidden again. 

As we noted in Chapter 5, although the chord quality is nonnally chosen 
automatically in tiiis way, the constraining effects of the walls of die key window 
provide a visible 'explanation' for the way in which the qualities are chosen. In 

erIc 3 



Appendix 1: Harmony Spac« prototype implemcntatioA 



particular, the traditional rule for constructing 'scale-tone' chord quahtics for any 
chord-arity on any degree of the diatonic scale (namely the 'stacking thirds' rule) 
has an exact visual analog on the screen of the prototype. I ^^ual terms, the 
next note in the chord must always be chosen in the outward-going sense along 
whichever axis (north or east) the key window permits at that point. (The diatonic 
scale is such that there is always only one choice.) Fig 4 is a screen dump from 
the prototype that illustrates just this. It shows a chord being built up from a 
single note to a diad, third, seventh and ninth chord on tlie same root. (Normally, 
a chord is erased from the screen automatically when the triggering mouse button 
is released, but we have used an option (see figs 2 and 3) to leave a trace on the 
screen.) The two pointing devices (mouse and arrow keys for chords and key 
window respectively) in conjunction with the visible constraint metaphor make 
the prototype a powerful tool for the physical control of chord sequences by 
novices. With the two pointing devices the user can, for example, repeatedly play 
a chord root while moving the key window, and the chord quality will change 
appropriately. (Exactly this point is iUustrated by figs 6,7 and 8. As the key 
window is moved from tonic to mediant to dominant, successive soundings of a 
chord of arity seventh on G are shown changing quality automatically from major 
seventh to minor seventh to half-diminished seventh.) 

Alternative mappings of degree of scale to chord quality are also implemented in 
the proiotype. For example, there are schemes implemented for dealing with the 
harmonic minor mode and dorian mode. Such alternative chord quality schemes 
can be selected until further notice simply by pressing the appropriate quality 
scheme key (see figs 2 and 3). Fig 5 shows a V chord being played in a minor 
key with the chord quality scheme for the harmonic minor in operation. Tb s 
causes the V chord to be played as a cadential dominant - with the sharpened third 
of the modified chord visib / sticking outside the bounds of the key window. 
Apart from the automatic selection or momentary overiding of chord qualities, the 
other way of dealing with chord quality supported by the prototype is to fix chord 
quality until further notice (see Figs 2 and 3). We now complete tliis general 
overview by quickly noting the main other features of interest of the prototype, 
which are as follows. Chords are played in their root position. All of the roots 
are mapped into the compass of a single octave, with the rest of the chord in close 

ERIC , 



A^ndix 1; Harmony Space prototype implementation 

position on top of the root. The octave into which the roots ai*e mapped can be 
varied by means of function keys (see figs 2 and 3). Roots outside of the key 
windcw (chromatic roots) can be muted or associated with aiiy fixed arbitrary 
chord quality until further notice (see figs 2 and 3). The display can be adjusted 
either to show all noti^s of every chord, or the roots only. The display can also be 
adjusted so that the trail of roots that have been previously played are 
automatically erased as the chords are released (this is the norm), or left on the 
screen to show the history of the progression. (Fig 9 shows a screen dump from 
the prototype resulting from playing the chord sequence of 'Street Life' 
(Crawford, 19'' 8) (see chapter 8 for the chord sequence) with the 'show root 
only' and 'leave trace' roots both engaged: the extended cycle of fifths 
progression is clearly visible. This completes the overview of the implemented 
prototype of Harmony Space. For diagrams of the command keys, see figs 2 and 
3. For a listed summary of the key functions, see the end of this appendix. 

2 Technical details of implementation 

The prototype is implemented in Lucid Common Lisp and its object-oriented 
extension 'Flavours' using the DOMAIN Graphics Primitives Routines package 
(GPR) on an Apollo Domain DN3(X) workstation controlling a Yamaha TX816 
synthesizer via a Hinton MIDIC RS232-to-MIDI converter. A simple midi driver 
for the Apollo was written in Pascal, and numerous low-level graphics routines 
were written in Lisp. 

3 Limitations of implementation 

The major limitations of the implementation are as follows. All of these are trivial, 
easily fixable problems from a programming point of view. The reason for 
documenting them rather than fixing them is that time constraints rule out the 
mechanical but laborious programming required to address them. Some of the 
bugs may seem too trivial to document, but they are recorded because they are far 
from trivial from the user's point of view. Some of them drastically affect the ease 
with which novices can currentiy use the prototype (see chapter 9). (To see an 
example of what a version of the interface might look like with some of these 
trivial but irritating problems addressed, see appendix 2.) 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space proioiype implementation 

Non-existent note labelling. The note circles are not labelled at all. Ideally it 
should be possible to dynamically select from a choic; of labellings for the note 
circles. Three obvious options would be alphabetic note names, degrees of the 
scale or semitone numbers. (Sec appendix 2.) 

Some states and possible clioices of state are not visible. There are no menus on 
screen to show possible choices of arity, chord quality and so forth. Shnilarly, 
there is no display (menu or otherwise) to show which of these states is currently 
selected. (See appendix 2 for a possible system of menus.) 

Registration and misstriggering. The note circles as drawn, compared with as 
detected, are not quite in alignment. Occasionally the wrong chord triggers. It 
should be possible to play a sequence of notes in a single gesture by playing one 
note, keeping the cursor depressed, and playing any sequence of notes by 
threading through the spaces between the note circles and across chosen note 
circ'es. As the prototype stands, this can be done with a series of mouse button 
depressions, but not in a single, fluid gesture. The sensing radius of the note 
circles seem to be too large, and when sweeping out sequences with the button 
fixed down, the motse continually bumps into unintended note circles. A related 
bug is when chords with chromatic roots have been muted and the mouse is 
swept with the button held down, for some reason the chromatic roots sound (this 
does not occur if each root is releas&d before trying to phy the next one). 

Speed of response. It appears to take around 250 milliseconds for Harmony 
Space to respond to a mouse button depression. The prototype pauses once every 
few hundred events or so for half a minute foi garbage collection. The fastest that 
the prototype can retrigger a chord is about once every half-second. If the button 
is held down anO swept aiound, chords are produced slightly faster than one per 
second. Subjectively, the cursor seems to move in a slightly treacle-like fashion, 
and does not always seem to niove exactly where it is directed. A response time of 
around 25 to 50 times faster would be adequate, since for many musical 
purposes, events separated by IC milliseconds are perceived as instantaneous. 
Now that an exploratory prototype has been built, it would not U- hprd to addres 
the speed pTOblem by this factor simply by recoding m tly - for 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 

example by declaring arrays and vectors and avoiding unnecessary message 
passing that was useful for the design and debugging phase. 

Faults in trace mechanism. As we have already noted, it is possible in the 
prototype to have the whole chord displayed or the roots displayed only. It is 
similarly possible to have each chord erased immediately after it is played or left 
as a permanent trace. However there are one or two related shortcomings in these 
features as implemented. Firstly, due to a minor bug, it does not seem to be 
possible to get a permanent trace when the chord arity is one. Secondly, when lit- 
up note-circle traces arc left, they are not really left permanently - they are simply 
not erased. Unfortunately, this means that if a note that has already been sounded 
is sounded again, then the trace becomes erased at that point."* 

Lack of multiple pointing devices The use of one mouse to control root position, 
and function keys to control all other functions is very limiting. For a better 
notional arrangement of controllers, see appendix 2. 

Lack of control of inversion, spacing and doubling. All chords are currently 
sounded in a close position. This can sound a bit wearying. See appendix 2 for 
some simple possible refinements. 

Lack of control of position of octave break. All of the roots are mapped into the 
currently selected octave, but the tonic may not be not the lowest note in the range 
in all keys. It should be possible to arrange the 'fold point" of the octave 
arbitrarily, and experiment with other schemes that do not map all of the roots into 
a single octave. 

Chord quality schemes for common modes not linked to window shape,;. Only 
the major mode key window shape is currently inplemented. It would be useful to 
implement a harmonic minor window shape to go with and motivate t ie hainionic 
minor chord quality scheme, as described in Appendix 2. 



^ The reason for this will probably be familiar to anyone who has programmed graphics 
in a hurry. The note circles are Uluminated and then erased by copying tlit.n once, p"<d ihi r 
twice, in standard graphics XOR transfer mode. The bug vould be trivial to fix 



Appendix 1: Hannony Space prciotypc implementation 

4 Simple ways of improving the Harmony Space prototype 

Apart from addressing the trivial programming bugs and missing features 
documented above, there are a number of simple measures that could greatly 
improve the usefulness of Harmony Space. An illustration of the kind of way in 
which these measures could be addressed is given in Chapter 5 and appendix 2. A 
small selection of these measures, and one or two new ones, are notea below 

Re-implement secondary control functions 

The secondary control functions, e.g.control of chord-arity, quality overide 
etcetera should be re-implemented in a DM fashion with menus or buttons, 
visible state and so on. 

Alternative displays to aid skill transfer. It would be trivially to arrange for all 
notes played to appear on a piano keyboard display as they sounded (see appendix 
2). (This could even be done with commercial programs or hardware connected to 
Harmony Space via MIDI.) This measure might help with transfer of skills to 
keyboard instruments. Similarly, it would be trivially possible for all notes 
played to appear on a staff notation display (see appendix 2). This might be best 
displayed using n<Hional, uniform note durations. (Actual durations could be used 
but mipht soon look very messy .) 

Rubber banding or numbering for progression tracing. When reviewing, the trace 
of a chord sequence, it can be hard to see the order of the chords. It would be 
trivial but useful to arrange for armws to be shown on screen linking consecutive 
notes, or perhaps to nuiiiber the chords on the display. 

(^ser defined chord qualities. It would be trivial but useful to arrange for users to 
be able l ") define llidr own chord qualiti^^s or chord ouality schemes by example. 

Better rhythmic control. It would be useful to allow ri.ythmic patterns read in 
from a MIDI keyboard or note editor to be combined with chord progressions 
when desued. Al* en atively, it might h« useful to have rhythmic figures selectable 
fro»n a m<;nu triggered at each bi^tton depression. ^ et again, it might be useful to 
us< a drum pail c • ^mbinod with Harmony Space like a version of the intelligent 



Appendix 1: Hamony Space proUHypc implemcntaiion 



drum (sec chapter 4). Finally, a midi glove (see chapter 4) might be a better 
controller than a mouse, since finger gestures could be use to control rhythmic 
patterns for each chord or arpcggiation. 

Switchable Balzano/Longuet-Higgins array. From an educational and 
psychological point of view, the two versions of Harmony space (based on the 
Balzano and Longuet-Higgins theories respectively) have interesting and subtlety 
different implications, as explored in Chapter 7. However, from an 
implementational point of view, the two versions of Harmony space are identical 
except for a shearing of the key-windows and a shearing of the layout of the note 
circles. It would be easy and useful to arrange for a single interface to support 
both layouts. 

For other possible improvements to the Harmony Space prototype , see Chapter 5 
and appendix 2. 

5 Conclusions 

The prototype implementation is rough and ready but permits simple experiments 
to be carried out. The prototype demonstrates the coherency and consistency of 
the key elements of the design of Harmony Space. 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype iniplementaiion 



6 Summary of commands supported by Harmony Space prototype 

The following table summarises all of the commands available in the prototype 
implementation of Harmony Space. The annotation 'toggle' indicates that the 
same key alternately switches a feature on and off. 



Action 



Function Kev 



Starting and fmishing 

exit Harmony Space 
redraw screen 
re-initialise midi interface 



Exit 

Again 

Read 



Display management 

display whole chord or root only (toggle) 
leave trail or only show current event (toggle) 



Edit 

Backspace 



Key window 
move key window 

Octave control 

octave up 
octave down 

set octave to middle C area 



up, down, left, right and 
diagonal arrow keys 

Maik 

Char Delete 
Line delete 



10 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 



Standard chord-arities 

single notes 

diads (scale-tone fifth wurXon) 

triads 

sevenths 

scale tone ninths (EQ and VII are played as sevenths) 



Fl 
F2 
F3 
F4 
F5 



Common variant chord quality schemes for the major mode 

diads (scale-tone thirds version) <shift> F2 

triads (version with dominant seventh on V) <shift >F3 

Common chord quality schemes for harmonic minor 

triads (version with V of harmonic minor as major quality) F7 
sevenths (version with V of h. minor as dominant seventh) <shift> F7 
triads (version with V of h. minor as dominant seventh) <ctrl> F7 

Common chord quality schemes for dorian mode 

triads (version with V of dorian as major quality) F8 

sevenths (version with V of dorian as dominant seventh) <shift> F8 

triads (version with V of dorian as dominant seventh) <ctrl> F8 



Overriding chord quality 

major 

dominant seventh 
minor 

minor seventh 
diminished 
diminished seventh 
dominant seventh #3 
13th major minor third 
major sixth 



1 

<shift> 1 
2 

<shift > 2 
3 

<shift> 3 
4 
5 
6 



Switching automatic mechanism off and on 

Freeze chord quality (toggle) 

Setting chord quality of chromatic roots 

set quality of chromatic roots to last quality 
mute chromatic roots 



Hold 



Pop 

<shift> Fl 



ERIC 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 




Figl 

A screen dump of tonic major tri^^jd beii-^g sounded on Uic Haniiony Space 

protorype^» 



5 As noted earlier, for technical reasons to do ^'ivh the U^e difficulty of printing large 
expmses of black, we have presented ail of the sciH^en dumps in this appendix inverte<l 
bk k"for white. Since the actual scn:«n dumps are over 1Mb (iach in size - too large to 
include in the iheris document - i\\cy luwe l>?>en redrawn manually a^ accui >i<x:ly a?> 
possible. 

ERIC 



Appendix I: Hannony Space prototj^pe iinpleinentation 



in wWd) U» roou of U«r dMxii 
irepkyed 



\ 



Setoa chord ftTtcy 



Gl I3C3 O El 13 



l.iii.i.iH.rnri 



RffSrvw Satan 
RckuUtteMIDI 

Dlipliy cbank w mou only 



Arrow Ittyi cartrol 
p<«ition of Hft^tntviy 
Splice ki^y window 



ihc dTcf.w of citotf key* 




Tnoedhrcd 
profs/oMlon 



SetquAljtyfor 
chranwticroo(i 




\ 



Moiue x-y position 
omiroli root pocition. 

Maam buUxxi iniiitia 
jind oofT^ktes 



Fig 2 



Overview of layout of function keys in prototype implementation of 

Harmony Space 



ERIC 



13 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 



Function kcyn 



F2 



F3 



F4 F5 





















F7 


F8 



Numeric Kcy« 



^"1 



Bin 



Grey Keys 



At row Kcyi 







OOJM 


Mark 


Chtr del 


Liiie dcJ 




\ 


t 


/ 








/ 


1 


\ 





fiiiiiriw 

MIDI 


dMrii m 






Again 


Read 


Edit 


Exit 


Hold 



CM 
taoa 



CofUici 



Backipace 




Shift 



Pop 



Fig 3 

Function of each key in prototype implementation of 
Harmony Space 



ERiC 



14 



Appendix 1: Hamony Space prototype implementation 




Fig 4 

Sv Tt ', > i dump from piX)totype illustrating five stages of scale-tone chord 
construction: note, diad.triad seventh and ninth. 
Note that ti." option not to erase chord traces automatically after they have been 

sounded has been selected. 



15 i^^^i 



Appendix I: Harmony Space prototype implementation 




Fig 5 

Screen dump from prototype illustrating the playing of a V chord in the hamionic 
minor mode. Note that tlie major key quality does not conform to the diatonic 

key "Window shape. 



ERIC 



16 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 




Pig 6 

The urs! » i r . - ii - . .i^- the prototype illustrating the automatic 
charge of d\oM u;, iiiy "' '^ '-^ with a fixed note as the key window is moved. 

The cliord ariiy r.i.Ld K.; .'. i.iusixatioii is the scale-tone seventh chord-arity (i.e. 

tt.or iH;te scale-tone chords). 

In this figure,, il; u ■ i liic position in the key window a^rresponding to 

Mir; degree of the scale V, 

In order lo Hi t!i!^ 7 . m .'>\v in accordance with the chord-growing rule, the 

■ !". 'd !iu;.liiv is dominant seventli. 



ERIC 



17 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 




Fig 7 

The second of three screen dumps from the prototype iUustrating the automatic 
change of chord quality associated with a fixed note as the key window is moved. 

In this figure, the key window has shifted vertically down a minor third relative to 

the original key. 

The fixed note now occupies the position in the key window corresponding to the 

degree of the scale III in the new key. 

In order to fit the key-window in accordance with the chord-growing rule, the 

chord quality is minor seventh. 



't • ■» 



18 



Appendix 1: Harmony Space prototype implementation 




Fig 8 

The final of three screen dumps from the prototype illustrating the automatic 
change of chord quality associated witli a fixed note as the key window is moved. 

In this figure, the key has shifted (horizontally) down a major third relative to the 

original key. 

The note now occupies the posiiion in the key window corresponding to the 
degree of tlie scale VU of the new key. 

In order to fit the key-window in accordance with the chord-growing rule, the 
chord quality is diminished seventh. 



ERIC 



Appendix 1: Hannony Space prototype implementation 





Fig 9 

Screen dump from prototype illustrating the playing of the chord sequence of 
Street Life (Crawford, 1978) (see chapter 9 for chord sequence). 

Tlie option not to erase chord traces automatically after they have been sounded is 

in force. 

Tlie option to display the roots of chords only (as opposed to the whole chord) 

has also been selected 




20" 



Appendix 2 : Harmony Space notional interface 



We noted in chapter 5 and appendix 1 that the prototype implenaentation of Harmony 
Space lacks proper menus, labelling, and any almost other than the minimal features 
described in chapter 5^ In this appendix, we present a specification for a shghtly 
less minimal version of Harmony Space, referred to as the 'idealised' version. The 
arrangements suggested in this appendix are not claimed to be id^tal - they are offered 
as an illustration. This hypothetical version of Harmony Space requires little in the 
way of non-standard implementation techniques and covers little new conceptual 
ground, but would almost certainly be much easier to um. To avoid continual 
circumlocution, we will refer to the idealised version as though it exists, although it 
is currently only a specification. The idealised version conforms to the minimal 
specification of Harmony Space given in chapter 5, with a number of straightforward 
extra features added: to give one or two examples, there is an extra mouse and foot 
SNvdtches in place of function keys; the note circles are labelled; repositionable ('tear- 
off) menus are used to make tlie interface easier to use, and so on. llie other major 
difference b^rtween the notional version and the implemented prototype is that it is 
rerc ifiguraWe to display a screen array conforming with either tlie Longuet-Higgins 
or the Balzano theory. Since appendix 1 uses the Balzano theory exclusively, for 
presentational balance we will give illustrations in this appendix in the l^onguet- 
Higgins configuration. The notional interface is an illustration: no paiticular '^laims 
are made for the mf nu layout, etcetera. We begin with an illustrated overview of the 
appearance and method of use of tiie notional interface. 

1 General appearance and operation of inrototypc 

The Harmony Space window for the idealised vcireion is shown in Fig 1. In the 

' Note - the material in this appendix inevitably overlaps to sorne extent materiaJ already 
seen in Chapter 5 and appendix 1. Idicntical otr almost idciUilcal wording is uswd in ports, 
altliough the description is caicfuUy tailored l»«rc to refer to the notional inttvfacc as q>posetJ 
to the prototype or minimal version. 



1 



Appendix 2: Harmony Space notional interface 



Longuet-Higgins configuration, notes are arranged in ascending major thirds 
(semitone steps of size 4) on the x-axis, and in ascending perfect fifths (semitone 
steps of size 7) on the y-axis. Unlike in the prototype, the user can direct for the note 
circles to be labelled either in terms of alphabetic note names (fig 1), roman 
numerals, (fig 5) or semitone numbers (not illustrated) by means of selections on the 
graphic display menu (fig 3). The key windows can be slid as a group over the fixed 
grid of circles by means of a mouse, midi-glove. People Mat2 or other pointing 
device (see fig 2 for a set of suggested controllers and their suggested functions). A 
different pointing device (we will just say 'mouse' in future to avoid clumsy 
phrasing) is used to move the cursor around in the window. 

(In this paragraph, we note features of the mouse action that apply in all versions of 
Harmony Space.) If the mouse button is pressed while the cursor is over a note 
circle, the circle lights up and the corresponding note sounds audibly until the button 
is released. If the button is kept depressed and the mouse is swept around, the 
appropriate succession of new notes is sounded and completed as the mouse enters 
and leaves the note circles. More generally, the mouse can be set to control the 
location of the root of a diad, triad, seventh or ninth chord. For any given chord 
arity, depressing the mouse button on a root causes all of the notes of the appropriate 
scale-tone chord to light up and sound. (Fig 1 shows a C major triad being sounded 
in this way). 

Apart from the two mice, other functions in the idealised interface are controlled by a 
set of foot switches, and a set of menus. (See figs 2, 3 and 4 for more details. Fig 2 
is an overview of suggested gestural controllers and their suggested functions. Fig 3 
shows the major menus, and fig 4 shows the secondary menus. There is also a 
summary discussion of menu functions at the end of this appendix.) The sliding foot 
switch (see fig 2) allows the user to select whether she wants at any time chords of 
arity one, two, three, four, five, etcetera, (i.e., single notes, diads, triads, sevenths, 
ninths). This foot switch is designed to allow the user to play interspersed single 
notes and chords fluidly. As in all versions of Harmony Space, the quality of each 
chord is chosen automatically (unless the user directs otherwise) in accordance with 
the prevailing chord-arity and the current location of the root relative to the current 

2 People Mats™ are commcrciaJlty avj)iil'il!)le RS232 pointing devices controlled by walking 
on them (Elsom-Cook,1986). See chapter 4 and appendix 1 for more notes on midi gloves. 



Appendix 2: liannony Space notional interface 



position of the key window. This automatic assignment of quality to chords can be 
overridden at any time by selecting the desired quality using the 'quality overidc' 
menu (fig 3), The second pointing device (used mainly for controlling modulation) is 
also used to control the ovcriding of chord quality. 

Many other controller arrangements are possible. For example, a foot switch could 
be used to choose between a limited number of chord qualities pre-selected by the 
user. Alternatively, control of modulation could be assigned to a mole (i.e. a foot- 
controlled two-dimensional pointing device (Pearson and Weiser, 1986)), leaving 
the second hand free to deal with chord quality interventions. Ideally, the user should 
be allowed to patch arbitrary control devices to control arbitrary parameters (e.g 
chord inversion and key-window shape), along the lines of the 'M' program 
reviewed in Chapter 4. 

The remainder of this appendix is taken up with a summary discussion of each menu 
function, grouped by menu, 

2 Summary of Menu functions 

2.1 Conventions common to all menus 

The user can choose how oarticular menus are to behave. The menus can behave 
cither in conventional 'pull-down' mode or can stay 'pulled down' until further 
notice for easier access. This feature is toggled by double clicking on the menu bar. 
This allows the user to customise the interface in accordance with which menus arc 
to be used most intensively, (Menus perform here, as elsewhere, a triple reduction of 
cognitive load: they show what choices are available; show the current choices in 
force; and allow choices not under consideration to be hidden.) In figs 2 and 3, 
following the Macintosh menu convention, dots (...) after a menu entry indicate that 
if the entry is selected, a secondary dialogue will follow to elicit additional 
information. 



Appendix 2: Hannony Space notional interface 



2.2 Graphic display menu 

The show root only command, and its inverse show whole chord control whether 
the entire chord or just its root is displayed (as exemplified by figs 1 and 6 
respectively). The audible result remains unaffected either way. 

The command show trail and its inverse no trail control whether the trail of notes 
that have been played are erased as the chords are released (fig 1) or left on the 
screen to show the trail of the progression (fig 6). Experiments with the prototype 
have shown that trails can get very messy with the 'show whole chord' option on: 
trails are generally more useful in combination with the 'show root only' command. 
To rubout all trails, the command tidy screen is used. 

The show keyboard command and its inverse hide keyboard control whether or not 
the notes being played at any moment are shown on a keyboard display (see fig 1). 
This could be simulated with the current prototype of Harmony Space by connecting 
it via midi to commercially available equipment (personal communication, Desain and 
Honing). 

The show staff commund and its inverse hide staff control whether or not the notes 
being played are cumulatively displayed on a staff display (fig 1). This can be 
simulated on die current prototype of Harmony Space by connecting it via midi to 
commercially available programs such as 'Personal Performer'. In practice, the 
varying durations of the chords can make the display rather messy. The command 
hide staff duration causes all of the durations to be shown uniformly (fig 5). To 
clear the staff, the command tidy staff is used 

The history of the chord sequence may be displayed beneath the harmony window as 
a trace of alphabetic chord names (figs 5 and 6) or roman numeral chord names (not 
shown) using the commands show alpha history and show roman history . In 
either case, modulations are indicated both textually and using typographic shifts 
(fig 5). To clear the history, the commands tidy roman history and tidy alpha 
history are used.(The prototype Harmony Logo interpreter maintains multiple views 
of chord sequences of a similar sort which can be printed out to help the user analyse 
chord sequences. The ease of providing and modifying such views was one of the 



Af^ndix 2: Hamiony Space notional interface 



major motivations fcM" using an object-oriented style to implement Hannony Logo.) 

The show key name command simply causes the key that Harmony Space is 
currently in to be displayed textually to complement the graphic display (not 
illustrated). 

The comm;tnds alphabetic labels, roman numeral labels and semitone number labels 
arc used to control the labelling of the note circles (see figs 1 and 5). 

Finally, the highlight centre command controls whether or not the label of the 
currendy selected harmonic centre (see harmonic centre menu) is emboldened in the 
note-circle labels, as it is in Fig 5 (although this has not reproduced strongly on the 
page). 

2 J Overide quality menu 

Qualities selected on this menu override the automatically selected chord quality (just 
for the next event to be triggered). When the quality lock command is selected, the 
quality of the chord is locked to its previous value (or a value selected on the menu 
just before the quality lock) until the quality lock is switched off. The define new 
chord quality option allows a user to define a new chord quality by example on the 
screen and name it, after which its name will appear on the quality overide menu like 
that of any other quality. The remove new chord quality option allows such entries 
to be removed. 

2.4 Chord-arity menu 

The chord-arity menu decides the size of the chord (one, two, three, four , five 
notes) triggered at any time by a single mouse button depression. The quality of the 
resulting chord depends not only on the mouse location (i.e. the degree of scale of 
the root) and the key window location (i.e. the key), but also on the chord quality 
scheme in force (sec entry for chord quality scheme menu). 

25 Filter and alphabet menus 

When thr key filter is on, the mouse pointer is constrained to move exactly 



Appendix 2: Harmony Space notional interface 



vertically, horizontally or diagonally at all times; movement at intermediate angles is 
interpreted as whichever of the constrained directions it most closely fits. With the 
key filter on, when a mouse movement would take the cursor to a note circle outside 
the key window (i.e to a note not in the current key), the cursor jumps to the next 
square on the same bearing which is in a key window. To reflect the state of the key 
filter graphically to the user, when the key filter is off the outline of the key window 
is drawn in a dotted line, as opposed to the continuous line used when the filter is 
on. The option tritone wrap simply means that transitions from IV to VII are 
displayed in a single key window (as in the traces shown in Chapter 5, fig 6). Note 
that this option docs not prevent chromatic notes from being sounded as part of a 
chord - it only prevents them from acting as roots. The alphabet filter works in 
exactly the same way as the key filter, but instead of allowing only roots in the key to 
be played, it allows only roots selected in the alphabet menu to be played. The option 
window wrap means that all chords are displayed in a single representative of the 
key window. 

2.6 Window shape menu 

The window shape menu allows key windows of different shapes appropriate to the 
harmonic minor and other modes to be displayed. Selecting a window shape 
automatically causes the corresponding harmonic centre to be selected in the 
harmonic centre menu, and the corresponding chord quality scheme to be selected in 
the chord quality menu, although this may be overridden using the latter two menus 
independently. New window shapes can be specified by the user, and associated 
with particular harmonic centres and t hord quality schemes using the define new 
shape option. 

2.7 Harmonic centre menu 

The choice of harmonic centre (I to VII) corresponds to specifying that one of the 
following modes: ionian (or major), dorian, phrygian, lydian, mixolydiaii, aeolian 
(or minor) or locrian is in use. This makes no difference to the chords audibly 
produced, (except in two circumstances: if the chord quality scheme is also changed - 
see the entries for the 'window shape' menu and 'chord quality scheme' menu - or if 
a modal pedal is selected - sec the entry for the 'extras' menu ). Choice of harmonic 



Appendix 2: Haimony Space notional interface 



centfxs also affects the harmony window display in the following ways. Firstly, it 
affects which root name is emboldened when »hc uighUght centre' command is used 
on the graphic display menu (sec the entry for the graphic display menu). Secondly, 
it affects tlie assignment of roman numerals to note namf when labelling the screen 
witli roman numerals. Thirdly, it affects the roman numeral history (see the notes on 
'roman numeral history' under the entry above for the graphic display menu). 

2.8 Chromatic quality menu 

The quality of chords associated with chromatic notes in their capacity as potential 
roots of chords may be fixed using the 'chromatic quality' menu. The same quality 
applies to all chromatic notes. As a special case, chromatic notes may be muted (this 
does not affect their sounding as non-root notes in chwds where appropriate. 

2.9 Chord quality scheme menu 

The chord quality scheme menu allows different degrees of the scale to be set to 
trigger chord qualities other than the scale tone qualities. Note that changes in the 
window shape automatically make changes in the chord quality scheme selected, but 
these may be overridden. The user may define and remove new chord qualiiy 
schemes using the define new scheme and remove scheme options. 

2.10 Midi menu 

The midi menu simply allows different synthesiser patches (timbres) to be selected. 

2.11 Extras menu 

If the option doubled root is selected, each chord is accompanied by a note in the 
bass doubling the root. If the option modal pedal is selected, each chord is 
accompanied by a modal pedal note appropriate to the harmonic centre in force. The 
option octave range allows an upper and lower octave range to be assigned to the 
pitch of chord roots. Limits can be assigned separately for the x and y axes. So for 
example, if the x-axis is assigned a lower limit of octave 4 and an upper limit of 
octave 6, moving the cursor along the x-axis gradually steps the root tiirough two 
octaves as a natural side-effect of adding major thirds. On coming to the top of the 
second octave, the pitch 'wraps around' to the bottom octave. This is repeated along 



Appendix 2: Hamony Space notional interface 



the X-axis. The option bass range is identical to the option 'octave range' except that 
whereas 'octave range' applies to the root, 'bass range' applies to the doubled root or 
modal pedal. The options root position, first inversion, second inversion and third 
inversion control the inversion of the chord sounded (leaving out of consideration 
any doubled root). The octave height of the notes in the chord in any inversion is 
determined by the octave height of the root. The spacing option allows any note in 
the chard to be exported up or down a specified number of octaves. 

2.12 Rhythmic figure and bass figure 

The rhythmic figure and bass figure menus allow a single mouse button depression 
to trigger rhythmic figures in the chord and doubled root or modal pedal 
independently. 

2.13 Arpeggiate and alberti pattern menus 

The arpeggiate menu allows a single mouse button depression to trigger one or more 
upward or downward arpeggios. These can be combined with rhythmic figures (see 
the notes on the 'rhythmic figure' menu). The alberti pattern option allows a single 
mouse button depression to trigger an arbitrary alberti figuration pattern. This option 
may be combined with the rhythmic figure option. 

This completes the summary discussion of each menu function, and the discussion 
of the idealised version of Harmony Space. Diagiams for this document are 
appended at the end. 

3 Conclusion 

Despite the term 'idealised' interface, there is no suggestion that the arrangements 
suggested in this appendix are particularly well-thought out or ideal. The 
airangements would need to be tested and improved by a process of trial and error. 
The purpose of this appendix has been to illustrate one way in which a fuller 
implementation of Harmony Space might be designed. 



Appendix 2: Ilarmony Space notional interface 




Figl 

Idealised version of Harmony Space with keyboard display. 



ERIC 



9 'i^'S 



Appendix 2: Harmony Space notional interface 



Function In note array area 



Secondary function 



Mouse 1 




play uaodated 4K»d 

x-pontion of choid root 
y-poation of chocd toot 



Mouic2 




move key window 

x-poiition of new hannonic ocntxe 

y-poAtion of new harmonic ccfmc 



menu item adoction 



Foot ilidcr 




— « chocd arity 



Foot iwitch 1 



sustain 



Foot iwilch 2 



key filter 



Summary of luggcatcd controller functions 



Mouse 1 play notes 

Mouse 2 move kev window t ovexide cioid quality 
Foot slider char^ge owed aiily 
Foot switch 1 key filter oci/oCr 
Foot switch 2 sustain 



Fig 2 

Suggested gestural cx)ntrollers and their functions in idealised version 

of Harmony Space. 




10 



9 f u ' 



Appendix 2: Harmony Space notional interface 




qutllty lock 



major 
minor 
dimtnlthod 
•Ufpmontod 

major olHth 
minor tlHth 



major ooMonth 
minor ooMonth 
dominant toiionth 
dImlnUhad oouanth 
h^lf dImlnUhod ooiionth 



major ninth 
minor ninth 



dofino 10111 chord quality 
romeuo chord quollty 




•hoir> root only 
•houi trail 



•houi Itoyboard 

•houi staff 

•houi otoff duration 



•houi roman history 
•houi alpha history 



shoui Icoy noma 



tidy scroon 
tidy staff 
tidy roman history 
tidy alpha history 

alphabotic labals 
romsn numorol labols 
somltono no. labols 



highlight contro 



ma 9rds/ ml 3rds 



noto 
diad 
V^trlatf 
souonth 

ninth 



V major 

harmonic minor 
dorian ^ dom U 

dofIno noui shapo 
romouo shapo 



M •> f Ml u n 1 < 




✓ l 




II 




III 

lU 




u 




Ul 









koy 

alphabot 



tritono uirap 
uilndoui uirap 




Fig 3 



Most commonly used menus fw idealised version of Haraiony Space. 



ERIC 



11 3 ij 



PflHERNS 



i 



FIgurt 1 
Figure 2 
Figure S 



Rdd figure .. 
remoue figure .. 



FIfire 1 

FIgurt 2 
Figure S 

Rdd figure 
rtmoue figure 




nilTf n iM,n. rii 



Figure 1 
Figure 2 
Figure 3 

lidd pattern 
remoue pettem 



< 



21 



SECONDRRV FUNCTIONS 



I 

00 

9 



( K t r n s 



model p^dal 
/ doubled root 
octaue range 
pedal range 
spacing 

root position 
1st Inuersion 
2nd Inuersion 
3rd inuersion 



( tifiini qihllltij 



/ mute 
dominant 7th 
minor seuenth 

add neui chrom 



/standard 
Uasdom 

ninths * seuenthi 



define neui scheme ... 
remoue scheme ... 




30 i 



ERIC 



Appendix 2: liarmony Space notional interface 




Fig 5 

Display from idealised version of Harmony Space showing trace of first eight bars of 
"All the things you are" in C major, with only roots shown in the trace, roman 
numeral labels displayed, and an alphabet name history given. 



ERIC 



13 



Appendix 2: Harmony Space notional ir*crrace 




C major Amin Dmin Gmaj Cmaj 



Fig 6 

Display from idealised version of Flamiony Space showing 
trace of "I got rhythm" progression with roots only displayed 
and staff notation display given. 



ERIC 



14 



Appendix 3: Chord symbol conventions. 



Two chord notation conventions are used in the thesis, Mehegan's (1959) 
convention and the 'classical' convention. The main difference between the two 
conventions is that in the classical version, chord qualities are always given 
explicitly: in particular, upper case roman numerals are major, and lower case 
numerals are minor. Other aspects of chord quality are shown expliciUy by 
annotation. In the Mehegan convention, all numerals are giver in upper case, since 
the chord quality is understood to be the scale-tone chord quality appropriate to the 
degree of the scale of the key in force - only altered chords or chords with added 
notes need to have their quality indicated cxplicitiy by annotation. We have trivially 
extended Mehegan's convention into the modal case so that in the Dorian mode, for 
example, D is notated as I. To distinguish between the two systems typographically, 
chord sequences notated using the classical convention arc undcriingd. tiiose using 
Mehegan's system are not. 



More details on Mehegan's convention 

Roman numerals representing scale tone triads or sevenths are written in capitals, 
irrespective of major or minor quality (e.g. I II H IV V etc.). Roman numerals 
represent triads of the quality normally associated witii the degree of the tonality (or 
modality) prevaUing. We call this quality the "default" quality. In jazz examples, 
Roman numerals indicate scale tone sevenths rather than triads. The following 
post-fix symbols are used to annotate Roman chord symbols to override the chord 
quality as follows ; x - dominant, o - diminished, 0 - half diminished, m - minor, 
M - major. The following post-fix convention is used to alter indicated degrees of 
tiie scale; "#3" means default chord quality but witii sharpened 3rd; "#7" means 
default chord quality but with sharpened 7th, etc. The following post-fix convention 
is used to add notes to chords; e.g. "+6" means default chord quality with added 



Appendix 3: Chord symbol conventions 

scale-tone sixth 6th. The prefixes # and b move all notes of the otherwise indicated 
chord a semitone up or down. 

General points 

In the thesis, inversions are mostiy ignored, as discussed in chapters 5 and 9. 
Mehegan's convention that unannotatcd Roman numeral refer (by default) to scale 
tone sevenths has been extended. We allow unannotated Roman numerals to stand 
for the scale tone chord of any specified chord-arity (see Chapter 5 for an 
explanation of the Harmony Space concept of choni-arity). 



