DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 289 735 



SE 048 820 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 

EDR3 PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



lozzi, Louis A.; Bastardo, Peter J. 

Decisions for Today and Tomorrow: Teaching Notes. 

Issues in Science-Technology-Society. 

National Energy Foundation, Sal^ Lake City, UT. 

Nov 87 

45p.; For related documents, see SE 048 821-822. 
Sopris West, Inc., 1120 Delaware Ave., Longmont, CO 
80501. 

Guides* - Classroom Use - Guides (For Teachers) (052) 

MFOl Plus Postage. PC Not Available from EDRS. 
Agriculture; Air Pollution; Artificial Intelligence; 
Decision Making; *Environmental Education; Genetic 
Engineering; Hazardous Materials; Nuclear Energy; 
*Science Activities; *Science and Society; Science 
Education; Secondary Education; *Secondary School 
Science; Simulation; *Social Studies; Teaching 
Methods ; *Technology 
*Environmental Problems 



ABSTRACT 

This teacher's guide was de 
senior high school level classes as a suppl 
in the areas of science and social studies, 
included in the guide may be used independe 
into a separate course on the relationships 
technology, and society. The separate chapt 
technology; (2) decision making in a high-t 
engineering; (4) artificial intelligence; { 
acid precipitation; (7) hazardous wastes in 
and agriculture; (9) organ transplantation; 
robotics; and (12) technology and decision 
guide includes lesson plans, teaching tips, 
worksheets. (TW) 



signed to be used with 
ement to existing programs 

Each of the 12 chapters 
ntly or may be combined 

between science , 
ers deal with: (1) 
ech world; (3) genetic 
5) nuclear energy; (6) 

the environment; (8) food 

(10) transportation; { 11) 
making. The teacher's 

and student handouts and 



************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 

********************************************************************* 



CO 
CM 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL IN MICROFICHE ONLY 

has:been granted by 



DECIS 





TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



U.8 DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

0tfiC9 Of EducttioAst RoMAfCh and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

^&This document has been reproduced as 
"'received from the person or oro>'^i2Ation 
oriQinating it 
D Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

• Points o( view or opinions stated mthisdcci*- 
ment do not necessarily represent o»f«ci?{ 
OERI pos-tK>n or poiicy 




for Today and Tomorrow 



id 

ERIC 



Miiii i COPY AVAILABLE 



ABOUT THE AUTHORS. 



Dr. Louis A. lozzi is Associate Professor of Science and Environmental Education at Cook 
College, Rutgers University ( New Brunswick, N.J.). He earned a bachelor's degree in scier.ce 
education and elementary education, a master's degree in geology, and a doctorate in science 
education. His teaching experience ranges from elementary school through graduate univer- 
sity levels. Dr. lozzi has authored or co-authored more than 80 books, monographs, and journal 
articles dealing with science, environmental education, education, and science-technology- 
society issues. 



Dr. Peter J. Bastardo is Manager of the Regional Curriculum Services Unit - Central (New Jer- 
sey Department of Education). He earned a bachelor's degree in social studies education and 
elementary education and a master's degree and doctorate in social studies education. Dr. 
Bastardo has taught a variety of subjects from the elementary school level through college. He 
has authored or co-authored several articles and books dealing with social studies, environ- 
mental education, and issues dealing with science-technoiogy-society. 



Decisions for Today and Tomorrow: 
Issues In 
Science - Technology - Society 

All Rights Reserved 
.ght ®1 987 by Louis A. lozzi 

Cover artwork by Jon Dee Burton. Used w'th 
permission of the National Energy Foundation. 

This book may not be reproduced in whole 
or in pait, by mimeograph or any other means, 
without permission. 

For information: Sopris West, Inc. 
1 1 20 Delaware Avenue, Longmont, CO 80501 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Audience and Program Usage 1 

Program Objectives 2 

Program Materials 2 

Chapter 1. What is Technology? 3 

Chapter 2. Decision-Making in a High Tech World 7 

Chapter 3. Biotechnology: Genetic Engineering 11 

Chapter 4. Computer Technology: Artificial Intelligence 12 

Chapter 5. Energy: Nuclear Power 15 

Chapters. Environment: Acid Precipitation 19 

Chapter 7. Environment: Hazardous Waste 25 

Chapter 8. Food and Agriculture 27 

Chapter 9. Medical Technology: Organ Transplantation 29 

Chapter 1 0. Transportation: Space Travel 30 

Chapter 1 1. Computer Technology: Robotics 31 

Chapter 1 2. Technology and Decision-Making 35 




ERIC 



SPECIAL ACKNOWLEDGMENT 



The authors and publisher would like to acknowledge the NATIONAL ENERGY FOUNDATION 
(Salt Lake City, Utah) and its President, Dr. Edward A. Dalton for its support in developing 
this volume. 

The National Energy Foundation (NEF) is a unique nonprofit educational organization devoted 
to the development and provision of instructional programs and materials. Supported by 
resources from business, government and education, NEF is dedicated to presenting energy, 
science, technology, and other contemporary issues in an objective and accurate manner. In 
an effort to comprehensively provide educational resources, NEF actively participates in 
cooperative programs with other educational organizations. Decisions for Today and Tomorrow 
is one such collaborative effort. 

For more information about NEF contact 

Dr. Edward Dalton 
National Energy Foundation 
51 60 Wiley Post Way, Suite 200 
Salt Lake City, UT84116 
(801)539-1406 



DECISIONS FOR TODAY AND TOMORROW 
Audience and Program Usage 



Decisions for Today and Tomorrow: Issues m Scier^ce-TechnologySociety was dt^signed for 
the senior high school level (grades 9- 1 2) as a supplement to existing programs in the areas of 
scieice and social studies education. Depending upon the students involved, the program 
can also be used with more capable younger students, as well as students well beyond the 
senior high school grades. Each of the twelve chapters ir.cluded in the Student Guide is com- 
plete and inde pendent and can, therefore, be taught or studied in any sequence selected by 
the teacher. This feature is particularly helpful when coordinating this supplementary pro- 
gram with an existing program of study. Of course, this program can stand on its own and be 
taught as a separate and distinct Science-Technology-Society program if so desired. 

This program can be used in many ways. It could be used as a basal text for a course in S-T-S at 
nearly any grade level, 9 through 12. In this case, one would use the program in the same way 
that any other textbook is used. Hence, one would typically start with chapter one and move 
sequentially through the book chapter by chapter. It is not critical that the text oe followed 
chapter by chapter in strict order. You can skip around. However, it is highly recommended 
that, if you want to change the order of the chapters for any reason, you first teach chapter 1 
and chapter 2. You can then reorder chapters 3 throught 1 1 . Chapter 1 2 is best utilized as the 
last chapter studied, although it too, can stand on its own if necessary. 

Another approach is to supplement existing courses in social studies and science by em- 
phasizing those sections that apply directly to the course being used in the classroom and 
then moving more quickly • or even eliminating - those chapters that are not specifically related 
to the existing course of study. Still another method might be to teach the course in the way 
one might deal with current events in the classroom. That is, set aside one day per week to 
cover a current event dealing with S-T-S. One week the students could do most of the reading 
and in subsequent weeks they can do the activities. While this approach tends to result in 
somewhat of a disjointed approach, it can be effective when there is little other choice. 

Highly capable students or highly motivated students enjoy using the program for science or 
social science enrichment. In these cases, the student(s) can work pretty much on their own 
with minimal help from you, the teacher. The text and activities stand on iheir own and work well 
in a variety of settings and with infinite variations. These are only a few of the typical con- 
figurations in which the program is used. There are many other arrangements as well. Use your 
imagination, creativity, and resourcefulness. As you come up with your own great ideas, let us 
know. This way we can share your ideas with others, too. 

Teachers of specific disciplines (e.g., science, social studies, etc.) will probably want to elant 
the discussions and acti cities so as to focus more heavily on the content and skills considered 
important to their discipline. Thus, teachers of science might want to supplement Dec/s/ons for 
Today ar)d Tomorrow with other readings focusing on the science concerns of the issue being 
studied. Likewise, teachers of social studies/science might want to focus more on the social 
concerns by supplementmg the text with additional appropriate readings or articles. Of course, 
all teachers should strive to relate the S-T-S issues included in the student text to the existing 
curriculum and regular classroom textbooks in science and social science. Another exciting, 
challenging, but highly rewarding, approach is to "team teach" the course in which this pro- 
gram is used. 



1 6 



Program Objectives 

While the basic purpose of this program is to help students develop more mature n ental struc^ 
tures, higher-order thinking skills, and a knowledge of present and emerging issues in S-T-S, 
specific objectives include the following: 

■- To increase student's knowledge about issues that interface science, technology, and 
society now and in the future. 

To increase student's ability to analyze issues that arise in our technological society. 

— To increase the socio-scientific reasoning ability of students. 

— To develop student's higher-order thinking skills, including problem-solving, decision- 
making, and critical analysis/thinking. 

— To develop student's awareness of his/her role in the process of technological change. 

— To help students recognize the complexity of decision- making in our high-tech world. 

— To provide opportunities for students to examine possible future technologies brought 
about by advances in science, engineering, and societal changes. 

— To increase student's ability to communicate more effectively orally and in writing. 

— To increase student's ability to develop and present effective arguments in a logical, con 
sistent, and comprehensive manner. 

— To increase student's ability to read analytically and critically. 

Program Materials 

Dscisions for Today and Tomorrow is comprised of three parts. 

The Science^Technology'-Society Teacher's Guide provides an overview of the program, a 
description of the model upon which the curriculum was developed and a discussion uf the 
teaching strategies and activities utilized in the program. It is essential that the teacher be 
familiar with the contents of this publication in order to adequately implement Decisions for 
Today and Tomorrow, 

The Student Guide contains the program readings and activity directions for each of the 
twelve "Decisions" units. The Guide is non-consumr.ble and should be made available to 
each student. 

Teaching Notes contains specific teaching directions and/or suggestions for each of the 
twelve chapters. At the end of each chapter, master copies of student handouts are provided 
for the teacher's use. These should be duplicated for distr''oution to students. 



TEACHING NOTES 



Chapter 1. What Is Technology? 

1. Have the students read the Introduction. 

2. Lead a class discussion of the questions presented in the Student Guide (e.g., What does 
the age of technology mean?}. 

At this point, simply have the students express themselves and their ideas. There is no need to 
correct false ideas or perceptions since answers to all of the questions posed in this section 
will be fully explored in the next chapter. 

3. Make sufficient copies of the Technology Inventory (Handout 1 ) for your class. 

A"master*' copy, which should be duplicated, appears at the end of this section. You will need 
at least one copy of the inventory per student for this part of the activity and a second copy for 
each student for Part B of the activity. 

4. Have the students read New Technology: Mass Production and complete the Tech- 
nology Inventory. 

The reading should provide sufficient information to enable the students to complete the 
Technology Inventory. Students may find it helpful to read through this article twice - the first 
time to get an overall understanding about mass production, and the second time to read for 
detail. You might also fini it helpful to discuss the article with theclass after the first reading to 
ensure that the students understand the major ideas before going on to read for detail. 

To complete the activity, students will have to think about what they read and then analyze 
and apply that knowledge. For the most part, the students wii: not be able to simply "lift" the 
information from the readi ng and "plug it into" the chart. Thus, some students might need help 
thinking through the reading. Provide assistance and guidance as you fee! it is necessary. 
However, be careful not to provide too much guidance. This activity was designed to make 
students think and, t^ erefore, the reading was deliberately written to promote analytical th ink- 
ing skill development. 

Encourage the students to include as many ideas as they can possibly conjure. What at first 
glance appears to be insignificant may, from a long-term perspective, have profound effects. 

5. Review Activity Part A with your students. 

For the most part, the students have given little thought to the societal and institutional 
changes brO!;ght about by a new technology and may find the assignment confusing. A 
detailed review o\ the example given will help to clarify their questions. 

Reproduce the chart on the board or overhead transparency and fill in the boxes with the 
students. The items for the categories Resource Requirements and Consequences have not 
been delineated andwillneedto be extracted from the narrativesection of the exampla.As you 
progress through the example, students will inevitably begin to offer their own suggestions 
and discover that the task is not as formidable as they might have originally believed. 

6. Have the students complete a Tech nology I nventory for one of the technologies listed in 
Part B - Other Technologies. 




Each student will need a second copy of the Technology Inventory. Since the list of tech- 
nologies is short, if there are other technologies that students wish to examine, they should 
feel free to substitute. 

Allow approximately one class period for the students to complete their charts, or have them 
complete thechartasahomeworkassignment. In eithercase,thestudentswill need sufficient 
time to think about many interactions that may not, at first, be obvious. 

An alternative to having the students complete the chart individually is to have pairs or small 
groups of students complete a single chart. In small groups, the brainstorming technique is a 
useful one to initiate the development of ideas. In brainstorming, each item is considered m 
turn. In a round robin fashion each student will present an idea. Each idea is recorded, and the 
process of presenting an idea continues until all ideas seem to be exhausted. During this initial 
process, the students should not attempt to evaluate the ideas presented. All ideas should be 
accepted and added to the list as stated. As a second step, the group as a whole will then 
evaluate the ideas and select those to be included. In some instances, several ideas may be 
combined to form a major concept. 

The students may need to be reassured that there are no single "right" answervS to this exer- 
cise. Depending upon an individual's earlier experiences or peropectives, one person's view 
about a given technology may be very different from that of another person. Try to help the 
students explore the ramifications of the technology by asking pertinent questions when it 
appears that an impasse has been reached. 

7. After the charts are complete, have the students meet in small groups to share their 
results. 

In the process of sharing ideas, new ideas will emerga, some of which the students may wish to 
include in their charts. The questions at the end of Pa.i B should be discussed in the groups. 

8. Have representatives from each group present a summary report of group's proceedings 
to the entire class since most students will want to hear the topics discussed in the 
other groups. 

9. Summarize the activity results with the class. 

Do not neglect tof ully discuas the questions since they are important for helping the students 
JeveloD various thinking skills. The lastquestion'W/?af/s your cfe//n/f/ono/f^^ 
ticularly important since it is a logical "lead in" to the next section which defines vyhat technol- 
ogy is all about. 

1 0. Read and Discuss What is Technology? A Definition. 

As witn all of the readings in this text, it is important to spend some time in discussing the impor- 
tant points and ideas presented. This is the time to clarify and/or correct any misconceptions. 
This reading is particularly important because it defines what technology is and sets the stage 
for the ensuing chapters. The reading is very comprehensive and merits the time necessary to 
ensure that the students have a good grasp of the information presented. 



4 



9 



student Handout 1 
TECHNOLOGY INVENTORY 



New Technology 



CHANGES 



Individual 




Community 



Business 



I 

Government 



RESOURCE REQUIREMENT 



Natural 



\ 

Man-Made 



\ 

Human 



CONSEQUENCES 



Knowledge 



Beneficial 



Negative 



Unpredicted Changes 



10 



Chapter 2. Decision Making In a High-Tech World 

1. Have the students read and discuss the General Decision-Making Model. 



You may find it helpful to make an overhead transparency of the model illustrated m the text- 
book and keep it projected while you go over the various steps in the model. 

The students should have little difficulty in understanding what is meant in Step 1 , Define the 
Problem or in Step 2, Identify Alternatives. They may, however, need help with the third step. 
Quantify Alternatives. You may need to explore with the students what is meant by the terms 
risk, benefits, and risk/benefit analysis. They may also need help in understanding what is 
meant by long- and short-term risks and benefits. 

In discussing Apply Decision Aids, the fourth step in the model, you may want to discuss "judg- 
ment" and perhaps how "good" judgment is developed. Your discussion of Decision Trees and 
the Decision Matrix need not now be very elaborate. These tools will be discussed m detail in 
the next section. Similarly, since other aids (models, gaming, and simulation) won't be used 
until later chapters, they should be discussed only briefly at this time. Understanding steps 5 
and 6 (Decision and Implement) should present little difficulty for the students. 

It is most useful to compare and contrast the model with the "Scientific Method". You might 
explore the following: 

— How are they similar? Different? 

— Could you substitute one for the other? Why? Why not? 

2. After you have fully discussed the Decision Making Model, construct an activity which will 
give students experience in using the model. 

You could suggest several problems from school or other real-life situations or have the 
students themselves suggest problem situations; for example, 

— decide which college to attend, 
which automobile to purchase, or 
which courses to take in school. 

The only decision aids used at this point will be previous knowledge about the issue and 
hopefully, good analysis and reasoning. Do not go into a lengthy discussion of decision trees 
or decision matrices until they are introduced later in this chapter. 

Depending on the class, you might first want to ''walk them" through one or two problems 
before they work on their own. 

After the students have had an opportunity to work out some problems independently, have 
them compare their results. 

— Were the decisions made by various individuals the same? Different? Why? 

— Which appeared to be a "better*' resolution of the problem situation? Wh^? 

Important: Keep some of these problems (and the decisions made) for review at the conclu- 
sion of this chapter when studentswill work on some of the same problems using the decision 
tree and/or the decision matrix. Students will then see more easily if their decisions are any 
different when using these additional aids. 




u 



3. Have the students read The Decision Tree and discuss its process. 

In discussing the decision tree and later, the decision matrix, make sure that the students 
understand that these are not stand-alone decision making models. Rather, they are decision- 
making aids that can be employed as part of step 4 in c .r decision-making model. 

Read through the procedure once or tv,fice. It is doubtful that the students will understand the 
process well enough to use it with any degree of accuracy at this point. Don't spend too much 
time on the procedure, but simply guide the students carefully through the example. It is 
usually after this part of the activity has been completed that the students begin to seo what 
the steps in the procedure really mean. 

If you feel that the students are capable of dealing with this activity effectively on their own, by 
all means use your own professional judgment. Spend as much time on the example and 
analyzing/reviewing the completed sample decision tree, as necessary. 

4. Have the students use the decision tree to solve the previously defined problems, par- 
ticularly those types of problems that can be broken down into a choice between two 
actions or choices. Again, use real-life problems, school problems, etc. 

important Note: It might seem strange that the sample problem in the Student Guide does 
not deal specifically with a science-technology-society related problem. This was done de- 
liberately. To develop good thinking skills, students need to acquire experiences dealing with 
different types of real-life problem solving. Through the application of learned strategies to 
new and different situations, more effective and meaningful thinking skill development is pro- 
moted. Later, students will be provided with opportunities to solve problems created at the 
interface of science, technology, and society. 

5. Have the students read The Decision Matrix and discuss its process. 

in dealing with the decision matrix, you should again walk the students through the problem 
and show how the calculations are made. All of the steps, including the calculations, are fully 
illustrated in thestudent textbook. However,somestudents might still have difficulty in follo.yv- 
ing the example. Make b -re that every student understands each step in the process before 
going on. Alu, be sure that the students understand that the "best" course of action when 
using the decision tnatm is the one with the Highest number and not, as with the decision tree, 
the Lowest number. 

6. Provide the students with ample opportunities to £»fjply the decision matrix to solving 
other problems. 

This extension is critical if the students are to understand the techniques (decision aid use) 
and be able to apply them towards solving other problems. 

Make as many copies of the Decision Matrix(Handout 2) as you will need for your class. A mas- 
ter copy of this chart appears on the next page of this guide. 



Chapters. Biotechnology-Genetic Engineering 



1. Have the students read Genes and New Life Forms. 

This reading deals with a very complex topic. It is important for you to review any scientific 
terms and/or concepts used in the reading with which the students are unfamiliar (some of the 
terms that might be new to your students have been defined parenthetically in the text). 

At many points throughout the reading the student is presented with important ques- 
tions. When the students encounter the questions, they should be encouraged to interrupt 
their reading and respond to them at that time. To r.elp "encourage" the students to not skip 
over the questions, you can require them to briefly write out their responses. In addition, all of 
the questions in the readings should bediscussed in class at aconvenient time. Other types of 
questions included later in the text require the student to analyze a point of view or problem 
and then express an opinion. Those questions should also be explored fully in class. 

Of course, a full discussion of the article (including the questions) should be conducted after 
the students have carefully read the entire article. 

2. Have students read The Tulelake Story and respond in writing to the questions at the end 
of the reading. 

The responses shouid be collected and stored for later comparison with the responses de- 
rived when the activities You be the Judge - Parts A and B are completed. The quality of the 
students' written work should be held to the highest standards possible - even their responses 
to the questions. This is important for a variety of reasons which are discussed m the Teachers 
Guide. (See the section on writing skill development) 

3. Complete the activity You be the Judge - Part A 

The instructions for this activity are quite simple. The basic question is "Should an injunction 
be issued to stop the experiment?" The students should follow the decision tree proceduies 
detailed in Chapter 2. If necessary, review the procedures vyith the class again before they do 
this activity. 

4. Complete the activity You be the Judge - Part B. 

Use a decision matrix(Handout 2) to help decide who should regulate and monitor the field of 
biotechnology. Students should use the information provided in the readings to "extract" the 
alternatives and the selection criteria. While this is not a simple task, it should be well within 
the capability of most students. Of course, you can assist those students that require additional 
help as necessary. 



Chapter 4. Computer Technology -Artificial Intelligence 



1. Have the students read Smart Machines. Can Computers Make the Human Brain Ob- 
solete? 

Throughout the reading, several questions are posed for the students to answer. Encourage 
them to take the time to pondei the questions before continuing with the reading. Also, plan to 
provide ample time in class for a lively discussion of these questions and any others you feel 
are important. 

"If - Then" statements, as they relate to artificial intelligence, are discussed. The students are 
asked to develop "if - then" rules for a variety of problems. This type of activity helps students 
gain useful insights into this important aspect of Artificial Intelligence and. at the same time, 
promotes the development of higher-order thinking skills. 

Interest in "expert systems" and the various opportunities this approach offers is increasing 
daily. The students are asked to speculate why this might be so. Probably the beot answer/ 
reason is commercial value. Simply, much money can be made if these types of Artificial 
Intelligence programs "catch on". 

The students are asked to "try writing down everything a child has to do to stack up3 blocks mti 
a little fower''(see Student Guide for full instructions). Make every effort to have the class con- 
ductthis activity and then have them read their procedures to the class. Discuss with theclass 
the problems they encountered in trying to write out the program (instructions). What dif- 
ficulties did they experience? How did they overcome them? Did they overcome them? If time 
permits, have the students try to write "programs" for various other simple (apparently) tasks. 

2. Conduct the Delphi Survey activity 

Comprehensive instructions for this activity are included in the Student Guide. Duplicate 
What Are Your Future Forecasts? (Handout 3) for distribution to your students. 

3. Conduct Activity il Create the Future, 

This scenario-writing activity is fully explained in the Student Guide. For general information 
on scenario writing, see the accompanying Teacher's Guide. 



13 



16 



student Handout 3: What Are Your Future Forecasts? 





In Your Opinion How 
Desirable is This? 


When Do You 1 hink 
This Will Occur? 






very 
desirable 


desirable 


neutral 


not 
desirable 


1990- 
2000 


2001 - 
2010 


2011 - 
2020 


beyond 
2020 


never 


What Are Some of 
the Effects? 


Explain Why You Came 
to This Conclusion 


ADVANCES IN COMPUTERS 

1. Computers will understand human speech 
& respond to spoken instructions. 
























2. Computers will learn from experience & 
correct their own mistakes. 
























3. Computers will perform thinking and 

pidlllllliy laoKo. 
























4. Computers will operate motor vehicles, 
Trains, suuways & snips wiinoui neea oi 
human operators. 
























rulUiic unHnuCu 

1. Every household will have a computer. 
























2. Nearly everyone will know how to 
program a computer. 
























3. Most courses in schools will be taught by 
computers. 
























4. We will use computers to decide where to 
live, who to marry, what job to take, how to 
spend money. 
























5. If one wants information about another 
person, one can obtain it from a computer 
data bank. 
























6. With computerized banking & exchange of 
money electronically, cash will not be 
needed. 
























7. A majority of people will spend most of 
the day at home. 

























18 



Chapter 5. Energy - Nuclear Power 

1 . Have students read a transcript from a Smithville Town Meeting. The Smithville DectSion. 

This reading gives the students an opportunity to assume roles as Smithville residents and 
attempt to come to a decision about whether or not to permit the construction of a nuciear 
power plant in their com munity. The arg uments are presented in the form a transcript of a town 
meeting. 

The students should first read the transcript silently and then, if you like, the script can be pre- 
sented as a dramatization with students playing the various rolea If you decide not to conduct 
this activity as a dramatization, the various "parts" can be simply read aloud - each part read by 
a different student, or just have the students read the article a second time to ensure their 
understanding. 

2. After the students complete the reading, they should form into small groups of from 3 to 5 
students each to discuss and evaluate the different arguments that are presented in 
the transcript. 

Distribute a copy of the Argument Summary Sheet (Handout 4). A master copy which can be 
duplicated appears on the next page of this guide. The worksheet will help the students to 
logically sort their thoughts and arguments. 

3. The class will then reconvene as a group to hear the various reasons selected and the 
decisions of each group. 

The presentations should be limited to about 5 minutes in length. At the conclusion of the 
class discussion, each student will then cast his/her vote on the proposal. To avoid the 
possibility of "stronger willed" students trying to pressure other students to vote "their wa/', it 
is suggested that the vote be conducted as a secret ballot. 

The first part of this activity is completed with a discussion of the questions at the end of the 
section. While conducting this discussion, keep in mind the various suggestions made m the 
Teacher's Guide regarding classroom discussions. 

4. Have the students read Smithville Tod 

This second reading provides additional background information for the activity The Gover- 
nor's Decision, and should be read prior to conducting a class discussion. This script can also 
be acted out by members of the class or simply read toacquire an information base upon which 
the students can call when discussing the scenario later in this activity. 

It is interesting to note that recent studies indicate that growth in mental structures and 
reasoning occurs to an even greater extent when students are involved in ' acting out" scenarios 
as in role play or creative drama activities, than when they simply read and then discuss the 
scenario. Significant growth still occurs when using this latter strategy, however, not to the 
same degree as it occurs in the former. 

5. Conduct the activity. The Governor's Decision. 

Use the same strategies and techniques discussed above and the suggestions presented pre- 
viously in the Teacher's Guide (Conducting Classroom Discussions). 

6. Conduct the activity Technology, Consequences and Responsiblllbties. 

In conducting this activity, the students should complete Handout 5 while in sHidll groups. A 
master copy of the handout appears at the end of this section. 



,7 19 



The handout includes a series of six technologies and for each technology an undesirable 
effect is indicated The students are to consider line types of new responsibilities that people 
must assume when they use the technology and list the responsibilities under the appropriate 
column. They will then suggest a solution th^* averts or remedies the undesirable effect. 

When the small groups have completed the assignment, the class should then meet as a large 
group. At that time, a spokesperson from each of the small groups should report the group's 
decsion/conclusion to the entire class. Following the presentations, the class should com- 
pare and contrast the different reports and discuss some of the more important issues that 
emerged. The questions at the end of the activity can serve to stimulate further dis- 
cussion. Again, see the notes and suggestions regarding "Conducting Classroom Dis- 
cussions" in the Teacher's Guide. 



20 

18 



student Handout 4: Argument Summary Sheet 

1- In a summary form list the arguments "for" and "against** allowing the nuclear generating plant to be built m the 
area (e.g., FOR— need for electricity; AGAINST— change natural environment) 

2 According to your opinion, how important is each reason? Indicate the level oflmporiance with a number from 1 
to 4 in the "importance*" column. 

4 - most important 
3 - much importance 
2 - some importance 
I - no importance 



Import- Import- 
FOR ance AGAINST ancc 



21 



Student Handouts 
Tochnology, Consequences, and Responoibilities 



TECHNOLOGICAL AN UNDESIRABLE 
INNOVATION EFFECT 



Plastics Production of piP'Jtics 

create toxic waste 
products that are 
difficult to safely 
dispose of. 



NEW POSSIBLE 
RESPONSIBILITES SOLUTIONS 
FOR PEOPLE 



Automobiles Car exhaust fumes 

create smog which 
causes lung diseases 
and even death. 



Weather 
modification 
such as cloud 
seeding and 
hurricane control 



Hurricanes are 
diverted from 
one's own 
country and sent 
over another country' 
(perhaps to an 
unfriendly neighbor?). 



Television Alters the way 

that political campaigns 
are run and propels 
"media" candidates 



Sonar Enables fishermen to locate 

large schools of fish. This 
may lead to the depletion of 
oceanic food supplies. 



ERIC 



22 



Chapter 6. Environment - Acid Precipitation 

1 . Have the students read A Growing Problem. 

A variety of questions have been included throughout the reading to help students th ink about 
and process the information presented. It is important, as was the case in all previous chap- 
ters, to provide sufficient opportunities and time for the students to study and to discuss these 
questions. This helps the students to focus on the issues presented and fosters the develop- 
ment of a variety of thinki(.g skills. 

The pH chart included in the student textbook can be used to compare and contrast pH levels 
in various parts of the U nited States. An effective'way to initiate a lively discussion on the topic 
Is to begin with the questions that accompany the chart. 

2. Conduct the scenario activity Acid Lakes and Jobs. 

After the students read the scenario "Acid Lakes and Jobs'*, they should discuss the main 
question: 

Should Governor Jones order the companies to burn low sulfer coal? Or, should he 
allow them to continue to burn high sulfur coal? 

After surveying the opinions of the class regarding this question, and some of their reasons for 
their opinions, organize the class into several groups of 3-5 students each. Ask each group to 
discuss the questions again and to identify the most important reason and the second most 
important reason why Governor Jones should take that action. 

When the groups arrive at their answer, reassemble the entire class and ask each group to 
report its results to the class. 

An Evaluatfon of Possible Effects 

Again form the class into several groups of 3-5 students. Duplicate copies of Handout 6 "An 
Evaluation of Possible Effects". A master copy of this form appears at the end of this section. 

The groups should follow the instructions in the Student Guide to complete the Han- 
dout. While completing the form, they should consider thequestion in the text that follows the 
scenario "Acid Lakes and Jobs". 

Discuss the results of this activity as suggested in the Student Guide. 

3. Conduct the role-play simulation Amending the Clean Air Act 

In this activity, the students will simulate a Senate Committee conducting a hearing on a bill 
concerning acid precipitation. Seven students will represent Senators while the remaining 
students will represent one of the six special interest groups. Each group will make a formal 
presentation to the Senators, when the presentations are completed, the Senators will cast 
their votes and announce the results. 

Students can be assigned to roles by self-selection or by teacher assignment. Either method 
offers advantages and disadvantages. You know your own class best, so u^e the approach 
that appeals to you. The ideapoint is to group theclass so that a dynamic inte.s^hange of ideas 
will be produced. For more information on grouping, see the section of the Teacher's Guide on 
"Classroom Discussion" and grouping. 

Provideampletimeforthestudentstostudytheir role positions. Through careful review of the 
background information, they can identify the major arguments associated with the position 
they will portray. Moreover, the students should have at least one class period or more to iden- 
ify the major issues and develop their presentations. Additional research by students will 
enhance their learning experiences and provide other ideas for the debate. 

21 23 



The Fact Sheet (Handout 7) (a master copy appears on the next page of this guide) should be 
used by members of the interest group to aid in the development of their presentation. The 
Senators will use Handout 8 (master copy also included in this guide) at the hearing to help 
them organize their notes and comments on each group. 

Upon completion of the hearing, the senators will meet to determine the outcome of the 
hearings. Each vote is to be accompanied by a short rationale statement. The Chairperson 
announces the decision and explains the reasons of the Senators. 

The following gives an overview of the simulation schematically: 

Simulation Overview 
Students read background reading 

I 

Form various interest groups 

I 

Groups develop presentation 
I 

Presentations to Senate Committee 

I 

Senate Committee votes 



24 

22 



student Handouts 

AN EVALUATION OF POSSIBLE EFFECTS 
THE SOIL AND WATER IN PARKLANDS BECOME MORE ACID 



Immediate Consequence, 


Harm 


Future Consequences 


Harm 


1. 






1. 




2. 






2. 




3. 






3. 




4. 
5. 






4. 
5. 




6. 






6. 




THE GLASS COMPANIES CLOSE DOWN. AND 
POWER PLANTS BURN LOW SULFUR & COAL 


Immediate Consequences 


Harm 


Future Consequences 


Harm 


1. 






1. 




2. 






2. 




3. 






3. 




4. 






4. 




5. 






5. 




6. 






6. 





ERIC 



student Handout 7 
INTEREST GROUP: FACT SHEET TO DEVELOP ARGUMENTS 



26 



Argument 


Reasons and Benefits 


Supporting Facts 


Possible Opposing 
Arguments 


Response to Arguments 





















































1) List your arguments logically and precisely; 2) Make sure Reasons & Benefits justify your arguments; 3) Be sure to 
include supporting facts and materials to support your argument; 4) Anticipate possible objection or opposing statement to 
your argument and be prepared to defend your position. 



student Handouts 
SENATOR'S WORKSHEET 



Interest Group Name 


Argument 


Facts Presented 


Benefits to 
My State 


Disadvantages to 
My State 


Questions to Ask 































































1) Fill in the columns as the arguments are presented by the various interest groups; 2) Write down any question you may 
wish to ask the spokesperson; do not interrupt his/her presentation. Ask your questions at the end of the presentation. 



28 



Chapter 7. Environment - Hazardous Wastes 



1. Have the students read Hazardous Wastes. 

Provide opportunities for the students to respond to the questions posed in the reading. 
Students are given feedback on their answers at various points later in the reading. While 
scientific terms are explained parenthetically in the text, you may need to provide additional 
explanation/examples for some classes. 

Relate Paracelsus' statement regarding "dose'' being the prime difference between *'a poison 
and a remedy" to the use of drugs. A discussion of drug abuse is very appropriate at this 
point For instance, you might discuss how the proper use of drugs can lead to the misuse 
of drugs. 

Early in the reading, the idea of risk/benefit comes up again. This will happen several times 
throughout the text. That is, new ideas and concepts will keep appearing in different con- 
texts as the student goes through the program. This was done intentionally to help foster the 
development of thinking skills by applying similar strategies to different situations and con- 
ditions. At this time, it might be useful to referthe students back to previous chapters in which 
a risk/ benefit ratio was used (e.g.. Chapter 2). 

It would be most helpful to have a few copies of Silent Spring available for the students to read 
in conjunction with this chapter. An "extra credit" assignment can be developed using this 
classic book. It is readily available in paperback in most bookstores. 

When discussing the chemical structures of the various organic compounds, use your own 
judgment aboutthe amount ofdetail you include. Thetext provides enough information forthe 
students to understand the concept and the problems. You can, however, go into as much 
detail and structural analysis as you like or as time permits. Allow Su.'f icient time for analyzing 
the data presented. A considerable amount of information is packed into the tables and 
graphs. 

2 Have the students read Everybody's Problem and have the class discuss the questions 
posed at the end of the reading. 

3. Conduct the activity Harry Carter's Grain Company. 

This scenario is presented in several parts. Make sure the students understand the problem 
or dilemma as well as the various facts that impact on the problem. Follow the procedures 
outlined in the Teacher's Guide. 

The problem described in this scenario can also be addressed using a decision tree. If you 
decided to use this approach, try the procedure outlined above first, then use the decision tree 
and then compare the resulta Were the results similar? Different? Why? If time will not permit 
the use of both approaches, try having half the class deal with the scenario in a dilemma/ 
discussion format and half the class use the decision tree format. Then you can compare the 
results of the two groups. 

4. Conduct the activity Car? Society Really Help? 

Comprehensive instructions for this "formal debate" activity are provided in the Teacher's 
Guide (see Debates). Besuretoprovidethestudentswiththedebatepointersgivenattheend 
of this section in their texts. If you feel it necessary, duplicate any or all of the instruction for a 
formal debate and "debate printers" for distribution to your students. 

Background information obtained from reading this and other chapters is used to illustrate the 



27 

•30 



point that technology is advancing well beyond the level of understanding of much of society. 

It is very important to spend a sufficient amount of time fully explaining the questions presen- 
ted under Concluding Observations in order to tie together a lot of 'loose ends". You can have 
the entire class deal with each question individually, have small groups of students work on 
one question each, or use any other configuration that you choose. 



31 

28 



Chapter 8. Food and Agriculture 



This chapter requires the student to extract information from tables, analyze the data in 
several ways and from a variety of perspectives, and then synthesize the information in a crea- 
tive writing activity. 

1 . Have students read Forecasting the Future. 

In this brief reading students are introduced to some basic forecasting concepts and terms. In 
addition, students read about three important forecasts for the future. Interestingly, each 
forecast depicts a very different scenario for the future. Some are optimistic while others are 
somewhat pessimistic. The students are then asked to consider several questions that guide 
them towards systematically examining why the forecasts that presumably are based on the 
same data bases suggest very different futures. 

2. Have the students examine the data from the Cornucopia Project 

This data details trends in the area of food and agriculture. I n responding to some of the ques- 
tions about the Cornucopia data posed in Whats Happening to Farming, students will be 
required to extract and analyze data f •'om the table. That is, the student will not be able to read 
theanswerto the questions directly from theTable. Rather, he/she will be required to calculate 
the correct answers. Your guidance in extracting the necessary data and performing the 
appropriate calculations will be most importan t here. I n Al I cases, the answers to the questions 
can be 

read directly from the table, 

— derived by making the necessary calculations using data provided in the table, or 

— derived by extrapolating data provided in the table. 

At the end of each section the student is required to make a Summary Statement describing 
the meaning of the information they have uncovered. Since these summaries will be used at 
the end of the chapter to complete Activity B, make sure that the st udents arrive at justifiable 
conclusions and make accurate/reasonable summary statements. It is useful to collect and 
critique each of the summary statements and then return them to the students for necessary, 
"reconsideration", revision, and/or correction. 

3. Have students complete the Cost of Farming Activity, 

This activity is very similar to Activity A in format except that the information presented is 
interspersed with questions (and summary statements). Again, make sure that the students 
use the data provided correctly and prepare justifiable Summary Statements. 

4. Conduct the summary activity Averting Future Food Shortages. 

This activity is most important because it requires the student to draw together all of the infor- 
mation and data gathered previously and use it to develop a comprehensive plan to prevent or 
avert future food shortages. The procedure used is quite simple and straightforward. However, 
your guidance will be particularly needed in helping the students to get started. From then on, 
your major concern will be organizing the class activity. You might have the students work in 
small groups after each student develops his/her own plan of attack. 

5. Have the students read "Farming Is Who I Am" 

This reading adds another dimension to the problems addressed in this chapter. Whereas the 
first part of the chapter was rather factual and "data" oriented, this reading adds the ''human 




elemenr and illustrates how the personal lives of farmers are being impacted by "hard times". 
After reading this section, you might want to discuss the plight of the U.S. farmer. Perhaps 
some of your students live on farms or know farmers personally. Do they agree with the farmer 
pdrayed in this reading? Why? Why not? Using the information and data collected in conjunc- 
tion with the first partof this chapter, the students might be able to suggest ways to helpthe far- 
mer. Continue the discussion of this section as long as it appears to be useful. 

6. Have the Students read The Agricultural Mechanization Controversy. 

This is a real-life case study that discusses a frequently ignored or unrecognized aspect of 
technology. While the entire case is not presented here, enough information is provided to 
give the student an understanding and an appreciation of the problem. Questions designed to 
emphasize important points and considerationsare interspersed throughout the reading. Pro- 
vide ample opportunities to explore these questions fully. At times, the positions presented 
may get complicated and difficult to follow (depending on grade level, ability of students, 
etc.). Use the various "probe questions" outlined in the Teacher's Guide. 

The University of California vs. CRLA case may have some far-reaching implications for re- 
searchers and for society in other areas outside agriculture. Pursue this topic with the students. 
Use a series of "what if" questions to assist you in this activity 

7. Conduct the court simulation debate activity The Agricultural Mechanization Contro- 
versy 

This activity simulates the court case of the farm workers(plaintiffs) vs. University of California 
-Davis (defendants). 

A. Select 3-5 students (depending on class size) to serve as judges. On the basis of the 
arguments presented by each debating team, thejudges will determine how the courts 
should decide. The judges should select one member to serve as the Presiding or 
Chief Judge. 

B. Divide the remainder of the class into two equal teams: the plaintiffs and the defen- 
dants. The plaintiffs will "speak" for the farm workers and try to convince the judges 
that their position is the one they should favor. The defendantswill present arguments 
supporting the University of California Determinewhich team will be the plaintiffs and 
which will be the defendants by "flipping a coin". 

C. Conduct the Debate using the procedures outlined the the Teacher's Guide (see 
"Debates"). While eitherthe"lnformaror the Formal" debate prodecure can be used, 
the "Formal" approach is recommended for use with this chapter activity. 



30 



33 



Chapter 9. Medical Technology - Organ Transplantation 



1. Have the students read Recycling Human Bodies and Who Gets the Heart? 

It is mostimportant to provide enough time and opportunities to fully explore the various ques- 
tions posed in the readings. While the first reading is primarily factual, the issues raised in 
"Who gets the Heart" can be somewhat emotional. The teacher should not allow the discus- 
sion to deteriorate into an argument of emotions, but strive to have the students deal v^ith the 
issues rationally. It is important to create an empathetic and compassionate atmosphere, 
while at the same time, promote rational decision-making. 

2. Conduct the scenario discussion surrounding the Baby Jane Case. 

Follow the guidelines presented in the Teacher's Guide. Scenarios can be very effectively 
"acted ouf using creative drama techniques to highten the interest of the class. 

In discussing the Baby Jane Case, make sure that the students focus on why Baby Jane should 
or should not get the heart. These "why*' types of questions are critical for developing think- 
ing skills. 

3. Have students write guidelines for organ transplant patient selection. 

The guidelines may be written as an individual assign ment or as a small-group assignment (3 
to 5 students per group). If the guidelines are to be written as a group, it is important that the 
group as a whole first discuss each topic to get input and opinions from all the members, and to 
come to some general consensus about the group*s major concerns. Each gioup member 
should then select a specific topic to develop. 

After everyone has completed the assignment, each individual (or small group) will present 
his/her list of guidelines to the class. While each individual/group is presenting his/her guide- 
lines, the remainder of the class should keep notes on any guideline(s) that 

— they disagree with, 
— - are not clear, 

— appear to be faulty, 

— seem to be unfair, or 

— propose anything else they feel should be questioned, challenged, or discussed further. 

After each individual or group presentation is completed, students may then, using their notes 
as a guide, ask questions, challenge statements and positions, or ask for additional elabora- 
tion on any statement made by the presenters. Students should try to analyze all arguments 
and positions and be on the lookout for any statements or ideas that 

— indicate biases as part of the argument, 

— are based on unjustifiable assumptions, 

— are based on any ambiguous or unfair claims or arguments, 

— are inconsistent or based on faulty lines of reasoning, or 
— - are weak arguments. 

NOTE: ANY CHALLENGES OR QUESTIONS RAISED DURI NG THIS PART OF THE ACTIVITY 
SHOULD BE MADE IN A COURTEOUS AND RESPECTFUL MANNER. 



31 34 



Chapter 1 0. Transportation - Space Travel 



1. Have students read the background information on transportation. 

Once again, it is important that the students critically read and think about the information pre- 
sented inthis section.Thequestions included in this reading have been specifically developed 
to help the student relate the information to their own personal experiences. Use these ques* 
tions (and any others that you may generate) to encourage your students to think about the 
variety of issues related to the many modes of transportation. ' 

2. Have the students read The Space Shuttle-A Case Study. 

The script for this activity is based on the actual space shuttle tragedy which took place on 
January 28, 1986. Many students will be able to add their own personal recollections and 
experiences to this case study. You may wish to have one student read the case study to the 
rest of the class in a dramatic setting. 

3. Have the students read The Findings ana The Recommendations. 

Discuss the questions .t the end of this section. Try to get the students to read 'Into" V^e data 
and allow them to arrive at their own conclusions based on the data and information pre- 
sented. 

4. Conduct the Shuttle Program Discussion Activity. 

Allow the activity to continue as long as it appears useful. Use the guidelines in the Student 
Guide. You may find it useful to use the best arguments for and against continuing the Space 
Shuttle program. 

5. Conduct the scenario writing activity Transportation in the Future. 

In this activity the students are to write a scenario based on one of the topics suggested in the 
Student Guide. Alternatively, they may wish to develop a transportation topic related to thei^ 
own particular area of interest. The main purpose of this activity is to have the students 
examine potential changes or effects created by a given decision or situation. Using the 
scenario format, the students can begin to consider the many complex and intricate issues sur- 
rounding the different modes of transportation. 

The students should be organized into small groups. Each group should select one of the 
topics suggested or another topic of their own choosing. After the students complete their 
scenarios, the scenarios should be presented to the entire class. 



33 35 



Chapter 1 1 . Computer Technology - Robotics 



1 . Read the "want ad" that opens the chapter to the students. 

Have the students try to determine just who or what can fill the job being advertized This will 
generate interest in the reading and issues that follow. 

2. Have students read background information on robotics. 

The reading has been developed to highlight many of the issues surrounding the field of 
robotics, including latest technology, economic considerations, societal impact, and future 
possibilities for robotic technology. Students are challenged to make future predictions as 
they address the questions incorporated in the readings. You should further challenge your 
students to uncover other issues that might underlie a potential robotic society. You may wish 
to have th. students discuss other sources of information that may contribute to everyone*s 
background on this topic. New information usually appears daily in newspapers or magazines 
-concerning the topic of robotics. 

3. Conduct the Case Study Mr. Harris' Factory, Part /. 

In conducting this activity, follow the instructions included in conjunction with teaching chap- 
ters4, 5, 6, etc., and conducting scenario discussions. If you have not used th is strategy before, 
it would also be useful to review the material dealing with conducting classroom discussions, 
scenario discussion, and questioning strategies presented previously in the Teacher's Guide, 

4. Conduct the Case Study Mr Harris' Factory, Part 2. 

The purpose of this activity is similar to most others that utilize the classic prisoners' dilemma 
approach (Hyman, 1 978). The activity seeks to have the students examine the socio-ethical 
issues related to the scenario pay-off chart. This simulation presents a values conflict in which 
two students are required to make a decision on the same question but without knowledge cf 
each other's thoughts or forthcoming decisions. There is oral communication at only one point 
during the simulation. 

Make sure that the students fully understand the scenario, how the simulation is to be conduc- 
ted, its purpose, and the rules before starting this activity. 

Mr. Harris' scenario is concerned with a conflict between two people - Mr. Harris and Mr. 
Fredericks. Each person has the same two choices to make during the simulation. Both have 
the choice of either installing robots or not installing robots in their factories. There are four 
possible outcomes: 

1. Both install robots. 

2. Both do not install robots. 

3. Mr. Harris installs robots while Mr. Fredericks does not. 

4. Mr. Fredericks installs robots while Mr. Harris does not. 

For each of these possibilities, there is a "payoff" in terms of profits that can be gained (see 
Payoff Chart in the student text). 

Theconflictin this simulation lies in theway the payoffsarecreated. These payoffs constitutea 
non-zero sum game. That is, for each "winner** there is not necessarily a loser, as in a game of 
football or baseball. The players are confronted with a conflict because it appears that, no mat- 
ter what choice they make, it appears they will not fare very well. 

The players decide to install or not install robots without first talking to each other or knowing 
what the other will decide. They pass written notes to each other to announce their decision • 



35 36 



No talking or discussion talces place at this point. The players communicate face-to-face 
only after they have made some initial decisions. 

The students requlreonly a pencil, scrap paper, a copy of Mr. Hams' Case Study, and the Payoff 
Chart. Master copies of the Payoff Chart appear on the next page of this guide, as well as m the 
student textbook. 



Divide the class into pairs and either assign the role of Mr. Harris or Mr. Fredericks to each stu- 
dent or, as a second possibililty, hav'e the students select their own preference. Tell them to sit 
back-to-back without talking to each other at ANY time until directed to do so. 

After the first decision is made in writing, the players pass their decisions (slips of paper) over 
theirshoulderstotheother players. Each player records each other's response on h\s, her own 
record sheet. 



There is no suggested time limit for conducting this simulation. The players write 1 0 separate 
decisions back-to-back during 1 0 rounds of play. After 1 0 rounds, the players confer face-to- 
face for 3 to 5 minutes about what has happened thus far. The players then repeat the first part, 
making 10 more separate decisions sitting back-to-back. 

After the twentieth round, you should debrief the exercise. This debriefing gives the players an 
opportunity to find out what others did, to reflect upon what they did, and to put the entire pro- 
cess together. 

One strategy you may use for debriefing includes the following: 

1. Describe what happened. 

2. Analyze the game's message. 

3. Plan future discussions and activities. 

4. Prepare summary and concluding statements. 

Allow ample time for the students to vent some of the feelings they experienced during this 
activity. Then encourage them to discuss what happened during the simulation using the 
following questions: 

— What decisions did you make? 

— Who switched decisions during the game? 

— Why did you switch? 

— How did you feel about your opponent's decisions? 

— Were you able to predict you opponent's decisions? Why? 

— Upon what did you base your decision? 

— What did you talk about during the 3- to 5-minute conversation? 

— V/hat way can we relate this simulation to real-life situations? 

— What, if anything, did you learn about compromise? 

Help your students to make generalizations and draw conclusions about the simulation and 
the issues contained in the scenario. Have the students brainstorm a list of ideas that wefe 
generated from this simulation. What generalizations and conclusions can be drawn from 
them? 

One final strategy you may wish to consider is to have the students complete the following sen 
tence: ''After going through this simulation^ I now realize that.,," You can then compare and 
contrast the responses by listing the commonalities and differences on the chalk board. 



36 

37 



5. Conduct the activity Examining the Effects of Robots: Tfie Futures Wheel, 



A futures wheel is a technique used to explore the consequences of an idea, trend, or decision. 
The effects are displayed in a graphic form that permits one to examine multiple interactions 
and "spinoffs". The central idea/trend is entered in a circle in the center of the paper. Spokes 
extend from the central circle and end with a circle in which is entered a First-order effect. The 
process is repeated with second-order effects radiating from the first, third from the second, 
and so on. 

Working in small groups, students will select one of toe ideas suggested or utilize one of their 
own ideas to complete a futures wheel. Review with the students the instructions and the 
example shown in the student textbook If possible, it is helpful to have large sheets of paper 
(i.e., newprint) available. This will permit the members of the group to work on the wheel 
simultaneously. 



ERIC 



37 38 



CHAPTER 12. TECHNOLOGY AND DECISION-MAKING. 



Recently, government officials, as well as the public, have acknowledged the important need 
to recognize adverse effects of technologies before they become widely instituted How to 
avert potential catastrophies and unpleasant side effects is a difficult challenge because 
there are so many unknowns. We would all welcome an accurate "crystal ball" which forecasts 
all future effects. But given that crystal balls are beyond our grasps, we have begun to develop 
methodologies for evaluating the potential impacts of technologies. Such evaluation tech- 
niques fall under the rubric of "technology assessment". The purpose of technology assess- 
ment is to provide decision-makers and policy-makers with a broad information base to help 
them make w'se judgments. Technologyassessmentinvolvesasystematicgatheringofinfor- 
.mation using a variety of techniques, including input from experts from various disciplines, 
evaluating different options; and organizing the information in a useful manner. The focus is 
not only on direct consequences, but on higher order consequences such as effects on peo- 
ple, social organizations, institutions and the physical environment In a sense, a technology 
assessment is a societal impact statement that examines how a technology might influence 
social, legal, political, economic, and educational sectors. It provides data for decision- 
making so that people can better select directions for the f Jture. 

This final chapter draws upon all of the knowledge and '^kill the students developed as a resuU 
of studying the previous chapters. However, even it the previous chapters have not been 
studied prior toconducting this activity, students should still be able to accomplish many of the 
objectives of this chapter. 

In this final activity, students will evaluate potentialfuture activities using a technology assess- 
ment process. While such techniques as technological forecasting, cost benefit and benefit 
nsk analysis, systems analysis, modeling, and other types of futures forecasting methodologies 
are beyond the scope of many high school students, they can at least begin to identify and 
think about how a new technology might influence, f.ffect, or change our existing society. The 
intent of this simulation is thus to challenge students to search for possible unintended, 
indirect, or delayed impacts of a new technology in order that people can prepare to make 
necessary adjustments or appropriate responses. 

The students will work in one of four interest groups and assume the role-perspective of that 
group. From a list of future technologies, they will select those that will best promote the goals 
of their group. Using the technology assessment flow chart, they will examine each technol- 
ogy and its impact on the areas listed. Based on the assessment, the group will then select 
four technologies to submit to the World Review Court for final evaluation. To complete the 
activity the students will write a scenario describing a world of the future where the "court 
approved" technologies have been instituted. 

The following flow chart summarizes the sequence of events for this activity. 



SIMULATION PLAN 

Parti 
Group Preparation 



1. 



Students form four (4) groups. Factory 
workers. Government Officials, 
Industrialists, Preservationists. 



2. 



Each group reviews goals, studies 
issues, and selects four technologies. 



3. 



Each group assesses the four 
technologies and prepares its 
presentations. 




Part II 
World Review Court 

1. Class assumes roles of World Review 
Court to hear presentations of 
technologies. 

2. Court evaluates each technology and 
approves or rejects it. 

Part III 
Scenario of the Future 

Students write a scenario of the future 
that describes how the accepted 
technologies have been or will be 
applied. 

Part I - Group Preparation. 

Students will work together ir. one of four groups: 

— Industrial Workers 

— Government Workers 

— Industrialists 

— Preservationists 

You may wish to assig n students to groups or allow them to select their own groups. In cither 
case, the groups should be evenly divided. 

Review the different steps of the simulation so that everyone understands the purposeand the 
tasks. Have the students examine Diagram 1 which outlines the sequence of events. This is 
also a good time to review the completed example in the student text so that any student ques- 
tions about the tasks can be answered before they begin the activity. Each student should 
receive a copy of the Technology Assessment Wo ASheet (Handout 9). A Master copy of this 
form appears at the end of this section. 

In their groups, the students should begin a discussion of their goals so that all group members 
will share a common understanding. They should then compile a list of issues or "problems to 
be solved'*. This list serves as a guide in helping the group identify technologies related to 
its goals. 

The group members will make their selections from the list of Future Technologies. Since the 
list is rather lengthy, the members may wish to divide the list and have different members study 
the various sections. Also, since some technologies will be discarded after the assessment, a 
nu mber greater than four should be selected A good strategy is to ran k those selected in their 
order of importance and then evaluate each in turn. When four technologies have been selec- 
ted, those items remaining need not be further considered 

The members may wish to conduct the assessment and fill in the worksheet as a group or 
individually. There are advantages to both methods. Group size may be the determining factor. 
However, having several students provide input facilitates the development of more ideas. 

After the assessments are completed and group members have agreed upon the four pro- 
posed technologies, each group develops a five-minute report for each technology to be pre- 
sented orally before the World Review Court. This report is essentially an argument in support 
of the technology and should demonstrate the beneficial changes that will result if the technology 

40 



40 



wereadopted Information from the completed worksheets provides the basic concepts which 
are furtherelaborated upon in therepcrt. Allow approximately two to threeclass periods fortne 
students to complete this portion of the simulation. 

PART II. World Review Court Hearing. 

At the designatedtimetheclass will convene at the World ReviewCourt. One student will serve 
as the Presiding Judge whois responsible for maintaining order and calling upon presenters m 
turn. He or she should also be assisted by a time-keeper who ensures that the presentation 
does not exceed the time limit. 

The students must now assume their roles as World Court Judges. Apart from the time when 
they make their presentations as representatives of an interest group, they must take the role 
of impar j'al judges who are responsible for the well-being of the world-at-large. They will 
undoubtedly experience internal conflict because they are promoting their own proposal and 
at the same time must exercise objective judgment In many respects, this is not unlike 
situations experienced by members of Congress or other elected officials who must respond 
to the special interests of the constituency who elected them while considering national 
needs and policy. Try to impress upon the students the importance of their role as judges and 
challenge them to stretch their critical thinking abilities. 

Each student receives a copy of the World Review Court Evaluatiqn Sheet. On it is a list of 
"objections" that they should consult periodically during each presentation. On the reverse 
side is a table for recording the results. Master copies for duplication appear at the end of 
this section. 



It may be useful to review with the class the list of objections and cite an example for each 
objection. This will help the students to better understand the meaning and implications of 
those objections. 

In a rotation sequence, the four interest groups will present their technologies before the 
World Review Court. Following each report, the judges have an opportunity to cite an objec- 
tion. Each objection must be accompanied by an explanation as to why the technology is 
undesirable or potentially dangerous. The Court as a whole will then vote on the acceptability 
of the objection. Technologies that receive two objections are eliminated 

After all presentations are heard and evaluated, the technologies meeting the Court s approval 
are announced by the Presiding Judge. The interest group with the greatest number of tech- 
nologies accepted is declared the group that has successfully achieved its stated goal. 

PART IIL Discussion of Results and Scenario of the Future. 

Following the simulation, the students will write a scenario ot the future describing a world 
where the selected and approved technologies have been instituted. The scenario may be 
written individually, in small groups or as a homework assign ment. In writing the scenario, the 
students will need to organize some of their own ideas developed during the course of the 
simulation and explore their thoughts about how the various technologies might influence 
future events. This writing activity challenges the students to make projections about future 
changes brought about by the new technologies and to include their personal commentary 
about those changes. While they have been evaluating technological impact throughout the 
simulation, the scenario provides a format for students to evaluate the final decisions they 
made and bring all their thoughts together. 

In the scenario the students will answer the question, "How will the future be affected by the 
decisions we made?" The technologies selected will be examined from a broader perspective 



41 



41 



and in terms of how one technology interacts with another. Scenario writing is, in fact, a 
methodology used by future forecasters to explain or explore a projection of the future. By 
developing a story or narrative around a series of possible events or desired goals, one can 
begintoexamin8thecompIexinteractionsoffactorsandvariablesofthatsituation.lt provides 
a flexible format for the writer to consider possible changes, consequences, and interrela- 
tionships in a more holistic manner. In this particular scenario-writing exercise, the students 
will be making predictions about future changes and identifying ways in which society pre- 
pares for and responds to those ch anges. This will enable students to gain additional insights 
about technology and change. 

Follow the guidelines for writing scenarios present in the chapters preceding this one as well 
as the suggestions provided in the Teacher's Guide. 

Comments and Suggestions. 

The list of "Technological Innovations" included in the student textbook contains a number of 
technologies that are, of course, unfamiliar to most people. Students will need to learn more 
about these technologies and the uses. Hence, it is important to provide the students with suf- 
ficient time to research. Increased knowledge will help to make the assessment task easier 
and make the simulation more interesting. The amount of time to be devoted to research is 
best determined by you and your knowledge of the students' needs and interests. 

There are no prescribed time limits for the group meetings. However, a flexible schedule 
should be established to provide the students with a guideline of tasks to be accomplished. 



42 

42 



student Handout 9 
TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT WORKSHEET 



What needs influence the 
development of the 
technology? 



T 



What are the components of 
the technology? 



Who will control the technology 
and who will benefit from it? 



Technology 

Give an example of its use . 



t 



First order consequence - What is the intended effect(s)? 



Second order consequences - What effects are related to the technology? 



Higher order consequences - What broad changes will occur? 



Impacts on Other Areas 



Individual Health and 
Safety 



Family Life 



Government and Laws 



Community 



Natural Resources 



Waste Disposal 



Workplace 



Bufiiness 



Energy Needs 



Environment 



Industry 



Student Handout 10 



WORLD REVIEW COURT EVALUATION SHEET 

Objections 

The new technology will. 

1 — Violate individual freedom and freedom of choice 

2 — Cause irreparable damaging change to the environment of human life 

3 — Create overcrowding and widespread famine 

4 — Create large scale unemployment 

5 — Invade personal privacy 

6 — Produce dangerous waste products 

7 — Enable government to make more of our personal decisions 

8 — Produce conflict between nations and increase likelihood of global warfare 

9 — Increase the gap between the rich and the poor nations 

10 — Drain nonrenewable natural resources 

1 1 — Create economic instability as a result of government overspending 

12 — Increase social unrest and conflict by widening the gap between the rich and poor 

13 — Increase competition among nations for scarce resources 

14 — Produce situations where people feel alienated, useless or a lack of control over 

their own lives 

15 — Leads to "Big Brotherism" — government increases the monitoring of its citizens 

16 — Reduces the value of human life and human dignity 



Instructions: 

• Record the title of the new technology 
presented and the name of the group 
sponsoring it. During the presentation, 
you are to decide whether or not the tech- 
nology will create/cause any of the objec- 
tions listed above. 

« Try to think of different ways in which 
the technology might be used. Ask your- 
self the questions: "What might happen if 
the technology were used or controlled by 
an unscrupulous person or group?'', 
"What might happen if it were used in 
ways other than its intended purpose?", 
or "Will it create unresolvable problems 
for future generations?" 

• When the presenter is finished, you, as 



judges, may in turn, cite an objection. Re- 
cord the number of the objection in the 
box next lo the title. The entire panel of 
judges will then vote on that objection: 
Yes '— if they agree with the objection. No 
— if they disagree with the objection. Re- 
cord the number of Yes votes and No 
votes. Other objections will be made and 
voted upon in a similar manner. Do this 
until all objections are heard. A technol- 
ogy which produces two or more objec- 
tions will be eliminated. Therefore, if the 
judges agree upon two objections, it is 
unnecessary to hear any additional objec- 
tions. Proceed to the next technology un- 
til all 16 technologies have been heard and 
evaluated. 



14 



RECORD SHEET 



Name of 

Technology Group Objection Number and Record of Vote 



1 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 




No 




No 




No 




No 


2 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 




No 




No 




No 




No 


3 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 




No 




No 




No 




No 


4 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No ■ 


No 




NO 




NO 




No 


5 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 


No 


No 


No 


No 


6 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 


No 


No 


No 


No 


7 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 


^0 ■■■ 




No 


No 




No 


8 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 


No 




No 


No ■ 


No 


9 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 




No 


No 


No 


No 


10 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 


No 


No 


No 


No 


11 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


Ho 




No 




No 


No 


No 


12 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 




No 




No 


No 


No 


13 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 


No 




No 




No 


No 


14 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No- 


No 




No 




No 


No 


in 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 


No 


No 




No 




No 


No 


16 






Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




Yes 




No 




No 




No 




No 




No 



ERIC 



45 



