AD  A 0 2 5 3 1 5 


BOLT  BERANEK,  AND  NEWMAN  1 N c 

mm 


CONSULTING  • DEVEIOPM 


BBN  REPORT  NO.  3302 
A. I.  REPORT  NO.  41 


INTELLIGENT  ON-LJNE  ASSISTANT  AND  TUTOR  SYSTEM 
Technical  Progress  Report  No.  1 
18  September  1975  to  31  March  1976 


f 


Sponsored  by 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
ARPA  Order  No.  3091 


D D 

C' 

^p^rpronpra 

JUN  10 

1976  jj’! 

m 

1 1 

[ >J  iLir- 

I 

Sifw 

I 


1 


s::j-:rtss  EUKK0.^  S'S’ff 

nder  Contract  No.  N00014-76-0476 . 


; eUher  expressed  or  1-pll.d.  of  the  Advenced 

search  Projects  Agency  or  the  U.S.  Government. 


BOSTON  WASHINGTON  CHICAGO 


HOUSTON  LOS  ANGELES  OXNARD  SAN  FRANCISCO 


Unclassified ______ 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PACE  Dm  a Entered) 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


a.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 


TITLE  (end  SuflTTfij~  i..  . ...  . - 

INTELLIGENT  ON-LINE  ASSISTANT  AND  TUTOR 
, SYSTEM, / Tec hm  1 cfe 1 Progress 
L-RtTporlt  No.  1,  18  September  1975  to 

31  March  1976  __ 


L_Autmqr(.;  j 

Mario  C.  /Grignetti,  Alice  K.  'Hartley 
Catherine  /kausmann,  William  L.  'Ash/ 
Robert  J.  Aobrow/  Alan  Bell  _ 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  AOORESS 

Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc.  - - 
50  Moulton  St. 

Cambridge,  MA  02138 


II.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  AOORESS 

ON  It  //V 

Department  of  the  Navy 

Arlington,  VA  22  2 17  

U.  MONITORING  AGENCY  name  8 ADORESSflf  Jlllerent  Iron i Cantrolllnl  Olll cm) 


IS.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  title  RapoflJ 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM  , 


».  RECIPIENT’S  CATALOG  NUMBER 


5 T^PE  OF  REPORT  A PERIOD  COVERED 

TecnSJrog  . R'&pt . #1  , 

18  Sep t">  75-31  Mar**  7 ( 


8.  PERFORMING  ORG.  REPORT  NUMBER 

BBN  Report  No.  3302 


8 CONTRACT  Q.B. GRANT  NUMBER!*; 

N00014-76-C-0476,'  . . 


II  REPORT  OATE  _ 

Apr  ttT1976  . 


IS.  NUMBER  OF  PAGE 


IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  f ol  title  imp  art) 

Unclassified 


ISa  DECLASSI FICATION/ DOWNGRADING 

schedule 


Distribution  of  this  document  is  unlimited.  It  may  be  released 
to  the  Clearinghouse,  Department  of  Commerce,  for  sale  to  the 
general  public . 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  the  ebetrecl  mnlmrmd  In  Block  20,  II  dlllerml  Irooi  Report) 


_ _ 0 7 


IS  SUPPLEMENTARY  notes 


/ >>  - 


19.  KEY  WORDS  (Conf/nu#  on  rororoo  old*  It  noeoooory  m d identify  by  block  numbor) 

Artificial  Intelligence,  Computer  Assisted  Instruction,  Natural 
Language  Understanding,  Syntactic  Analysis,  Semantic  Interpre- 
tation, Semantic  Networks,  Question  Answering,  INTERLISP  imple- 
mentation, Writable  Control  Store,  Memory  mapping  device 

20  ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  revoreo  elde  II  neceeeecy  md  Identity  by  block  number) 

This  report  covers  work  performed  from  18  September  1975  to  31 
March  1976  under  Contract  No.  N000 1 4 - 7 6 -C -04 7 6 . Our  final  ob- 
jective is  to  develop  a system  to  help  computer-naive  people 
deal  with  their  Intelligent  Terminal,  an  envisioned  personal 
mini-computer  of  great  sophistication  and  power.  Our  system  will 
be  capable  of  mediating  "intelligently"  between  these  users  and 
the  tools  that  vrill  be  available  to  them  in  the  Intelligent 


INTELLIGENT  ON- 


LINE ASSISTANT  AND  TUTOR  SYSTEM 


Technical  Proqess  Report  No.  1 
18  September  1975  to  31  March  1976 


ARP A Order  No.  3091 


Contract  No.  N 0 0 0 1 4 - 7 6 - C - 0 4 7 6 


Program  Code  No.  6D30 

Name  of  Contractor: 

Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  Inc. 

Effective  Date  of  Contract: 

18  September  1975 

Contract  Expiration  Date: 

31  December  1976 

Amount  of  Contract: 

$592,562.00 


Principal  Investigator: 

Mario  C.  Grignetti 
(617)491-1850  x 3 9 4 

Scientific  Officer: 

Gordon  Goldstein 

Short  Title  of  Work: 

INTELLIGENT  ON-LINE  ASSISTANT 
AND  TUTOR  (INLAT) 


Sponsored  by 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
AREA  Order  No.  3091 


the  official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of 
Research  Projects  Agency  or  the  U.S.  Government. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


■am 


m*t 


mm 


« « 


-r  *» 

SECTION 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

3 

h 

SECTION 

2 

INTERLISP-11 

6 

r 

Introduction  and  purpose 

6 

« * 

Hardware 

7 

i 

.1 

Writable  Control  Store  - Purpose  and  Description 

8 

* * 

Memory  Mapping 

11 

Age  Distribution  Registers 

14 

f 

i 

Software  Implementation 

15 

I.., 

Operating  environment 

15 

LISP  kernel 

17 

New  I ISP  code 

20 

i ; 

Available  tools 

21 

? ' 1 

Present  Status 

21 

1 

Hardware 

22 

Software 

22 

Prognosis 

22 

W-w  * 

Schedule 

23 

'1  \ 

SECTION 

3 

"INTELLIGENT"  ON-LINE  ASSISTANTS  AND  TUTORS 

24 

m ■ * 

Introduction 

24 

Tutorials  for  systematic  teaching 

25 

a* 

Methodology  of  building  tutorials 

27 

SL1 

The  tutorial  as  a stand-alone  document 

30 

* 

Quest  ion- Answer ing 

32 

Collecting  sample  Questions 

33 

m m 

1 ; 

I. 


Page  2 


Analyzing  the  sample  questions  36 

Parsing  37 

Semantic  Interpretation  39 

Semantic  Network  44 

Current  Control  Structure  48 

APPENDIX  A - Specifications  53 

APPENDIX  B - PDP-li  Memory  Mapping  Device  61 

APPENDIX  C - A Tutorial  Introduction  to  Hermes  76 


Page  3 


SECTION  1.  INTRODUCTION 

Wo  are  interested  in  making  it  easy  for  comDuter-na ive 
peoole  to  sit  in  front  of  a computer  terminal  (eventually  an 
I ntel 1 iqent  Terminal)  and  learn  how  to  use  the  computer 
tools  available  through  it.  We  believe  that  a qood  way  to 
achieve  this  goal  is  by  means  of  a reactive  learning 
environment,  where  tutorial  services  ranging  from  systematic 
teaching  to  occasional  on-line  help  are  made  easily  and 
immed iately  available  to  users. 

The  three  fundamental  aspects  that  such  a learning 
environment  must  incorporate  are: 

1)  wel 1 -o rgan i zed  tutorials,  i.e.  a set  of  lessons  that 

systematically  teach  the  how-to  knowledge  that  is 

essential  for  useful  operation  of  a computer  tool? 

2)  the  ability  to  "look"  over  the  user's  shoulder  and  be 
"aware"  of  what  he  is  doing,  so  that  when  needed,  the 
system  can  offer  help  that  is  specific  to  the  task  the 
user  is  engaged  in. 

3)  the  ability  to  perform  these  services  in  response  to  user 
requests  expressed  in  natural  language  (English). 

Since  such  reactive  learning  environments  incorporate 
Artificial  Intelligence  techniaues,  and  to  the  extent  that 
they  appear  to  have  features  that  mimic  human  intelligence, 
we  have  coined  for  them  the  acronym  INLAT  ("Intelligent" 
oN-Line  Assistant  and  Tutor). 


Paqe 


4 


The  specific  objectives  of  the  present  contract  are  to 
develop  INLAT's  for  three  of  the  tools  that  may  conceivably 
be  the  mainstays  of  future  Intelligent  Terminals.  These 
tools  are  Hermes  {a  computer  mail  processing  system) , the 
Rand  editor  (a  multi-window,  scope  editor)  and  a News 
Service  information  retrieval  system  (such  as  the  New  York 
Times  Information  Bank  or  Stanford's  News  Service  program). 


INLAT's  can  be  best  developed  in  a programming 

environment  that  makes  it  easy  to  turn  out  large  and 

sophisticated  systems  in  relatively  short  times.  It  is  very 
important,  especially  when  dealing  with  potentially  large 
populations  of  computer-naive  users,  to  be  able  to 

drastically  revise  design  concepts,  approaches  and 
implementations.  We  believe  that  INTERLISP  is  the  best 
available  "milieu"  in  which  this  fast  turn-over  development 

effort  can  take  place.  Not  only  is  it  based  on  a language 

of  enormous  power  and  flexibility  (LISP) , the  work  horse  of 
most  AI  work  today;  it  is  also  a system  that  has  built  in 
many  of  the  facilities  (such  as  the  Do  What  I Mean  (DWIM) 
and  the  Programmer's  Assistant)  that  are  considered 
essential  in  an  Intelligent  Terminal.  For  these  reasons, 
the  crucial  part  of  the  present  effort  is  to  provide  an 
INTERLISP  environment  on  the  machine  that  has  been  selected 
as  a first  prototype  for  the  Intelligent  Terminal,  the 


DEC  PDP-11 


Paqe 


5 


The  body  of  the  Report  beqins  with  a descriotion  of  our 
desiqn  qoals  and  the  work  performed  in.  brinqinq  up  an 
1NT2RLISP  system  on  the  PDP-11.  In  the  remainder  of  the 
Report  we  describe  the  work  performed  to  implement  our 
INLAT.  Althouqh  the  INLAT  is  intended  as  an  aid  in  the  use 
of  multiple  tools,  the  bulk  of  our  work  in  this  area  to  date 
has  been  centered  on  orovidinq  a counselor  and  assistant  for 
the  Hermes  messaqe  system  beinq  developed  independently  at 
BBN.  Therefore,  our  description  is  limited  to 


INLAT-Hermes  system. 


Page  6 


SECTION  2 


INTERLISP-11 


_Int  roductj.on  and  Purpose 

The  main  objective  of  our  Intelligent  Terminal  work  is 
to  make  it  easy  for  computer-naive  people  to  learn  how  to 
work  with  a computer  capable  of  performing  a number  of 
clerical  functions.  We  believe  that  our  objective  can  be 
achieved  if  we  provide  tutorial  and  on-line  help  facilities 
that  rely  heavily  on  natural  language  understanding 
techniques.  These  techniques  have  been  developed  for  the 
most  part  using  LISP  programming  environments  of  great 
sophistication  and  power,  of  which  INTERLISP  is  perhaps  the 
best  known. 

Although  INTERLISP  is  a formidably  powerful  tool,  and 
its  advantages  for  AI  work  are  widely  recognized,  its  usage 
has  been  relegated  to,  and  is  commonly  associated  with 
powerful,  large  machines.  In  recent  years,  however,  the 
technological  advances  in  computer  hardware  have  been  so 
dramatic  that  today's  "minicomputers"  have  almost  equalled 
the  power  of  such  mainstays  of  LISP  as  the  PDP-10,  and  are 
available  at  a fraction  of  the  latter's  cost.  Therefore, 
one  of  our  most  important  subgoals  is  to  bring  up  a full 
INTERLISP  system  (as  it  now  exists  in  the  PDP-10  under 
TENEX)  on  a PDP-11  computer.  This  we  call  INTERLISP-11. 


Page  7 


More  soec i f ica 1 1 y , what  wo  want  to  provide  in  an 
INTERLISP  environment  with  the  following  characteristics: 

a)  serves  a sinqle  user, 

b)  is  fullv  comoat ible  with  INTERLISP, 

c)  runs  at  half  the  speed  of  INTERLISP-10  when  there  is  only 
one  user  (therefore  it  should  aopear  much  faster  than 
INTERLISP-10  under  "normal"  TENEX  load  conditions), 

d)  has  a larqer  address  space  (4  million  words)  than 
INTERLISP-10  (which  is  known  to  be  too  small),  and 

e)  minimizes  machine  dependent  code  for  easier  exporting  to 
another  computer . 

In  the  rest  of  this  section  we  describe  our  plan  for 
achieving  these  purooses.  We  begin  *>bv  describing  the 
hardware  configuration  that  we  selected  and  the  reasons  for 
choosing  it.  Next  we  describe  the  software  work  that  is 
needed  to  accomplish  our  goals  with  the  selected  hardware. 
Finally,  we  describe  the  oresent  status  of  the  work  and  our 
orognosis  of  what  will  be  done  bv  when. 

Hardware 

tj 

The  characteristics  of  the  desired  INTERLISP-11 
environment  impose  three  kinds  of  broad  requirements  on  the 
hardware.  These  reouirements  comprise  the  ability  for: 

1)  efficiently  executing  LISP  compiled  code  and  storing 
comoactly  LISP  data  structures  (mainlv  lists), 


Page  8 


2)  dealing  with  a large  virtual  address  space, 

3)  running  the  UNIX  operating  system  and  the  Rand  software 
developed  to  run  under  it,  especially  RITA  and  the  Rand 
Editor  . 

In  order  to  satisfy  the  third  requirement  we  need  a 
system  centered  on  the  PDP-11  computer?  the  other  two 
requirements  impose  a particular  selection  within  the  PDP-11 
family  and  the  incorporation  of  extra  hardware. 
Specifically,  the  hardware  configuration  that  was  specified 
for  our  purpose  consists  of  a DEC  PDP-11/40  processor  with 
128K  words  of  core  memory,  a fast  512K  words  fixed  head  disk 
for  swapping  (R304) , and  a slower  28M  words  disk  for 
secondary  swapping  and  filing  {Telefile).  In  addition,  we 
have  an  interface  for  network  communications  (IMP-11A) , a 
Writable  Control  Store  (WCS)  for  efficient  and  compact 
microcoding  of  compiled  LISP  code  and  for  compact  list 
structure,  a specially  designed  Memory  Mapping  Device  (MMD) 
to  facilitate  the  imple nentation  of  the  large  address  space, 
and  a number  of  other  peripheral  devices.  In  what  follows 
we  will  describe  only  the  two  non-standard  components  in  the 
above  configuration,  the  WCS  and  the  MMD. 


Wr i table 

Control 

Store  — Purpose  and  Descr 

iption 

The 

Writable  Control 

Store  (WCS) 

was  de 

signed 

at 

Carnegie 

Mellon 

University 

by  Professor 

Samuel 

Fuller 

and 

his  group,  and  it  is  used  extensively  in  their  Hydra 
project.  It  provides  a way  of  auqmenting  the  caoabilities 
of  the  standard  11/40  processor  which  is  crucially  important 
for  our  purposes.  The  most  important  advantage  derived  from 
usinq  the  WCS  is  that  it  allows  us  to  design  an  instruction 
set  for  LISP-compiled  code  that  is  independent  of  the  host 
machine  instruction  set  and  is  therefore  better  suited  to 
LISP  idiosyncrasies.  The  resultant  object  programs  are 
therefore  more  comoact  and  run  more  efficiently  than  their 
PDP-10  counterparts.  In  terms  of  required  memory  size,  we 
estimate  that  object  programs  written  in  the  above  set  will 
be  only  1/3  as  larqe  (in  terms  of  number  of  bits)  as 
eauivalent  PDP-10  compiled  LISP.  Alternately,  they  will 
reauire  3/4  as  manv  16-bit  PDP-11  words  as  required  on  the 
PDP-10  (36-bit  words) . Finally,  because  of  its  relative 
machine  independence,  the  new  object  code  will  permit 
substantially  easier  transfer  to  newer,  more  cost-effective 
hardware  when  it  becomes  available. 

The  11/40  processor  is  implemented  with  256l<?  words  (56 
bits)  of  read-only  microcode.  It  is  designed  so  that  the 
11/40  options,  such  as  the  Extended  Instruction  Set  and  the 
Floating  Point  instructions,  can  be  installed  by  simply 
plugging  in  additional  microcode  read-only  memory  modules. 
This  plug-in  extensibility  makes  it  possible  to  design  and 
build  the  WCS.* 

*The  11/40  is  the  only  PDP-11  able  to  accommodate  the  WCS 


Page  10 


• 

The  WCS  has  the  following  characteristics: 

].)  it  provides  1000  words  of  add i t iona  1 high  speed  microcode 
control  store  aich  can  be  used  to  implement  critical 
parts  of  INTERLISP-11,  including  the  object  code 
execution  "interpreter"; 

2)  it  i's  writable,  facilitating  both  design  and  debugging, 
and  allowing  for  the  possibility  of  swapping  microcode 
sets  (such  as  one  for  the  garbage  collector); 

3)  it  provides  an  extension  of  the  underlying  PDP-11  micro 
machine,  enhancing  its  generality.  The  standard  PDP-11 
ROM  has  56-bit  words  while  the  extended  micro  machine  is 
controlled  by  80-bit  words. 

While  (1)  and  (2)  are  fairly  clear,  (3)  requires  somewhat 
more  comment.  Simply  adding  extra  control  store  to  the 

basic  11/40  micro  machine  would  not  provide  a very  useful 
general-purpose  microprogrammed  machine,  since  the  11/40 
microcode  is  designed  primarily  for  implementation  of  the 
PDP-11  instruction  set  and  thus  lacks  generality.  The  WCS 
adds  to  it  the  following  features 

a)  A general  Mask-Shift  unit  that  allows  the  extraction  of 
any  contiguous  bit  field  from  a 16— bit  word,  to  be  used 
as  an  input  to  the  PDP-11  Arithmetic  Logic  Unit  (ALU) 

b)  A 16  word  stack  that  allows  micro-subroutining 

capabilities,  temporary  storage,  etc. 

c)  Quadruplication  of  the  address  space  (1024  vs  256) , aside 

from  writability. 


Page  11 


d)  Extended  microbranch  control,  i.e.  N-wav  branching 
controlled  by  output  of  Mack-shifter. 

The  extra  power  provided  by  these  facilities  allowed  us 
to  design  an  instruction  set  {see  the  APPENDIX  A at  the  end 
of  this  section)  that  is  almost  ideally  suited  for  LISP 
compiled  code. 

Memory  Mapping 

The  4 M words  address  space  specified  previously  for 
INTERLISP-11  clearly  exceeds  the  amount  of  main  memory  (core 
or  RAM)  one  can  reasonably  expect  will  be  available  for 
Intelligent  Terminal  appl icat ions . This  implies  that  a way 
must  be  found  to  map  the  ItlTE  RLISP-1 1 address  space  into  a 
s a ller  real  memory. 

The  existing  mapping  device  for  the  PDP-11  (the  so 
called  Memory  Management  Option)  doesn't  help  us  very  much 
since  it  is  designed  for  the  opposite  application  it  maps  a 
small  virtual  address  space  into  a larger  amount  of  real 
memory.  This  is  good  for  multiuser  applications  since  it 
allows  several  user  processes  with  small  virtual  spaces 
(32k)  to  be  resident  in  core  simultaneously,  but  this  is  not 
our  case. 


We  considered  the  software  approach:  a page  table  that 
lives  in  core,  microprogramming  for  nutting  together  a real 


Page  12 


core  address,  and  reloading  of  Memory  Management  Registers 
(MMR's)  for  accessing  th-t  real  address.  This  approach  is 
undesirable  for  several  reasons:  a)  it  is  slow,  the 
microcoded  instructions  that  we'd  need  would  usurp  WCS 
memory  space  that  could  be  used  for  other  purposes,  c)  and 
it  would  impose  an  extra  burden  to  our  programming  tasks. 
This  last  consideration  is  very  important;  in  order  to 
minimize  reloading  of  MMR's,  which  is  very  expensive,  we 
would  have  to  be  very  clever  in  order  to  keep  core  "windowed 
in"  as  much  as  possible.  Clearly,  a solution  that  allows  us 
to  treat  all  core  references  equally  is  much  preferred, 
since  it  simplifies  the  programming  effort,  reduces 
debugging,  and  speeds  coding. 


These  reasons  suggested  a 
a simple  hardware  pager,  that 
( MMD) , to  map  the  22-bit  addre 
a 19  bits  ( 512K)  real  core  add 


hardware/software  trade-off: 
we  call  Memory  Mapping  Device 
ss  space  of  INTERLISP-11  into 
ress . 


The  MMD  works  as 

follows . 

The 

22-bit  virtual 

address 

space 

is  visualized  as 

consisting 

of 

4K  pages,  each 

IK 

words 

long . 

A 22-bit  address 

specifies 

a 

page  number 

(a 

page 

table 

location)  with  its  high  order  12  bits,  and  a location  within 
the  page  with  its  low  order  10  bits.  The  main  component  of 
the  MMD  is  a 4K  by  16  bits  random  access  memory  that  acts  as 
a page  table,  i.e.  it  maps  a virtual  page  into  a real 

The  16-bit  word  at  the  specified  location  in 


memory 


page . 


Paqe  13 


the  paqe  table  contains  information  on  how  to  access  the 
paqe.  If  the  paqe  is  in  core,  its  real  core  address,  aqe, 
and  status  are  specified  as  fol lows 

AGE  5 bits  - Clock  readinq  at  time  page 

was  last  referenced  (Modulo  32)  . 

AGE  is  jammed  in  from  a special 
Age  register  every  time  the  page  is 
referenced.  The  Age  register  is 
incremented  by  software  at 
presettable  clock  intervals. 

WMOD  1 bit  - Tells  whether  or  not  the  page 

has  been  modified  by  a write  access. 

WPR  1 bit  - Grants  or  refuses  permission  to 

write  on  the  page. 

RCP  9 bits  - real  core  page  number 

(most  significant  9 bits  of  19  bit 
Real  core  address) 

If  the  page  is  not  in  core,  AGE  is  set  to  a special  value, 
and  the  Page  Management  modulo  (see  below)  takes  over. 

The  MMD  hardware  constructs  a 19-bit  address  by 

concatenating  RCP  with  the  least  significant  10  bits  from 
the  virtual  address.  An  indication  of  the  efficiency  of 
performance  we  expect  can  be  gleaned  from  the  following 
example:  To  obtain  CAR  of  a list  (i.e.  its  first  element) 


Page  14 


without  the  MMD  would  take  23  microseconds  under  the  most 
favorable  circumstances.  Of  these,  14  microseconds  are  used 
for  software  mapping  one  data  reference;  the  other  memory 
references  are  assumed  non-mapped  (which  implies  that  the 
stack  is  windowed  in  core) . With  the  MMD,  this  time  is  cut 
to  10.8  microseconds,  and  special  care  to  keep  the  stack 
windowed  is  not  reguired. 

Age  Distribution  Registers 

The  AGE  field  in  each  page  table  entry  permits 
efficient  demand  paging  by  making  it  possible  to  find  the 
least  recently  used  pages.  Such  pages  are  good  candidates 
for  removal  from  memory  when  one  needs  to  make  room  for  new 
ones.  Since  the  table  is  fairly  large  (4K  words)  a pure 
software  search  for  the  least  recently  used  pages  will  be 
time  consuming  and  inefficient;  for  this  reason,  we  have 
included  a set  of  age  distribution  registers.  These 
registers  provide  a histogram  of  the  page  ages  existing  in 
the  table.  In  fact,  there  are  2 sets  of  age  distribution 
registers,  one  for  pages  that  have  been  modified,  the  other 
for  unmodified  pages.  That  is,  for  each  possible 


combination  of 

AGE  and  WMOD  there 

is 

an 

Age 

Distribution 

register  that 

contains  the  number 

of 

pages 

whose  table 

entries  contain 

that  combination. 

Thus , 

for 

example  . to 

find  the  n oldest  pages  one  finds  the  corresponding  ages  by 
examining  at  most  64  Age  Distribution  Registers,  and  then 


*f,,w 

* m 


I. ! 


Page  15 


uses  these  aqes  as  search  keys  in  scanninq  the  map 


The  complete  set  of  specifications  for  the  MMD  can  be 
found  in  Appendix  B. 


1 

• * 

Software  Imolementation 

l.i 

The  software  implementation  c 

INTERLISP 

is  greatly 

1 5 " 

facilitated  by  the  fact 

that  a large 

fraction  of 

the  system 

j I i 

is  written  in  LISP. 

The  non-LISP 

parts  of 

INTERLISP 

! r j 

reoresent 

| * < 
n 

1)  the  way  INTERLISP  is 

integrated 

with  its 

operational 

environment , 

2)  the  kernel,  or  irreducible  parts  that  must  be  written  in 
machine  language  and  on  which  the  rest  of  the  system  is 
built . 


In  the  following  we  discuss  these  issues  in  detail. 


Operating  Environment 

This  oackage  provides  the  facilities  of  a simple 
operating  system,  i.e.:  the  interface-  specific  hardware 
devices  and  the  scheduling  and  performance  of  core 
allocation  procedures.  This  portion  or  the  system  will  be 
small  in  accord  with  our  desire  to  minimize  the  machine 
dependence  of  the  system. 


• at,.;  j v _ ...  . 


Page  16 


Page  management  is  the  major  component  of  the  operating 
environment.  The  page  manager  allocates  teal  core  for  the  4 
million  word  LISP  virtual  address  space  using  the  memory 
mapping  device  for  efficient  demand  paging.  It  uses  3 
levels  of  storage:  core,  fixed  head  swapping  disk,  and  bulk 
storage  disk.  The  page  manager  also  provides  user  mode 

access  to  the  paging  mechanism  such  as  mapping  file  pages 
into  address  space,  and  get/set  access  permission  for  a 

page  . 

in  addition,  the  operating  environment  supplies 
primitive  file  operations  (read/write-character,  open/close 
file) , terminal  echo,  padding,  and  interrupts;  interfaces  to 

IMP  11R,  auto  dialer,  real  time  clock;  and  scheduling  of  . 

background  processes.  The  operating  environment  also  has 
the  ability  to  run  straight  (non-LISP)  PDP-11  processes  such 

as  UNIX  user  programs. 

The  precise  method  for  running  UNIX  user  programs  has 
not  yet  been  completely  specified.  An  outline  of  our 

intended  approach  is  the  following.  The  MMD  has  been 

designed  so  that  it  is  possible  to  dedicate  any  contiguous 
32k  segment  of  the  virtual  address  space  for  a PDP-11  (user 
mode,  program  by  appropriate  setting  of  the  relocation  field 
in  the  mode  register  (see  Appendix  B)  . Because  it  is 
difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  demand  page  11/40  code,  the 
required  pages  must  be  resident  in  real  memory.  This  poses 


ft 


*M**  wm-  ♦■*'?**•*  ***•  SW‘!SWP^»^S?PW|!!Si  w-T^rasr™* 


Paqe  17 

no  particular  problem  - as  32K  words  can  be  swapped  in 
aoproximately  .3  seconds 

The  ootions  for  interfacing  UNIX  user  programs  to  I/O 
devices  are: 

a)  Implement  a compatibility  package  to  emulate  UNIX  system 
calls 

b)  Modify  the  UNIX  system  calls  in  key  programs  (RITA  and 
RAND  editor)  so  they  will  run  in  the  INTERLISP  operating 
envi ronment . 

c)  Swap  out  LISP  and  swap  in  UNIX,  turn  the  machine  over  to 
UNIX  and  let  UNIX  do  the  work.  Of  course  this  requires 
an  addition  to  UNIX  so  it  can  "return"  to  LISP. 

Option  C is  probably  unsatisfactory  as  it  does  not 
provide  any  convenient  communication  between  LISP  and  UNIX 
user  programs.  The  choice  between  (a)  and  (b)  depends 
heavily  on  whether  the  INTERLISP  environment  can  be  made 
similar  to  the  UNIX  environment  without  perverting  the 
requirements  of  the  LISP  environment.  We  have  not  yet 

learned  enough  about  UNIX  to  answer  this. 

LISP  Kernel 

The  LISP  Kernel  includes  the  following  modules : 

1)  storage  allocation  and  garbage  collection; 

2)  data  storage  and  retrieval; 

3)  stack  management; 


Page  18 


(a)  function  call/return; 

(b)  stack  allocation  and  deallocation  (note  that  multiple 
environments  make  this  a fairly  complex  process) , and 

(c)  stack  primitives  - e.g.  STKPOS,  STKNTH; 

4)  Interpreter  includes  EVAL,  APPLY,  ENVEVAL,  ENVAPPLY , 
PROG,  COND,  etc.; 

5)  other  data  primitives  - such  as  strings  and  hash  arrays; 

6)  Basic  I/O: 

(a)  interfaces  to  the  operating  environment  for  page 
mapping,  files,  terminal,  and  other  devices; 

(b)  terminal  interrupt  handlers,  and 

(c)  atom  hashing  routine; 

7)  protection  mechanisms  for  critical  data  such  as  file 
directories  - Includes  both  protection  against  accidental 
destruction  by  user  and  protection  against  simultaneous 
access  by  asynchronous  processes  (e.g.  user  and  FTP 
server)  ; 

8)  compiled  code  interpreter. 

The  LISP  kernel  will  be  implemented  in  a judicious 
combination  of  machine  language  and  microcode.  Although  it 
would  be  desirable  to  implement  the  entire  kernel  using 
microcode,  it  clearly  will  not  fit  in  the  available  writable 
control  store.  Therefore,  those  portions  of  the  kernel 

*An  exception  occurs  with  garbage  collection.  There  are  a 
small  number  of  garbage  collection  primitives  (those  that 
mark  and  chase  pointers)  that  are  executed  thousand _ or 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  times  during  a garbage  collection. 
In  this  case  it  is  feasible  to  swap  microcode. 


Page  19 


whiah  are  both  frequently  used  and  simple  (short),  such  as 
the  compiled  code  interpreter,  function  call/return  and 
portions  of  the  stack  allocation  and  deallocation  code  will 
be  written  in  microcode.  As  for  the  other  portions,  while 
it  is  possible  to  swap  microcode,  the  time  to  do  the  swap 
would  qenerally  exceed  the  time  to  accomplish  the  desired 
task  with  PDP-11  code  instead.*  What  remains  to  be  explained 
is  how  to  interface  smoothly  the  execution  of  straight 
PDP-11  code  with  LISP  microcode,  in  particular  how  we  intend 
to  access  the  4M  word  address  space  of  the  LISP  environment 
while  executing  PDP-11  kernel  code,  and  how  to  get  along 
with  only  1300  words  of  WCS. 

While  it  would  be  possible  for  PDP-11  code  to  access 
,_he  4M  word  LISP  address  space  by  using  Core  Management 
windows,  this  would  be  both  slow  and  awkward.  A cleverer 
approach  is  to  out  to  use  some  of  the  many  PDP-11  opcodes 
(Floating  Point,  Extended  Instruction  Set)  preempted  by  the 
inserti  ) of  the  WCS,  and  redefine  them  as  new  opcodes  using 
the  WCS.  All  these  automatically  cause  a transfer  of 
control  to  the  writable  control  store,  where  one  can  decode 
the  instruction,  perform  the  desired  operation  in  microcode 
(where  access  to  the  4M  word  address  space  is  faster  and 
simpler,  see  EXT  register  in  MMD  appendix) , and  then  resume 
PDP-11  code  execution. 


The  reverse  operation,  i.e.:  to  transfer  control  from 


Page 


20 


microcode  to  PDP-11  code  will  also  be  necessary.  To  see 
this,  just  consider  that  the  compiled  code  instruction  set 
contains  2048  miscellaneous  operations  (see  Appendix  A). 
While  the  most  frequently  executed  ones  will  be  microcoded, 
it  is  clear  that  IK  of  WCS  can  not  handle  the  whole  set. 
Therefore,  most  of  th^se  relatively  infrequent  compiled  code 
instructions  will  have  to  result  in  calls  to  routines  in 
PDP-11  code.  Another  example  is  the  set  of  operations 
involved  in  a return  from  a function.  In  the  spaqhetti 
stack"  (multiple  environments)  of  INTERLISP  there  are  two 
types  of  function  returns,  essentially  the  simple  return  and 
the  return  that  requires  an  environment  switch  or 
environment  copy.  The  simple  return  can  be  accomplished 
easily  in  microcode,  while  the  hard  return  is  probably  both 
long  enough  and  infrequent  enough  to  be  undeserving  of 
microcode  . 

Both  cases  (the  compiled  code  instructions  and  the  hard 
return)  are  handled  in  a manner  similar  to  a PDP-11  trap. 
That  is,  we  save  the  state  of  the  machine,  where  the  state 
includes  whether  we  were  in  the  compiled  code  interpreter  or 
in  11-code  (executing  a "new"  instruction  - e.g.  RETURN); 
we  perform  the  desired  operation  in  11  code;  and  we  resume 
the  interrupted  state. 


New  LISP  Code 


Page  21 


As  we  noted  before,  a large  portion  of  INTERLISP-10  is 
implemented  in  INTERLISP  and  may  be  transferred  directly  to 
INTERLISP-11  without  modification.  However,  there  is  still 
a significant  amount  of  additional  LISP  code  that  must  be 
written  for  the  PDP-11.  The  reasons  are  various  — some 
things  are  necessarily  machine  or  imolementat ion  dependent 
such  as  the  code  generator  for  the  compiler.  Others  are 
machine  dependent  (in  INTERLISP-10)  for  speed,  such  as  the 
arithmetic  functions  (SIN,  COS,  etc.) , and  READ  and  PRINT. 
Some  things  are  provided  by  TENEX  such  as  the  file  system. 

Available  Tools 

Much  of  the  required  work  can  proceed  in  parallel. 
Those  portions  of  the  system  which  will  be  written  in 
INTERLISP  can  be  written  and  debuaged  using  INTERLISP-10. 
CMU  has  provided  an  assembler  and  simulator  for  the 
microcode  that  runs  on  TENEX.  The  simulator  does  not 
capture  all  the  idiosyncrasies  of  timing  problems  in  the 
microcode  but  does  facilitate  initial  debugging.  We  have  a 
cross-net  debugger  for  the  PDP-11  that  runs  under  TENEX  and 
communicates  with  the  11  via  the  IMP  interface.  Since  it 
doesn't  suffer  from  the  space  limitations  of  most  PDP-11 
debugging  aids,  it  is  much  more  useful. 


Present  Status 


Page 


22 


Hardware 

All  of  the  hardware,  except  the  MMD,  is  installed  and 
working  as  of  1 May  1976.  The  MMD  has  been  designed  and 
specified.  Delivery  is  expected  in  early  June.  Following 
delivery  we  will  probably  need  to  do  some  final  debugging 
(maximum  2-3  weeks) . 


Software 


The  major  component  of  the  operating  environment,  the 
page  manager,  has  been  designed  and  partially  written.  In 
the  LISP  kernel,  the  compiler  code  instruction  set  is 
designed  as  well  as  most  of  the  data  storage  formats  and  the 
stack  management. 

Prognosis 

We  expect  to  have  an  INTERLISP-11  system  that  is  useful 
for  testing  and  demonstrating  some  on-line  help  and  tutorial 
facilities  for  at  least  one  of  the  tools  that  will 
eventually  be  available  under  the  IT.  This  we  should  be 
able  to  do  by  the  end  of  the  contract  period.  However,  some 
components  may  have  to  be  omitted  due  to  lack  of  time.  The 
garbage  collector,  for  example,  is  not  essential  for  a 
demonstration  system  since  we  can  use  LISP  for  a long  time 
without  filling  a 4M  word  address  space. 


Paqe 


23 


Schedule 

To  the  best  of  our  crystal  ball  abilities,  the 

following  appears  to  be  a realizable  schedule  of 
INTERLISP-11  development  during  the  remainder  of  the 

contract. 

By  the  end  of  the  3rd  quarter  (30  June)  we  expect  to 

have 

1)  MMD  delivered,  debugged  and  accepted 

2)  An  operating  environment  complete  in  its  essentials 
possibly  omitting  auto  dialer 

3)  The  compiled  code  interpreter,  stack  management,  and  some 
of  the  data  allocation,  storaqe  and  retrieval. 

4)  The  compiler  done 

5)  Read,  print,  and  file  system  desianed 
4th  quarter  (30  September) 

1)  Complete  kernel,  integrate  with  operating  environment 

2)  Complete  READ,  PRINT  and  file  system 

3)  Comolete  necessary  LISP  code  (omit  some  arithmetic 
functions  for  example) 

5th  quarter  INTEGRATE  AND  DEBUG,  AND  USE 


Page  24 


SECTION  3.  "INTELLIGENT"  ON-LINE  ASSISTANTS  AND  TUTORS 
Introduction 

We  envision  the  learning  of  a computer-based  tool  by  a 
computer-naive  person  as  a multistage  process.  The  first 
stage  is  one  where  a basic  conceptual  framework  is  built-up. 
It  is  here  that  the  new  user  acquires  the  meaning  and  a 
sense  of  the  relative  importance  of  key  concepts  that  are 
almost  completely  new  to  him.  Learning  at  this  stage  can 
take  place  effectively  only  if  the  new  user  is  "taken  by  the 
hand"  and  led  through  the  maze  of  new  knowledge  by  an  expert 
that  presents  to  him  carefully  selected  amounts  of  new 
information  and  shields  him  from  knowledge  that  cannot  be 
understood  at  that  point.  This  "systematic  teaching"  phase 
must  be  bolstered  with  examples,  demonstrations  ( let  me 
show  you  how  to  do  this")  and  supervised  practice.  The 
latter  is  a factor  of  fundamental  importance:  the  new  user 
must  be  posed  problems  that  can  be  solved  with  what  he 
should  have  learned  so  far,  and  his  solutions  and  results  be 
scrutinized.  If  he  makes  an  error,  the  nature  of  that  error 
must  be  explained,  and  some  remedial  material  offered. 

Once  this  basic  conceptual  framework  has  been 
established,  learning  can  proceed  much  more  independently. 
It  is  here  that  question  answering  pays  off  handsomely,  not 
only  because  the  answers  are  frequently  complete  in 


V 


Page  25 


themselves  (they  do  not  engender  new  questions)  but  because 
the  no-longer-naive  user  knows  what  questions  to  ask. 

In  the  rest  of  this  section  we  describe  our  efforts  in 
creating  an  IWLAT  for  the  Hermes  message  system.  We  begin 
by  describing  our  work  in  designing  tutorials  for  systematic 
teaching,  we  continue  with  a description  of  our  work  in 
ques t ion-an swe r i ng , and  we  close  with  a description  of  the 
control  structure  that  holds  the  whole  system  together. 

T lj t o r i a ^ s for  systematic  teaching 

As  alluded  to  in  the  Introduction  to  this  Section, 
while  effective  teaching  still  depends  on  describing  facts, 
actions,  purposes,  procedures,  etc.  symbolically,  the  most 
effective  elements  of  the  teaching  situation  are  the 
ostensive  ones,  namely: 

1)  teaching  by  letting  the  students  do  things  by  themselves 
and  helping  them  correct  their  mistakes. 

2)  teaching  by  way  of  examoles 

3)  teaching  by  demonstrating  actions  (the  tutor  typing 

commands  for  the  new  user,  for  example,  when  a 

complicated  new  command  is  being  introduced  or  when  he  is 
unable  to  proceed) 

A very  useful  way  to  proceed  is  to  write  something  like 
a script  for  a series  of  lessons  or,  in  other  words,  a 
scenario  for  the  form  the  INLAT  adopts  when  in  tutorial 


Page  26 


mode.  It  is  a way  of  exploring  how  to  skillfully  organize, 
segment,  present,  and  sequence  knowledge  about  the  subject 
matter  in  a manner  that  results  in  easy  and  comfortable 

learning . 

When  a new  user  asks  the  INLAT  to  teach  him  something 
systematically,  he  is  presented  with  an  agenda-driven 
sequence  of  tutorial  units.  The  elements  of  these  units 
ar  e : 

a)  delivering  information 

b)  asking  questions  of  the  student 

c)  showing  examples 

d)  demonstrating  actions 

e)  requesting  the  student  to  perform  tasks  and  exercises, 
evaluating  them,  and  making  the  appropriate  comments  to 
the  student 

f)  pausing  to  answer  questions  from  the  student 
Elements  a)  and  f)  are  always  present. 

The  procedure  is  as  follows.  The  INLAT  presents 
exposition,  embedded  in  which  is  a series  of  tasks.  Fairly 
frequently,  the  system  stops  to  ask  whether  there  are  any 
questions.  If  the  student  has  no  questions  the  exposition 
continues.  If  he  has  a question  he  types  it,  and  when  the 
question  has  been  answered,  he  can  either  keep  asking 
questions  or  allow  the  system  to  proceed  with  its  tutorial 
exposition. 


* 3 


Page  27 

a aa 

Whenever  a task  is  proposed,  the  INLAT  puts  the  new 
user  in  touch  with  the  tool  being  taught.  After  he  is  done 
with  the  task,  the  system  evaluates  his  performance  of  it. 
If  he  has  done  the  task  correctly  he  will  be  praised  and  the 
exposition  will  continue.  If  he  has  cone  the  task 

it  » 

incorrectly  his  mistake  will  be  pointed  out  to  him,  his  work 

*.  * 

space  restored  to  its  form  before  the  task  was  initiated  and 
he  will  be  asked  to  do  it  again.  He  may  ask  the  system  to 
show  him  how  to  do  it,  or  even  ask  the  system  to  do  it  for 
him  if  he  is  in  real  trouble. 

Much  thought  was  given  to  how  much  material  would  be 
sufficient  for  allowing  an  individual  to  comfortably  use 
Hermes.  We  decided  to  focus  our  attention  on  several  areas 

S_i 

including  simple  message  processing  (reading,  filing, 
deleting,  listing)  simple  message  sending  (creating  a 
message,  replying,  forwarding),  and  several  object  creating 
tasks  (classifying  mail  by  means  of  message  sequences, 
operating  with  different  files,  etc.)  We  felt  that  this 
material  is  best  delivered  in  small  lessons  of  two  or  three 
pages.  In  addition,  we  kept  in  mind  that  effective  teaching 
of  a new  system  such  as  Hermes,  requires  repetition  of  key 
material . 

n 

tk 

Methodology  of  building  tutorial  material 


The  methodology  in  building  these  lessons  is  in  itself 


Page  23 


interestiiig  to  those  who  would  design  such  material.  There 
were  many  iterations  in  going  from  the  initial  draft  to  the 
finished  product.  (We  use  the  term  "finished"  very  loosely, 
for  we  are  sure  to  find  more  weak  areas  in  the  tutorial  as 
testing  continues.)  We  initially  designed  an  outline  of 
topics  that  we  wanted  to  cover,  and  then  broke  them  down 
into  groups  which  later  became  lessons. 


The  real  testing  of  this  material  came  when  we  ran 
subjects  using  the  tutorial.  Our  method  for  doing  this  was 
simple.  The  material  was  not  on-line,  but  was  handed  to  the 
student  in  booklet  form.  The  booklet  contained  groups  of 
text  that  included  descriptions  of  tasks.  At  the  places  in 
the  booklet  labelled  "TASK"  the  student,  already  sitting 
inside  Hermes,  performed  the  tasks  on  a specially  designed 
message  file.  We  monitored  the  subject  through  a computer 
link,  two  terminals  talking  to  each  other.  When  the  student 
had  questions  or  needed  assistance  he  typed  a semi-colon  and 
his  request.  The  "tutor"  (a  human  at  this  point)  then 
responded  to  his  request.  (A  description  of  the  kind  of 
requests  encountered  follows.) 


We  were  especially  interested  in  the  "bugs"  exhibited 
in  the  student's  conception  of  Hermes'  commands  and  actions. 
For  example,  the  delete  command  has  a non-visible  side 
effect  — it  marks  a message  for  deletion  but  does  not 
it  from  the  message  sequence  until  the  user 


remove 


types 


Paqe  29 


expunge  or  leaves  Hermes.  To  counter  any  confusion  that  the 
student  might  have  about  deleting,  these  effects  were  made 
explicit  by  telling  the  student  exactly  what  happens  when  he 
deletes  a message.  It  is  very  important  to  make  explicit 
the  hidden  effects  of  a command,  especially  a powerful 
command  like  delete  that  can  cause  exasperating  results  if 
not  understood  completely.  Another  bug  of  this  type  is  when 
to  follow  a filter  with  a colon  and  when  not  to.  There  is  a 
rule  that  goes  like  this:  if  a filter  is  also  a field  name, 
follow  it  by  a colon;  otherwise  there  should  be  no  colon. 
Although  we  did  not  explicitly  state  this  rule  in  the  text 
(as  maybe  we  should  have) , we  did  point  out  when  a filter 
must  not  have  a colon.  We  are  sure  that  hints  like  these 
greatly  reduce  the  amount  of  confusion  inherent  in  learning 
a new  system.  It  is  easy  to  get  hung  up,  to  manifest  this 
bug,  and  simple  enough  to  include  a sentence  or  two  to 
alleviate  the  oroblem  before  it  becomes  a point  of  real 

confusion. 


Sometimes  these  bugs  were  handled  by  including  text  to 
warn  the  student  of  the  pitfalls.  Another  way  of  dealing 
with  the  problem  was  to  anticipate  it  and  rearrange  the 
tutorial.  For  example,  the  section  on  "panic  buttons"  was 
moved  to  the  front  of  the  tutorial  to  allay  the  student  s 
fear  of  getting  stuck  in  a problem  situation.  Forward  and 
Reply  were  moved  to  before  the  Compose  command  in  the  belief 
that  they  are  less  complicated  to  learn  and  are  really 


Paqe  30 

simpler  versions  of  Compose.  The  section  on  current  objects 
was  put  last  because  it  is  information  that  may  be  more  than 
the  student  wishes  to  deal  with. 

The  third  way  of  dealing  with  "bugs"  was  to  interact 
with  the  Hermes  project  on  system  design.  For  example,  the 
version  of  Hermes  we  were  dealing  with  in  the  testing  of  the 
tutorial  did  not  make  explicit  the  existence  of  partially 
completed  drafts,  which  users  often  forget  about.  Without 
this  information,  the  student  may  enter  the  draft  state 
again  and  begin  creating  what  he  thinks  is  a new  message. 
But  in  fact  the  old  draft  is  still  there  and  what  he  is 
really  doing  is  appending  to  each  of  the  fields.  The  Hermes 
project  has  handled  the  problem  by  making  explicit  (telling 
the  user)  whether  there  is  a draft  sitting  around  that 
hasn't  been  sent. 

We  have  described  a methodology  for  creating  tutorial 
material  that  includes  adding  hints  to  the  document, 
reordering  material  to  anticipate  difficulties,  and  making 
suggestions  for  the  modification  of  the  system,  Hermes, 
itself. 

The  Tutorial  as  a Stand-alone  Document 

Another  version  of  the  tutorial  only  slightly  different 
from  the  one  used  in  the  tutoring  session  above  is  a 
descriptive  document  that  stands  alone,  apart  from  the 


Paqe  31 

computer  delivery.  It  excludes  tasks  which  the  student  can 
do  and  instead  presents  examples  of  the  Hermes  activities 
explicitly.  It  is  not  "learning  by  doing",  but  "learning  by 
watching".  It  is  a surprisingly  robust  document  that  people 
have  found  helpful,  so  much  so  that  it  is  being  put  out  as 
the  user's  introduction  to  Hermes  distributed  by  the  Hermes 
project.  It  is  included  in  this  report  as  Appendix  C. 


Page  32 


Qil^fkion  Answering 

We  are  convinced  that  a really  useful  on-line 
assistance  facility  for  computer-naive  users  wil]  have  to  be 
based  on  an  ability  to  understand  questions  and  requests 
posed  in  English.  However,  as  is  well  known,  Natural 
Language  Understanding  by  computer  is  an  extremely  difficult 
problem  area  in  Artificial  Intelligence  and  we  believe  that 
machine  comprehension  of  completely  free  and  unrestricted 
English  is  still  a distant  goal.  Therefore,  our  efforts  in 
this  area  must  be  necessarily  qualified  and  delimited  if  we 
are  to  produce  a usable  system  within  the  period  of 
performance  of  the  present  contract. 

The  main  realization  that  we  have  to  come  to  terms  with 
is  the  limitedness  of  the  range  of  English  that  we  can  make 
our  INLAT  comprehend,  and  the  breadth  and  depth  of  stored 
knowledge  we  will  have  available  to  produce  answers  to 
user's  requests.  Past  experience  with  a previous  INLAT-like 
system,  NLS-SCHOLAR,  showed  us  very  clearly  how  inadequate 
even  a relatively  sophisticated  system  can  be  when  subjected 
to  unrestricted  inputs  from  users  unaware  of  the  system's 
limitations . 

To  make  habitable  and  useful  a system  that  inherently 
cannot  be  robust  enough  to  withstand  the  onslaught  of 
incompletely  specified,  vague,  ambiguous,  and  colloquially 
expressed  requests,  we  need  at  least:  a)  to  teach  the  user 


Page  33 


the  kinds  of  requests  the  system  can  handle  and  those  it 
cannot  handle,  b)  to  incorporate  facilities  for  guiding 
users  to  formulate  acceptable  requests  "on-the-fly  (for 
example,  guidance  on  what  kinds  of  continuations  would  be 
acceptable  given  the  beginning  of  a question)  and  c)  to 
devise  more  elaborate  partial  comprehension  facilities 
(i.e.:  the  system  mutters  to  itself  "I  don  t know  what  he 
means  by  ...,  but  within  that  general  area  I only  know  these 
few  facts.  So  i'll  show  him  what  I know  and  let  him 

choose " ) . 

Collecting  Sample  Questions 

The  first  task  we  undertook  was  to  collect,  classify 
and  analyze  a large  number  of  genuine  questions  about 
Hermes.  Authenticity,  rather  than  contrivedness  of  these 
questions  was  ensured  because  we  solicited  them  at  the  time 
Hermes  was  being  tentatively  released,  and  because  we 
offered  our  services  in  trying  to  provide  answers  for  them. 
Thus,  the  questions  reflected  genuine  doubts  users  were 
having  about  a newly  available  tool. 

One  of  the  things  that  became  apparent  from  the 
beginning  was  that  while  a large  number  of  these  requests 
appear  answerable  with  state-of-the-art  Natural  Language 
Understanding  techniques,  others  are  very  hard  to  handle  . 
This  shows  that  even  a "restricted"  domain,  such  as  Hermes, 


Paqe  34 


is  fraught  with  difficulties,  both  in  the  complex  surface 
structures  and  in  the  amount  of  implicit  knowledge  needed  to 
"understand"  those  requests. 

Some  appreciation  of  the  difficulty  in  machine 
understanding  of  these  hard  requests  can  be  gained  via  a few 
specimens  in  our  collection: 

1)  "What  if  I instead  of  typing  a part  of  the  word  print 
followed  by  an  escape  I just  typed  part  of  the  word 
followed  by  a space  and  the  message  #?" 

2)  "If  I use  the  "copies"  subcommand  of  the  "reply"  command, 
are  the  addresses  on  the  cc:  and  bcc : lists  kept  on  them 
or  are  they  moved  into  the  to:  list?" 

3)  "Why  don't  the  messages  start  with  1,2,3...?" 

(He  has  just  seen  an  initial  survey  which  only  prints 
messages  marked  recent  and  unseen.) 

4)  "What  do  I do  to  read  let's  say  the  last  message  without 

reading  every  message  in  between?" 

(He  has  just  learned  about  LF  and  ~ but  has  not  been  told 
about  the  Print  command.) 

5)  "Now  what  happens  if  I want  to  see  a preceding  message, 
(not  necessarily  the  one  directly  before  but  let  s say 
16)  even  if  you've  already  bypassed  the  message?" 

(A  complex  paraphrase  of  the  preceding  request.) 

One  can  see  tnat  a system  able  to  understand  these  questions 


would  have  to: 


Paqe 


35 


a)  be  tolerant  of  dubious  English  constructs,  as  in  1; 

b)  be  able  to  model  the  situation  described  in  order  to 
provide  an  answer  by  just  trying  it  out,  as  in  2; 

c)  be  able  to  make  the  correct  anaphoric  references  ("the 
messages")  and  have  an  internal  model  of  the  user's 
knowledge  to  provide  the  pertinent  explanation,  as  in  3, 

4 , and  5 . 

These  examples  also  illustrate  how  important  it  is  to  train 
the  user  how  to  ask  auestions  so  that  the  syster  ,ight  have 
a chance  of  understanding  them. 

On  the  brighter  side  of  the  picture,  we  realized  there 
were  a large  number  of  auestions  that  arise  naturally  and 
for  which  we  could  successfully  provide  answers.  These 
questions  include  those  about: 


1) 

procedures 

(How  do  I do  something) 

2) 

Purposes 

(What  does  a certain  command  do) 

3) 

Definitions 

(What  does  something  mean) 

4) 

Instruments 

(What  command  performs  a certain 

action) 

5) 

Di  f ferences 

(What's  the  difference  between  ..) 

6) 

Possibility 

(Can  I do  something) 

(Does  a certain  action  have  a certain 

effect) 


Page  36 


Analyzing  the  sample  questions  - Vocabulary,  Syntax,  and 
Semantics . 

In  order  to  characterize  the  questions  we  could 
feasibly  answer,  we  performed  an  analysis  of  the  collected 
requests.  In  general,  there  are  two  problems  when  dealing 
with  a corpus  of  utterances  that  map  into  a finite  knowledge 
space  — a so-called  "closed  world."  Basically,  there  are 
many  ways  of  saying  the  same  thing,  and  there  are  many 
distinct  things  to  talk  about.  Let  s be  more  specific. 

The  first  problem  is  represented  by  the  high  number  of 
utterances  to  which  we  normally  attribute  the  same  meaning. 
This  requires  understanding  how  to  extract  that  single  deep 
structure  representing  the  meaning,  from  the  many  surface 
forms  in  which  that  meaning  can  be  expressed. 

The  second  problem  is  what  are  the  distinct  meanings 
contained  in  the  corpus  of  utterances,  and  by  extension  and 
generalization,  what  are  all  the  possible  distinct  meanings 
contained  in  the  knowledge  space.  This  requires  designing  a 
deep  representation  for  those  meanings,  in  terms  of 
factoring  them  into  a fewer  number  of  "primitive"  meanings. 
To  handle  efficiently  a large  number  of  distinct  meanings  we 
want  to  "factor"  as  much  as  possible  - we  want  to  create  a 
class  of  articulated  structures  in  which  each  part  can  be 
one  of  a small  number  of  possibilities,  and  in  which  the 
interpretation  of  the  whole  is  a simple  function  of  the 
interpretation  of  the  parts  and  their  relationships.  A 


Page 


37 


natu 

r al 

repre 

char 

acter 

istic 

desc 

r ibed 

shor 

Our 

first 

ref  1 

ected 

th ' 

clas 

sif  ie 

d tho 

and 

the 

clas 

sing 

le  He 

rmes  ■ 

Pars 

ing . 

To  handle 

havi 

ng  a 

few 

is  parsing.  ? 

in 

which 

th« 

We 


are  arranged  into  a smaller  set  of  canonical  positions. 
Thus,  a first  stage  of  the  factorization  process  alluded  to 
before  is  accomplished:  some  very  different  phrasings  having 
equivalent  meanings  are  reduced  to  parsed  structures  with 
only  small  localized  differences. 


To  this  end,  we  investigated  several  complex  parsing 
systems,  including  the  Lunar  System  and  the  General 
Syntactic  Processor  (GSP) . Both  of  these  parsers  are 
syntax-driven  and  produce  a parse  that  has  much  of  the 
structure  of  a Case  analysis.  An  example  of  the  parse  of 
the  same  sentence  from  both  LUNAR  and  GSP  is  shown  next. 


Page  38 


(PRINT  THE  CURRENT  MESSAGE  AT  THE  LINEPRINTER) 

* k * 

PARSINGS: 

S IMP 

NP  PRO  YOU 
AUX  TNS  PRESENT 
VP  V PRINT 
NP  DET  THE 

ADJ  CURRENT 
N MESSAGE 
NU  SG 

PP  PREP  AT 

NP  DET  THE. 

N LINEPRINTER 
NU  SG 


41** 

* * * 

Parse  1: 


PRINT  THE  CURRENT  MESSAGE  AT  THE  LPT: 


1 : 

[LABEL  = 

S 

MOOD  = 

IMP 

2: 

SUBJ  = 

[LABEL 

3: 

HEAD  = 

4: 

FVERB  = 

[LABEL 

TENSE 

ROOT 

5: 

HEAD  = 

[LABEL 

ROOT  = YOU] ] 
= V 


UNTENSED  = T 
PNCODE  = X3SG 
TENSE  = PRESENT 
ROOT  = PRINT] 

6:  OBJ  = [LABEL  = NP 

7:  DET  = [LABEL  = ART 

ROOT  = THE] 

8:  ADJ  S = ( [LABEL  = ADJ 

ROOT  = CURRENT] ) 

9:  HEAD  = [LABEL  = N 

NUMBER  = SG 
ROOT  = MESSAGE] 

10 : MODS  = ( [LABEL  = PP 

11:  PREP  = [LABEL  = PREP 

ROOT  = AT] 


We  can  see  that  although  GSP  makes  explicit  what 


fills 


each  case  frame,  Lunar  is  designed  to  allow  for  this  also; 


Page  39 


ti  ft 

I T 


the  outp 

ut  printi 

ng  routines 

could 

be  mod 

if 

ied 

to  mi 

mic 

GSP's  behavior. 

The  final  decisio 

n of  whi 

ch 

par 

ser  to 

use 

has  been 

delayed 

to  allow  for 

the  i 

ntroduct 

io 

n o 

f a more 

robust  G 

SP  parser 

which  should 

be  av 

ai  1 able 

in 

the 

very  n 

ear 

future . 

Semantic 

Interpre 

tation  . 

We 

then  expl 

ored  what  it 

would 

take 

to 

ex 

tract 

the 

meaning 

(semanti 

c structure) 

of  a 

request 

qi 

ven 

its  par 

se . 

Since  th 

e final  r: 

epresentation 

was  e 

xpected 

to 

be 

equival 

ent 

to  a single  Hermes  command,  and  there  seemed  to  be  a rough 
relation  between  the  main  surface  verb  (head)  and  the 
underlying  command,  we  investigated  the  collected  "procedure 
requests"  with  this  in  mind.  The  first  step  was  to  break 
them  down  by  the  surface  verb  to  see  the  kinds  of  Cases  the 
verbs  can  take  and  how  the  procedures  can  differ  when  taking 
into  account  the  contents  of  these  Cases.  This  is  one 
example : 

The  verb  COPY 

Sentence  relevant  Hermes  command 

Copy  a message  to  a tile.  FILE 

Copy  a message  to  the  lineprinter.  LIST 

Copy  a filter  into  a named  filter.  COPY 

Copy  a message  into  the  draft.  FORWARD 

Copy  a message  into  a field.  f . CTRL-B,  ADD-FILE 

In  all  but  one  example,  the  Object  Case  is  message,  but  the 

Hermes  command  that  is  being  requested  is  dependent  on  the 


**  m 


Page  40 


contents  of  the  destination  Case  (file,  linepr inter  , filter, 
draft,  t ield) . 

The  next  breakdown  was  the  grouping  of  sentences  by  the 
Hermes  command  that  is  being  requested.  With  that  breakdown 
we  could  analyze  all  the  various  surface  verb  and  Case 
contents  that  can  refer  to  a single  Hermes  command.  For 
example,  the  command  List  can  have  a variety  of  surface 
representations: 

The  Hermes  command  LIST 

Cet  a listing  of  the  message. 

List  the  message. 

Output  a message  to  the  linepnnter. 

Copy  a message  to  the  lineprinter. 

As  we  investigated  this  relationship  further  we  found 
that  there  were  many  simple  syntactic  structures  in 
plausible  sentences  l it  could  not  be  mapped  to  parts  of  a 
single  Hermes  command.  In  other  words,  the  user's  natural 
language  concepts  correspond  to  something  larger  than  a 
single  command.  This  led  to  the  idea  of  a conceptual 
command  - a conceptually  '"unitary  action  that  the  user 
desires  Hermes  to  take.  The  conceptual  commands  fall  into 
natural  classes  whose  elements  differ  only  in  the  objects  to 
be  affected  or  the  details  of  the  operations  to  be 
performed.  Such  classes  of  conceptual  commands  do  not 
always  map  to  single  Hermes  commands  with  varying 
parameters.  In  general  they  map  to  a " MACRO-command  - a 


Page  41 


sequence  of  (optional)  Hermes  commands  whose  arguments  can 
be  filled  in  to  provide  a Hermes  procedure  for  any  example 
of  the  class  of  conceptual  procedures. 

As  an  example  of  such  a class  of  conceptual  commands 
consider  the  class  of  "display  Hermes  structure"  commands. 
These  commands  all  involve  showing  the  user  (by  producing 
character  string  output  on  some  file,  including  the  users 
terminal,  the  line  printer  or  a disk  file)  some  portion  of  a 
specified  collection  of  Hermes  objects.  To  specify  a 
particular  display  command  we  must  specify  several  Cases 
(parameters  of  the  class  of  conceptual  display  commands.) 
Some  examples  of  Cases  are: 

Class  - the  type  of  object  to  be  displayed  (message 
sequence,  switch,  command,  description); 

Restriction  - characteristics  defining  those  objects  of 
class  which  are  to  be  displayed  (e.g.  filters  like  FROM: 
AIGHES , names  like  DELETE  SWITCH); 

Output  template  - description  of  a part  of  each  object 
which  is  to  be  displayed,  as  well  as  formatting 
information  (e.g.  fields  of  message,  default  value  or 
current  value  for  a switch) ; 

Destination:  file  to  send  output  to 

Given  the  contents  of  these  cases,  we  can  choose  the 
relevant  conceptual  command  from  the  class  and  fill  in 
the  arguments  of  its  related  MACRO-command . With  the 


Page  42 


filled-in  cases  we  can  also  construct  procedures  that 
look  at  the  values  of  the  cases  and  manipulate  them  to 
achieve  an  understanding  of  the  user's  request. 

We  will  now  follow  the  interpretation  of  a request 
"Tell  me  the  character  count  of  messages  41  through  45". 
The  cases  we  will  try  to  fill  out  are: 

Class 

Restrict  ion 

Template 

Destination 

I.  Cl.ass : Class  is  the  object  we  are  concerned  with.  The 
class  is  "message". 

II.  Restriction:  Made  on  the  class.  It  is  "message  number 
between  41  and  45". 

III.  Output  Template:  What  part  of  the  object  is  to  be 
displayed.  It  is  "character  count". 

IV.  2££ti^nation:  We  assume  it  is  the  terminal,  TTY:. 

To  go  from  these  conceptual  cases  to  arguments  of  a 
MACRO-command  we  need  several  procedures  including  a 
template  maker,  a sequence  maker,  and  a display  command 
maker.  We  indicate  below  some  of  the  decisions  to  be  made 
in  each. 

Template  maker : Is  there  a template  that  already  exists  that 
does  this?  Yes,  there  is  Ptemplate  and  Stemplate.  Which  is 
better?  Stemplate  because  it  contains  fewer  other  things. 
Would  it  be  better  to  create  a new  template  that  only  does 


Page  43 


this  one  thing  --  give  a character  count?  Yes. 

> CREATE  TEMPLATE  TEMP 
>>LINE-INSERT  END  CHAR-COUNT 

> >DONE 

> 

Sequence  maker:  Creates  the  correct  message  sequence  given 
the  Class  and  the  Restriction.  In  this  example,  41  throuqh 
45 , or  41:45. 

Command  maker:  Should  we  choose  the  most  specific  or  the 
most  general  command  to  perform  this  operation?  The  most 
general  is  Transcribe,  the  most  specific,  Print. 

Tell  me  <msg/part>  of  <msg/seq>  => 

Print  <msg/seq>  <template>  <destination>  => 

Print  (messages)  41:45  (using  filter)  temp  (on  file)  tty: 


In  summary,  we  have  sketched  out  how  we  are  attacking 
the  auestion-answering  problem.  A break  down  and  analysis 
of  requests  has  begun.  We  now  see  as  the  next  step  working 
on  a procedure  for  using  the  cases  once  they  are  filled  in. 
In  addition  this  next  quarter  we  will  settle  on  a parser  and 
proceed  to  exercise  it. 

Semantic  Network 

In  order  to  answer  questions  about  a program  like 
Hermes,  an  on-line  assistant  needs  to  have  readily  available 


Page  44 


a store  of  factual  information  about  the  program.  Given 
that  the  system  is  a large  and  complex  as  it  is,  it  becomes 
imperative  to  make  a judicious  choice  of  both  the  nature  of 
the  information  to  be  stored,  and  its  representational 
format.  In  addition,  any  data  structure  which  is  expected 
to  represent  such  potentially  sophisticated  information  must 
be  designed  with  careful  attention  paid  to  the  procedures 
that  will  access' it.  No  matter  how  elegantly  the  knowledge 
is  represented,  it  is  not  useful  unless  it  can  be  found.:  and 
applied  when  needed. 

Our  first  attempt  has  been  to  encode  basic  descriptive 
(static)  knowledge  about  the  internal  structure  of  the 
Hermes  program.  Such  information  is  the  kind  necessary  to 
answer  simple  factual  queries  about  Hermes  commands  and 
objects.  For  example,  questions  like: 

1)  "What  are  the  arguments  to  the  PRINT  command?" 

2)  "What  are  the  parts  of  a DRAFT  message?" 

3)  "What  commands  operate  on  messages?" 

4)  "What  is  the  difference  between  the  SURVEY  and  SUMMARIZE 
commands?" 

would  be  answered  by  a system  whose  knowledge  base  includes 
a straightforward  record  of  the  structure  of  Hermes 
commands,  the  parts  of  Hermes  objects,  and  the  objects 
manipulated  by  commands. 

Since  questions  about  such  things  can  be  phrased  in 
many  ways,  and  make  use  of  many  different  arrangements  of 
concepts,  it  makes  sense  to  represent  the  information  in 


Page  4 5 


terms  removed  from  those  of  natural  language.  To  this  end, 

we  have  chosen  to  represent  a description  of  Hermes  based  on 

the  semantic  network  formalism.  The  main  value  accrued  from 

a network  structure  like  the  one  we  are  using  is  the  ability 

to  store  information  about  many  objects  in  one  place 

(usually  called  a "concept  node") . Since  one  node 

V 

represents  an  entire  class  of  things,  an  assertion  stored  at 
the  node  is  implicitly  made  about  each  individual  member  of 
the  class. 

We  have  derived  a discipline  for  creating  the  Hermes 
Net  that  diverges  from  standard  semantic  net  building.  For 
our  links,  we  use  only  a small  set  of  primitively-defined 
link  types,  which  explicitly  reflect  the  basic 
epistemological  operations  of  the  network  representation, 
Thus,  any  conceptual  relation  (one  related  to  the  Hermes 
world)  is  build  out  of  primitive  links,  and  is  never  implied 
to  be  primitive.  While  the  extra  "layer"  of  structure  makes 
the  network  somewhat  more  difficult  for  a human  to  read,  it 
avoids  the  ambiguities  and  type  confusions  invariav''  found 
when  the  underlying  operations  are  glossed  over. 

For  example,  here  is  how  we  would  build  a node  for 


COMMAND: 


Page  46 


R£>L£ 


CMUtJ/  


'Rft>TfciaiO 


riob — ^c_ 


<T B'ifUiO ocr)  <--- — S 

MOPAJ-Ity 


i^ooMjry 
OPTIONAL.  < 


(*IP£/  <■ 


Ro»e 


yr 


t?A.TTF6 


™g*b!H  » orriotw- 

NVM&ER  . . . 

> ^1 

F-oL- »-  (APj&'rtE/JTt) 

9P* TT^  . ^ — N &>L& 


> (CurlcT/art) 


pattr* 


o 


ROUE 


->  ( tttu-f) 


The  relation  DATTRS  always  points  to  a description  of  a 
part  or  attribute  of  the  thing  being  defined.  Here,  we  see 
that  node  A defines  the  "ARGUMENTS"  part  of  a command.  The 
MODALITY  states  that  command-arguments  are  optional;  if 
there  are  any,  there  can  be  more  than  one,  as  indicated  by 
NUMBER  pointing  to  ">1".  The  ROLE  link  specifies  the 
functional  role  of  this  part  of  a command  in  relation  to  the 
command  as  a whole.  If  a concept  node  like  COMMAND  is 
thought  of  as  a case  frame,  the  xxx  specify  the  case 
definitions.  ROLE  names  the  particular  case.  Finally, 
VALUE/RESTRICTION  points  to  another  concept  that  defines  the 
class  of  values  legal  as  fillers  for  the  case. 

We  have  represented  many  of  the  Hermes  commands  and 
objects  in  this  manner.  We  will  not  go  into  the 
representation  in  any  more  detail  here  but  merely  point 


out 


Page 


47 


that,  since  the  underlying  set  of  relations  used  in  our  net 
is  fixed  and  well-defined,  the  procedures  we  build  will  be 
able  to  operate  consistently.  This  is  the  main  reason  for 
breaking  up  the  basic  operations  into  individual  links. 

Notice  in  the  figure  that  Hermes  COMMANDS  have  a part 
called  a FUNCTION.  We  have  found  that,  while  a network  that 
straight  forwardly  reflects  the  structure  o the  program  is 
necessary  to  answer  simple  factual  questions,  it  is  not 
adequate  to  handle  even  the  simplest  of  functional 

questions , e .g . 


1) 

2) 

3) 


"How  do  I read  a message?" 

"What  is  the  second  argument  of  PRINT  for? 
"What  are  COMPOSE-TEMPLATES  used  for?" 


Such  questions  require  a £unct^onal  view  of  the  Hermes 
world.  We  have  begun  to  represent  PURPOSES  in  the  same  kind 
of  network  notation  that  we  are  using  for  the  commands  and 
objects.  This  net  takes  notions  like  CREATING,  DESTROYING, 
CHANGING,  MOVING,  etc.,  which  are  the  ways  the  user  thinks 
of  what  Hermes  does,  and  provides  a structured 
classification  so  that  relevant  operations  are  easily 
accessible  from  related  ones.  We  believe  that  this  type  of 
structuring  will  facilitate  the  inferences  necessary  to  go 
from  the  natural  language  phrasing  of  a functional  question 
to  a well-defined  conceptual  structure  for  the  gu_ry. 


It  has  also  become  clear  that  "functions 


do  rot  map 


Page  48 


one-to-one 
mechanism 
this  may 
models  of 


onto  the  commands  and  object 
for  interfacing  the  two  netwo 
lead  to  a powerful  tool  for 
the  same  factual  world. 


s.  We  are  studying  a 
rks,  and  believe  that 
integrating  different 


Current  Control  Structure 

The  various  modules  that  compose  the  INLAT  (Natural 
Language  Understander,  Tutor,  Hermes,  Question  Answerer, 
etc.)  are  held  together  by  a Control  Structure  presided  over 
by  a monitor.  Our  notions  in  this  regard  are  still  evolving 
and  the  Monitor  we  shall  describe  next  represents  only  our 
current  approach.  As  such,  it  may  very  well  change  in  the 
next  few  months. 


The  Monitor  oversees  all  dialog  between  the  user  and 
the  system.  It  is  its  job  to  read  inputs  from  the  user, 
analyze  the  input  to  extract  contextual  information,  examine 
it  for  'level  of  sophistication'  and  both  syntactic  and 
semantic  error  checks,  record  each  piece  of  dialog  on  a 
history  list  (the  e are  several  history  lists  — see 
subsequent  discussion),  and  decide  how  to  handle  the  input, 
i.e.,  which  module  to  pass  it  to.  Currently,  the  monitor 
attempts  to  parse  the  input  as  a Hermes  command,  and  if  it 
succeeds,  it  passes  the  command  directly  to  Hermes? 
otherwise  it  hands  it  to  to  the  Natural  Language 
Understander  to  be  parsed  and  then  to  the  Q A 


(Question-Answerer)  to  be  processed.  Also,  the  monitor 
takes  care  of  all  interfacing  between  the  user  and  Hermes, 
protecting  each  from  the  other.  It  sets  up  necessary 
network  links,  creates  a copy  of  the  user  s mailbox  for  its 
own  internal  use,  and  maintains  a user  profile  (which 
includes  the  Hermes  profile  and  other  information) . In 
summary,  the  monitor  is  the  central  component  that  gets 
everything  going  and  directs  the  whole  operation. 

The  monitor  also  will  have  to  evaluate  what  the  user 
is  doing  in  relation  to  some  model  or  notion  of  what  the 
user  is  trying  to  accomplish.  As  a simple  (and  possibly 
unrepresentative)  example  of  how  the  monitor  watches  over, 
assume  the  user  is  in  an  editor  doing  subcommands  and  wishes 
to  abort  a subcommand  but  mistakenly  types  E (taking  him 
out  of  the  editor) . He  then  attempts  to  redo  the  subcommand 
not  realizing  he  is  at  the  top  level.  The  monitor  should 
inform  the  user  what  happened  and  get  him  back  where  he  was 
in  the  editor. 

Th"e ~inoni tor... .takes  care  also  of  correcting  mistakes  such 

as  typing  1*3  instead  of  the  intended  riiessage-G-pecif ication 
1:3,  or  of  understanding  what  the  user  means  when  he  types 
'Print  template'  instead  of  'Show  template  or  Send  switch 
instead  of  'Export  switch'. 

Thus  far,  there  have  been  two  versions  of  the  Monitor 
constructed.  The  first  was  a quick  & dirty  version  that 


Page  50 


didn't  do  much  more  than  establish  the  network  couplings,  do 
all  interfacing,  I/O  and  interrupt  handling,  maintain  a 
simple  profile,  and  delegate  inputs  to  either  NLF  and  QA,  or 
to  Hermes.  The  main  problem  with  it  was  its  mode  of 
operation:  having  to  constantly  send  bits  of  information 
across  the  network  and  then  wait  for  a response  before  it 
could  continue.  This  made  real-tirne  operation  impractical 
due  to  the  long  delays  involved.  This  version  was  abandoned 
over  a month  ago. 

The  current  version  is  not  yet  complete,  but  is  close 
to  being  operational.  This  version  does  not  send  anything 
across  the  net  until  it  has  gathered  a complete  Hermes 
command  to  be  executed,  i.e.,  not  until  it  is  absolutely 
essential  no  net  delays  are  incurred  that  can  be  avoided. 
Also,  the  current  version  does  a good  deal  more  than  the 
previous,  as  it  is  not  a quick  & dirty'  monitor,  but  rather 
more  along  the  lines  of  what  the  final  one  shou  .ook  like. 

As  well  as  doing  all  of  the  nitty-gritty  work  necessary 
for  the  Hermes  interface  over  the  net,  the  monitor  does  a 
certain  amount  of  syntactic  error  correction,  maintains 
rat-her-  complete  and  useful  history  lists,  and  attempts  to 
construct  a good  internal  representation  of  user  inputs. 
The  monitor  operates  to  a large  degree  by  emulating  Hermes. 
It  contains  a complete  parser  for  Hermes  Commands,  a partial 
simulation  of  Hermes,  and  also  a simulator  for  certain  parts 


Page  51 


of  Tenex.  (The  Tenex  s 
file  recognition  and 
Tenex  to  read,  but  also 
JOBSTAT,  QFD,  DIRECTORY 


imulation  is  used 
confirmation,  which 
for  various  utility 
, etc.) 


principally  for 
Hermes  passes  to 
commands  such  as 


Among  the  other  things  that  it  is  doing,  the  monitor  is 
maintaining  a complete  history  of  everything  that  occurs 
during  the  session.  This  is  done  on  a number  of  different 
'history  lists'  (not  LISPX  history  lists).  Each  command 
line  (a  question  is  considered  a 'command')  begins  with  a 
line  number  and  prompt  character.  This  line  number  is  then 
the  index  for  everything  that  is  recorded  on  the  history 
lists  up  to  the  next  command  line.  The  things  that  would  go 
on  the  list  would  include:  the  raw  line  read  from  the  user; 
any  modifications  or  interpretations  or  parsings  of  that 
line;  any  Inlat  dialog  with  Hermes  (invisible  to  user) 
needed  to  process  the  line;  the  final  Hermes  command  issued; 
and  the  corresponding  response,  if  any.  In  addition  to 
these  lists,  there  are  a number  of  'context'  variables  that 
are  maintained.  These  will  be  the  key  to  extracting  an 
interpretation  that  can  be  used  by  the  Inlat  system.  The 
idea  is,  as  of  this  moment,  that  a chain  of  'history  trees' 
will  be  kept.  The  root  of  each  tree  is  on  the  chain  in 
sequential  chronological  order.  The  tree  growing  off  of 
each  root  then  represents  all  interactions  and  subtasks  and 


Page  52 


subgoals  that  were  used  to  accomplish  the  task  initiated  by 
the  root.  This  corresponds  to  the  subcommand  structure 
within  Hermes  itself.  Although  we  annot  yet  be  too 
specific  about  these  trees,  th  t-  will  contain  all 
information  pertinent  to  a given  task  — the  only  question 
is  what  form  it  will  have,  i.e.  how  it  will  be  compressed 
and  encoded. 


APPENDIX  A - SPECIFICATIONS 


Page  53 


1 • INSTRUCTION  set 

The  LISP  compiler  will  produce  code  in  the  instruction  set 
described  below.  The  code  is  interpreted  (run)  by  the  micro-code. 

In  the  following  description  TOS  means  top  of  stack;  the  quantity 
on  the  top  of  the  stack  is  referenced,  S as  a source  means  the 
quantity  on’ the  top  of  the  stack  is  popped.  S as  a destination  means 
the  result  is  pushed  on  the  stack. 


Group  _1 

4 bit  op  1 bit  sub-op  3 bit  sourcetyp  8 bit  offset. 


source  types  are: 


STACK  - temporary  value  in  current  frame  extension.  Offset  is  a 
positive  quantity  representing  a negative  offset  from  the 

current  stack  pointer. 


LIT 


- literal  of  the  (compiled)  function  now  running.  Offset  is 
a positive  offset  from  the  current  function  literal  pointer. 


LOCAL  - local  variable  in  the  current  basic  frame.  Offset  is 
positive  from  current  basic  frame  pointer. 

SPEC  - specvar  reference.  An  indirect  reference  to  a value  cell. 
In  compiled  functions  the  value  cell  pointers  are  in  the 
literal  area,  and  in  interpreted  functions  the  value  cell 
pointers  are  in  the  basic  frame.  In  either  case  the 

so-called  literal  pointer  is  the  base  for  specvar 

references.  The  offset  is  positive. 


SYSTEM  CONSTANT  - Constants  that  are  referenced  frequently,  such 
as  T and  NIL,  are  stored  in  a system  literal  table.  The 
offset  is  positive  from  the  beginning  of  the  system  literal 

table . 


IMMEDIATE  - 
offset 


immediate  small  numbers 
is  the  number  minus  63. 


in  the  range  -63  to  +64. 


The 


op  sub-op 

00  0 PUSH  E->S 

1 RET  return  (E) 

01,02  unused  (possibly  IF  TRUE,  RET  and  IF  FALSE,  RET) 


Group  2 

4 bit  op  2 bit  sub-op  2 bit  sourcetyp  8 bit  offset 


Page  54 


op 

03 


04 


05 


source  types  are: 

STACK,  LIT,  LOCAL,  SPEC. 


sub-op 


0 

_ L- 

CAR 

CAR ( E ) ->S 

1 

RCAR 

(return (CAR  E) ) 

2 

CDR 

CDR(E) ->  S 

3 

RCDR 

etc . 

0 

CAAR 

1 

RCAAR 

2 

CADR 

3 

RCADR 

0 

CDAR 

1 

RCDAR 

2 

CDDR 

3 

RCDDk 

Group  3 


4 bit  op  2 bit  subop 


2 bit  source  type 


8 bit  offset 


op  subop 


06 

0 

TOS 

1 

POP 

2 

PCAR 

3 

PCDR 

07 

0 

SCDR 

1 

SCDDR 

2 

ADD1 

3 

SUBl 

Group  4 - 

ar 

ith . 

4 bit 

op 

2 bit 

subop 

TOS->E 

S->E 

CAR ( S) ~>E 
CDR(S) ->  E 
CDR (E) ->  E 
CDDR(E) ->  E 
E+1->E 
E-l->  E 


bit  source  type  8 bit  offset 


op 

10 


13 


subop 

0 

1 

2 

3 

0 

1 

2 

3 


ADD 

SUB 

MUL 

DIV 

REM 

EQ 

> 

< 


TOS+E->TOS 


COMPARE  TOS  with  E and  POP, 
set  indicators. 


Note  that  the  quantity  on  the  top  of  the 
a pointer  to  a number  (a  boxed  number) 
number.  The  result  can  be  stored  on  the 


stack  can  be  either 
or  a tagged  unboxed 
stack  as  a tagged 


Page 


55 


unboxed  number . 

Group  5 - type  tests 

4 bit  op  2 bit  subop  2 bit  source  type  8 bit  offset 


op 

12 


13 


subop 

0 LISTP  test  E,  set  indicator 

1 ATOM 

2 LITATOM 

3 NUM.BERP 

0 FIXP 

1 STRINGP 

2 ARRAYP 

3 STACK? 


Group  6 - branch 

4 bit  op  2 bit  subop  10  bit  offset 

Offset  is  9 bits  + sign,  0 implies  long  branch  where 
15  bit  offset  is  in  the  following  word. 


OP 

14 


15 


subop 

0 BRT  branch  if  indicator  true 

1 3RF  branch  if  indicator  false 

2 unused 

3 BR  unconditional  branch 

0 BNTL  branch  if  TOS=NIL  and  POP 

1 BNN  branch  if  TOS  MOT  MIL  and  POP 

? NBNIL  if  TOS=NI L , branch  and  don't  pop;  if 

TOS  NOT  MIL,  don't  branch  and  do  pop. 

3 NBNN  if  TOS  MOT  NxL,  branch  and  don't  pop; 
if  TOS  = NI L , don't  branch  and  do  pop. 


op  16 

unused 

Group  7 - 

literal 

8 bit 

op  8 bit 

op 

1700 

CALL 

1704 

DCALL 

1710 

LCALL 

1714 

OLCALL 

1720 

BIND 

call  function,  literal  is  #args,,  fnname 
call  function,  discard  value 
linked  call  to  function 
linked  call,  discard  value 
used  for  prog's  and  open  lambdas  that 
make  'frames 


Page  56 


1724  TYPTST  test  type  of  TOS , arg.  is  type  number 

( immediate) 

1730-1734  unused 

Group  8 - miscellaneous 

16  bit  op,  174000-177777 

2048  miscellaneous  operations,  args.  if  any,  are  on  the 
stack . 

For  example: 

CONS 

MEMB 

ASSOC 

ELT 

SETA 

RPLACA 

RPLACD 

DRPLACA  (discard  value) 

DRPLACD 

DPOP  (pop  ond  discard) 

NLGO  non-local  GO  in  PROG 

NLRET  return  from  PROG  when  inside  an  open  LAMBDA 

APPLY 

EVAL 

APPLY* 


Paqe 


57 


II.  STACK  FORMAT 


The  stack  is  allocated  in  a fixed  64K  segment  limiting 
stack  pointers  to  16  bits. 


Frame  Extension 

[ FLGS ] [USE] 

16 

flags  are  easy/hard,  active/inactive 

SIZE  or  END 

16 

BLINK 

16 

ALINK 

16 

CLINK 

16 

' 

RETURN 

32 

TEMPORARIES 

32 

bits 

each 

Basic  Frame 

BINDINGS 

32 

bits 

each 

BLINK-> [FLGS] [CXT] 

16 

figs 

are  active/inactive 

[FRAME  SIZE] [ # ARGS]  16 
FRAME  NAME  24 
FEF  or  VCELLS  24 

Holes 


-1  16  HOLE  FLAG 

SIZE  or  END  16 
LAST  HOLE  16 
NEXT  HOLE  16 


Frame  extension  is  all  obvious.  Terns  are  22  bit 
pointers.  High  order  10  bits  can  be  used  for  magic  markers 
such  as: 

0)  POINTER 

1)  22  bit  integer 

2)  UNBOXED  stack  pointer 

3)  or  anything  else  that  can  be  stored  in  22  bits 

4)  ALL  ONES  RESERVED  (see  Holes) 

The  basic  frame  overhead  follows  the  bindings  so  that 
bindings  can  be  stacked  directly  without  either  moving  them 
to  build  the  frame  or  having  a special  operation  to  begin  a 
function  call  by  skipping  some  stack  locations.  If  the 
function  is  compiled,  the  i igh  order  10  bits  of  a binding 


Page  58 


contain  the 
the  FEF . If 
pointers  are 
the  high  order 
locaton  of  the 


relative  location  of  the  value  call  pointer  in 
the  function  is  interpreted,  value  cell 
in  the  basic  frame  following  the  framename  and 
10  bits  of  a binding  contain  the  relative 
value  cell  pointer  in  the  basic  frame. 


Stack 

permitting 

permitting 


holes  are  chained  both  frontwards 
quick  searches  for  available 
the  removal  of  any  hole  from  the 


and  backwards, 
holes  and  also 
list. 


When  a frame  is  about  to  be  tun,  it  is  desirable  to  be 
able  to  check  whether  a stack  hole  immediately  follows  the 
extension.  Thus  a hole  mark  must  be  d ^inguishable  from 
binding,  and  from  a frame  extension  header  This  is 
accomplished  by  prohibiting  the  value  -1  in  the  high  10  °Jts 
of  a binding,  and  -1  as  the  value  of  USE.  To  remove  a hole, 

H,  from  the  chain, 


(NEXT (LAST  H) ) <-  (NEXT  H) 

( LAST ( NEXT  H) ) <-  (LAST  H) 

Hole  merging  is  often  useful  and  is  accomplished  as 
follows : 

IF  x+  (LEN  X)  = (NEXT  X)  then 

(LEN  X)  <-  (LEN  X)  + (LEN(NEXT  X)) 

(LAST (NEXT  X) ) <-  X 

(NEXT  X)  <-  (NEXT (NEXT  X)) 


Holes  that  are  smaller  than  4 
chain.  These  can  only  be  used 
above  or  if  they  eventually  get  mer 


words  are  not  in  the 
if  required  by  the  frame 
ged  into  adjacent  holes. 


-NOTE:  Using  an  FEE  contained  in  ^he  compiled  code^means 

-hat  CHANGENAME  of  a compiled  function 
illegal . 


;ize  Comparison 

Extension  overhead 
3asic  Frame  overhead 

compiled  bindings 
interp.  bindings 
rypical  3 args,  compiled 

3 args,  interpreted 


PDP-11 
112  bits 
80 

32  bits 
48  bits 
288 
336 


PDP-10 
180  bits 
36 
36 
36 
324 
324 


Paqe  59 


III.  LIST  STORAGE 

A CONS  cell  can  occupy  one,  two  or  three  16  bit  words.  Full 
pointers  are  22  bits.  The  flavors  of  CONS  cell  are: 


1)  CAR  special,  CDR  special  - stored  in  16  bits 

2)  CAR  special,  CDR  lonq  - stored  in  16  bits 

3)  CDR  special,  CAR  lonq  - stored  in  32  bits 

4)  Both  lonq  - stored  in  43  bits 

5)  INVIZl  - invisible  pointer  - short  - the  cell  has  been  RPLACA  d 
or  RPLACD'd  and  the  new  value  would  not  fit  in  a 1 word  CONS. 
The  real  cons  is  offset  from  here.  0 means  it  is  in  a hash 


table . 


6)  INVIZ2 

- 2 word  invisible 

FLG 

TYPE 

000 

both  special 

[3 

001 

CDR  long 

[3 

[16 

010 

CAR  long 

[3 

011 

Both  long 

[3 

[16 

[16 

100 

INVIZl 

[3 

101 

INVIZ2 

[3 

FORMAT 


[U...]  denotes  unused  bits.  7 bit  CAR's  are  encoded  as  follows: 

bit  6 = 0 - remaining  6 bits  0 CAR  is  NIL,  otherwise  CAR  is  a list 

offset  from  this  location  by  +/-  31  words.  6 bit  CDR  s are  encoded  as 


follows : 

3 - CDR  is  NIL,  otheiwise  CDR  is  a list  offset  from  this  location  oy 
+/-  31  words.  INVIZl  is  used,  when  the  original  CONS  is  one  word  long, 
the  new  cons  will  not  fit  in  one  word,  and  there  is  a free  slot  big 
enough  within  an  offset  of  +/-  4000  words.  One  unique  value  is 

reserved  to  denote  that  the  real  cell  is  contained  m a hash  table. 
INVIZ2  is  used  when  the  original  CONS  was  2 words  and  the  new  CO  S 
requires  3 words.  Then  the  INVIZ2  pointer  is  the  full  22  bit  address 
of  the  actual  CONS  cell.  Using  the  following  data  obtained  by  GREEN 
and  CLARK  we  can  compute  the  average  number  of  bits  required  by  a list 

cell . 

29%  of  CAR's  are  lists.  Of  these  70%  are  within  +/-  31. 

72%  of  CDR's  are  lists.  Of  these  38%  are  within  +/-  31. 

25%  of  CDR 's  are  NIL. 

3%  of  CAR's  are  NIL. 

11%  of  CAR's  are  numbers  0-15. 

Thus,  P (0 ) = . 30  , P ( 1 ) = . 04 , P ( 2 ) = . 53 , 


P ( 3 ) = . 08 . Assuming 


THUS,  r \ VJ  ) - . j u t r V A / - • V r ^ , . - - , - ' ~ ' , 

pointers  the  average  number  of  bits  per  list  cell  is  then 


28 


no  INVIZ 
5 bits. 





. ......... 


Page  60 


LIST  ALLOCATION 

To  allocate  list  cells  we  will  need  a free  list  of  words,  one 
free  list  per  Dage  containing  relative  addresses  within  the  page. (10 
bits).  If  a word  on  the  free  list  has  only  one. free  word  following, 
then  a "next  to  last  word  in  chunk"  flag  will  be  set  in  the  word. 
Similarly  the  last  word  in  a chunk  will  have  a "last  word,  in  chunk 
flag  set.  When  allocating  space  for  a new  list  cell,  we  will  take  one 
two  or  three  words  as  needed.  If  the  free  pointer  indicates  that 

there  is  not  enough  space  in  the  chunk,  then  just  waste  the  words  at 

the  end  of  the  chunk  and  step  the  free  pointer  to  a chunk  that  is  big 
enough.  (Note  that  there  is  a bit  of  iteration  in  the  above  process 
but  basically  simple).  As  we  will  probably  linearize  lists 

occasionally,  the  small  amount  of  waste  should  not  matter  very  much. 
Also,  given  there  are  2 unused  CONS  types,  we  could  use  one  of  the 

types  to  mark  lonely  1 to  2 word  holes.  Then  the  holes  could  be  used 

by  RPLACA ' s to  preceding  cells. 


APPENDIX  B 

PDP-11  MEMORY  MAPPING  DEVICE 


Page  61 


The  PDP-11  Memory  Mapping  Device,  to  be  referred  to  as 

MMD  will  accept  Unibus  memory  requests  from  a PDP-11 
processor  or  other  bus  master  and  generate  paged  memory 
requests  on  a second  Unibus  connected  to  all  system  memory. 
It  shall  contain  a high  speed  4k  by  16  bit  memory  to  hold 
the  real  core  addresses  of  all  virtual  memory  pages.  The 
device  will  have  control  registers  that  will  store  the 
following  functions:  (1)  relocation,  (2)  byte/word 
addressing,  (3)  disabling  of  paging  and  EXT  registers,  (4) 
write  protection,  (5)  word  modification  detection,  (6)  age 

of  pages,  (7)  distribution  of  ages,  and  (8)  invalid  page 
status  information.  The  diagram  below  shows  the  location  of 
the  MMD  in  a system. 


I Control  Registers 

1.1  Mode  Registers  ( *0  , 764200,  764202,  764204,  764206 


WRD 

EXT 

■■ 

AMD 

STS 

PTE 

REL 

ADR 

ENA 

M 

15  13  12  11  10  9 8 7 6 0 


Page 


62 


There  are  four  mode  registers  which  allow  4 different 

nets  of  parameters  in  using  the  MMD,  Bits  <17: 1 6 > of  the 
PDP-11  bus  address  select  the  mode  register  to  be  used. 

This  register  is  read/write.  The  definition  of  the  register 
bits  is  below. 

1.1.1  REL  - Relocation.  - This  7 bit  quantity  is 

added  (orJOR'ed)  to  the  high-order  address  bits  for 
use  in  addressing  the  page  table  memory. 

1.1.2  EXT  ENA  - Address  Extension  Enable  - This 

bit  when  false  causes  the  EXT  register  to  be  treated 
as  if  its  contents  were  zero.  When  true  the  EXT 

register  (combined  with  REL)  is  the  high  order  part 

of  the  virtual  address. 

1.1.3  WRD  ADR  - Word  Addressing  - When  true,  word 
addressing  is  enabled  (address  is  shifted  left  1). 

’.1.4  PTE  - Page  Table  Enable  - When  true,  the  page 

table  memory  is  used;  when  false,  the  page  table 
memory  is  bypassed. 

1.1.5  STS  - Protect  Trap  Status  - When  true  will 
not  allow  modification  of  information  retained 

during  trap. 


n t—M  lril|ljrT““-''— 


1.1.6  AMD  - Age  Modification  Disable  - When  true, 
no  change  occurs  in  the  age  section  of  the  page 
table  memory  on  memory  references. 

1.1.7  XXX  - f.on-existent 


1.2  EXT  Register  (1),  76*1210 


This  6 bit  register  is  clocked  from  external, 
non-Unibus  hardware  and  may  be  read  or  written  by  the 
processor 


15  6 5 0 


1.3  Age  Register  (1),  76*1212 


This  5 bit  register  can  both  be  read  and  written  by  the 
processor.  Its  contents  are  entered  into  the  page 
table  memory  during  memory  references  unless  inhibited 
by  AMD  true  or  PTE  false. 


XXX 


AGE 


15 


5 4 


1 . *1  Age  Distribution  Registers  (6*1),  76*1000  - 764176 


These  12  bit  registers  indicate  the  number  of  pages  of 


iii  «am* 


Page  o4 


a particular  age  (and  write  modification)  in  the  page 
table  memory  at  any  given  time.  The  registers  can  be 
both  read  and  written  from  the  processor  and  are 
automatically  updated  by  the  MMD. 


XXX 


AGE  CNT 


15  12  11 


0 


AGECNT  - Age  count  - number  of  pages  in  the  page  table 
memory  with  the  Write  Modification  Bit  (05)  and  age 
bits  (04:00)  set  to  the  address  of  this  register. 


XXX  - Non-existent 

1.5  AST ( 1 ) , 764214 

This  16  bit  register,  Address  Stored  on  Trap,  contains 
the  low  order  16  bits  of  the  memory  address  requested 
that  caused  a fault.  It  is  read-only. 

1.6  DST  (1),  764216 


This  16  bit  register,  Data  Stored  on  Trap,  contains  the 
16  bits  of  data  that  would  have  been  written  into 
memory  if  a trap  had  not  occurred.  Its  contents  are 
only  useful  if  the  fault  occurred  on  a write  memory 
cycle.  It  is  a read-only  register. 


Page 


6 5 


1.7  PCST  76-4220 

This  1 6 bit  register,  Program  Counter  Stored  on  trap, 
contains  the  contents  of  the  PC  at  last  CLKIR  prior  to 
trap.  It  is  read-only. 

1.8  MST  764222 

This  register,  Map  Status,  contains  the  status  of 
certain  bits  at  the  time  of  a trap.  The  cause  of  the 
trap,  and  the  MMDENA  bit.  Bit  15  may  be  set  or  reset 
and  bits  14:12  may  be  reset  under  program  control.  The 

rest  of  the  register  is  read  only.  While  any  of  bits 
14:12  is  set,  trap  information  (AST,  DST , PCST,  MST)  is 
not  modified.  When  bits  14:12  are  reset,  updating  of 

trap  information  resumes. 


MMD 

ENA 

ILLEG. 

PG. 

WRITE 

VIOL 

TIME 

OUT 

XX 

P17 

P16 

A17 

A16 

CO 

Cl 

15 

14 

13 

12 

11  6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

1.8.1  Cl  - PDP-11  memory  cycle  control  signal 


1.8.2  CO  - PDP-11  memory  cycle  control  signal. 


1.8.3  A 1 6 - 1 6th  bit  of  address  referenced  at  trap. 


Page  66 


1.8.4  A17  - 17th  bit  of  address  referenced  at  trap 

1.8.5  P 1 6 - 1 6th  bit  of  PC  referenced  at  trap. 

1.8.6  P17  - 17th  bit  of  PC  referenced  at  trap. 

1.8.7  write  viol  - trap  was  caused  by  attempt  to 

write  on  a write  protected  page. 

1.8.8  illegal  pg  - trap  was  caused  by  reference  to 
illegal  page  - (age  field  all  ones) 

1.8.9  TIME-OUT  - trap  was  caused  by  memory  not 
responding  within  5 micro  secs . 

1.8.10  MMDENA  - The  memory  map  device  enable  bit 
may  be  both  read  and  written.  When  the  MMDENA  bit 
is  0,  the  MMD  becomes  completely  transparent, 
without  however  clearing  any  of  its  registers.  When 
returned  to  1,  operation  will  continue  as  it  was 
before  being  disabled.  MMDENA  is  reset  to  0 by 

System  Reset.  \ 

\ 

NOTE:  A second  input  and  clock  line  should  be v 
provided  to  set  and  reset  MMDENA  (to  be  used  by 
possible  future  modifications) 


II  Page  Table  Memory  (PTM) 

The  page  table  memory  is  a 4K  by  16  bit  memory  which 
may  be  both  read  and  written  and  is  addressed  between 
locations  740000  and  757777.  Its  bit  assignment  is 
given  below: 


RMP 

WPR 

WMOD  PA 

15 

7 6 

5 4 0 

2.1  RMP  - Real  Memory  Page,  The  address  of  a IK  page 
in  physical  memory.  This  is  cent  as  the  nine  most 
significant  address  bits  to  physical  core  if  the  paging 
function  is  enabled. 

2.2  WPR  - Write  Protect,  this  bit  when  true  causes  a 
trap  if  any  attempt  to  write  is  made. 

2.3  WMOD  - Write  Modification,  this  bit  when  true 
indicates  that  at  some  time  a write  occurred  in  the 

page  . 

2.4  PA  - Page  Age,  these  5 bits  indicate  the  value  of 
the  age  register  at  the  last  time  that  the  page  was 
referenced. 


Ill  Operations  performed  by  MMD 


Page  68 


3 . 1 Reading  or  Writing  of  Control  Registers . 

The  registers  detailed  in  Section  I may  be  referenced 
at  the  addresses  given.  An  attempt  to  write  a read 
only  register  is  a NO-OP.  The  sections  of  registers 
marked  "XXX"  are  not  only  undefined  but  cannot  be  used 
to  store  and  retrieve  information.  These  registers,  in 
general,  function  no  differently  than  the  registers 
used  to  command  PDP-11  I/O  devices. 

3.2  Reading  or  Writing  the  PTM 

The  PTM  may  be  used  as  any  other  memory  to  store  and 
retrieve  information.  Standard  Memory  diagnostics  may 
be  run  in  this  memory  by  simply  setting  the  diagnostic 
to  test  memory  between  120K  to  124K.  The  paging 
mechanism  must,  of  course,  be  disabled. 

3.3  Initialization  Sequence  . 

Upon  power  up  or  a system  power  clear  signal,  MMDENA  is 
set  to  0.  This  allows  the  system  to  operate  as  if  the 

MMD  were  not  on  the  system. 

3.4  EXT  Address  Entry 


Page  69 


The  MMD  will  provide  6 data  bit  inputs  for  the  EXT  and 
clock  or  latch  input.  These  inputs  should  be  TTL.  A 
set  of  DIP-packaged  resistors  will  be  provided  for 
termination  of  these  lines.  The  clocking  of  data  on 
these  lines  is  performed  independently  of  any  MMD 
function . 

3-5  Paminm  Memory  References 

This  function,  the  primary  function  of  the  MMD  is 
described  in  Section  IV. 

IV  Mapped  Memory  References. 

Memory  references  are  affected  by  most  of  the  control 
registers  defined  in  Section  I and,  of  course,  by  the 
PTM  if  mapping  is  enabled.  The  series  of  operations 
used  to  finally  arrive  at  a real  core  address  is 
complex  and  for  that  reason  has  been  divided  into  3 

sections:  the  calculation  of  the  address  sent  to  the 
PTM,  the  calculation  of  the  Real  Core  Address  from  the 
output  of  the  PTM,  and  other  functions  such  as  ageing 
which  occur  during  memory  references. 

4.1  Calculation  of  PTM  address 

4.1.0  If  BA  <17:  1 4 > are  all  ones,  the  address  is  a 
Unibus  device  register.  (Note:  a switch  or  jumper 
should  be  installed  to  permit  changing  Unibus  device 


Page  70 


registers  from  BA  <17:  1 -4 > = 1111  to  0011.) 


4.1.1  One  of  the  4 Mode  Registers  are  selected  by 
Bus  Address  16  and  17  as  follows: 


BA  17  BA  16 


Mode  Register 


0 0 764200 


0 1 764202 

1 0 764204 

1 1 764206 


NOTE:  If,  however,  MMDENA=0,  the  contents  of  the 
mode  registers  are  disabled  and  zero  is  used  as  the 
contents . 


4.1.2  If  EXT  ENA  of  the  selected  Mode  Register  is 
true,  the  EXT  register  is  concatenated  with  the  bus 
address  BA  < 1 5 : 00> . If  EXTENA  is  false,  zeros  are 
concatenated.  The  result  is  a 22  tit  address. 

4.1.3  If  WRD  ADR  of  the  selected  Mode  Register  is 
true,  the  above  address  is  intended  as  a word 
address,  and  is  shifted  left  one  to  produce  a byte 
address.  If  WRD  ADR  is  false  no  shift  occurs.  The 
result  is  a 23  bit  quantity,  BBA  (big  bus  address  or 
bus  byte  address). 


4.1.4  The  high  order  7 bits  of  BBA  are  XOR'ed  with 
REL,  the  contents  of  the  relocation  field  of)  the 
selected  Mode  Register.  The  result  concatenated 
with  BBA  < 1 5 : 0 0 > is  the  RBBA  (relocated  big  bu\N 
address).  RBBA  <22 : 1 1 > is  the  PTM  address. 

4.2  Calculation  of  Real  Core  Address 

4.2.1  The  PTE  bit  of  the  selected  Mode  Register 
determines  whether  the  page  memory  is  used  in 
address  calculation.  If  PTE  (Page  Table)  is  true, 
the  high  order  portion  of  the  Real  Core  Address,  RCA 
(19:11)  is  set  to  the  RMP  (Real  Memory  Page,  the  9 
least  significant  bits  of  PTM). 

If  PTE  is  false  RCA  (19:11)  is  set  to  bits  <19:11> 
of  RBBA.  RBBA  <22:20>  are  in  that  case  ignored. 
Note  that  if  PTE  is  false,  no  modifications  are  made 
to  the  page  table,  and  normal  page  table  delays  are 

avoided . 

4.2.2  RCA  (10:00)  are  taken  from  BBA  (10:00).  This 
forms  the  IK  word,  2K  byte  address  within  a memory 
page  . 

4.3  Miscellaneous  functions  during  Memory  reference 
4.3.1  Age  Register 


During  all  memory  references,  unless  the  AMD  bit  of 


Page  72 


the  selected  Mode  Register  is  true,  or  PTE  is  false, 
the  contents  of  the  age  register  are  loaded  into 
bits  4 through  0 of  the  PTM.  If  AMD  is  true,  PTM 
(4:0)  remain  unchanged. 

4.3.2  Write  Modification. 

During  all  write  cycle-type  memory  references,  the 
contents  of  the  WMOD  bit  of  the  PTM  are  set  to  1. 
During  read  cycles  this  bit  is  not  affected.  This 
is  to  be  able  to  avoid  writing  pages  back  on  to  a 
disk  if  the  page  is  unmodified. 

4.3.3  Tran  Status 

During  memory  references  certain  information  is 
stored  in  case  a trap  occurs.  If  the  STS  bit  of  the 

selected  Mode  Register  is  false,  AST,  DST,  POST,  and 
MST  are  updated.  If  the  STS  bit  is  true,  the 
contents  of  AST,  DST,  PCST,  and  MST  are  frozen  (not 

updated ) . 

4.3.4  Traps 

A trap  occurs  if  ( 1 ) an  attempt  is  made  to  write 
when  the  WPB  of  the  PRM  is  true,  or  (2)  the  age 


Page 


73 


i 


1 


count 

er  is  set 

to  al 

page  . 

A trap 

occurs 

is  no 

t returne 

d caus 

When 

a trap  oc 

curs  , 

prote 

cts  the  s 

tatus 

trans 

parent . 

Also 

set 

(illegal 

page, 

time- 

out) , an 

d no 

table 

or  age  d 

istrib 

1 one's  indicating 
because  the  Unibus  s 
ing  the  processor  to 
the  MMDENA  bit  is  set 
information  and  make 
the  appropriate  stat 
write  violation, 
modification  is  made 
ution  registers. 


an  invalid 
ignal  SSYNC 
time-out . 
to  0 which 


s the  MMD 
us  bits  are 
and  memory 
to  the  page 


4.3.5  Age  Distribution  Registers 


These  registers  provide  a record  of  how  many 
there  are  with  a particular  age.  This  reco 
kept  by  2 operations.  When  a memory  refe 
occurs  and  the  AMD  bit  is  not  set,  the  combin 


of  the  WMOD  (write  modificat 

ion ) 

and 

the 

PA 

age)  of 

the  PTM  form  an  add 

ress 

that 

selects  o 

the  ADR 

registers.  WMOD 

is 

used 

as 

the 

significant  bit,  bit  5;  and  bits  0 through 


taken  from  the  PA 

. The  contents 

of 

that 

loc 

are  decremented. 

The  contents 

of 

the 

loc 

specified  by  the 

present  state  of 

the 

write 

re 

line,  or'd  with  WMOD , and  the  age  registe 
incremented.  This  keeps  a record  of  the  numbe 


pages 
rd  is 
rence 
at  ion 
(page 

ne  of 
most 
4 are 
at  ion 
ation 
que  ?t 
r are 
r of 


pages  of  each  age  in 


the 


PTM.  The  age  distribution 


Page  74 


registers  are  also  updated  on  direct  processor 
writes  to  the  page  table. 


UICO 


B A<  17  16  > 
BA<17  00> 


EXT  ENA 
M<8> 


DMUX<05 00> 


EX. <05  00> 


2 - 1 MUX 


BA<I7  14»  all  ONES 
D , 0 


BA<  15  00> 


UNIBUS 

DEVICE 

REG. 


WRD  ADR 
M<9> 


SHIFT/ 
NO  SHIFT 


REL 

M <06  n0> 


BBA  < 22  16> 


BBA<  22  00> 


PTE 
M<  10> 


XOR 



r 

L 

0 

BBA<15  11  > 


AGE  REG 

X \ 

RBBA<22  ll> -/1  L 

<04  00> 

V 

r 

AGE 

D1STR. 

REGS 

(0:63) 

<1100> 


WRITE  REQ 


PAGE  TABLE 
4 KX  16  RAM 


W MOD 


•BBA<IO  00> 


RBBA  <19;  11  > 


-K  WMOD.  PAGE  AGE  =A 

* WMOD.V WRITE  REQ. AGE  REG:B 

(A)  -1  — A 

( B)  + 1 — ► B 

IF  A^B.DO  NOTHING 

NOTE- 

— 1>  CONTROL  SIGNAL 
-*•  DATA 


RCP 

<08'00> 
■ WRITE  PROT 
WRITE  REQ. 


RCA<I9  00> 


MEMORY 


ILLEGAL  WRITE 

PG  y VIOL 

VALID  CORE 
ADDR 


MEMORY  MAP  BLOCK  DIAGRAM 


Page 


76 


A TUTORIAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  HERMES 


Catherine  L.  Hausmann 
Mario  C.  Grignetti 


April  30,  1976 


The  Intelligent  Terminal  Project 
BOLT  BERANEK  AND  NEWMAN  INC. 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts 


mm 


Page 


77 


1 - 


m m 

m m 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 

LESSON  1 Basics  - Roadinq  Messages 

Startinq  Hermes  - Initial  Survey 
Panic  Buttons 

Printing  Messaqes  with  <LF>  and 

LESSON  2 More  Message  Processing  

Printing  Messages  with  the  PRINT  Command 

Abbreviating  Commands 

Messaqe  Lists 

FILE 

LIST 

LESSON  3 Answering  and  Forwarding  Messages... 
REPLY 
FORWARD 

LESSON  4 Message  Composition 

COMPOSE 

Drafting  a.  Message 

SHOW 

Edit inq 

LESSON  5 Selective  Printing  - Filters 

SURVEY 

Filters 

The  ? facility 
Multiple  Filters 

LESSON  6 Working  with  Draft  Messaqes 

CREATE 

SAVE-FIELD 

ADD-FILE 

LESSON  7 - Housekeeping  and  Your  Messaqe  File 
DELETE 

LESSON  8 - Current  Objects 

CSEQUENCE 

CONSIDER 

CMESS AGE-FILE;  GET 

LESSON  9 - On-line  User  Aids 

HELP 

EXPLAIN 

DESCRIBE 


Page 

78 

80 


85 


89 


92 


96 


99 


103 

106 


110 


Paqe  78 


A TUTORIAL  INTRODUCTION  'TO  HERMES 


INTRODUCTION 

This  guide  introduces  Hermes,  a new  system  for  reading 
and  Drocessing  ARPANET  messages.  Hermes  has  features  that 
help  the  user  read  the  messages  he  has  received,  prepare 
messages  for  transmission  to  other  users,  and  create  and 
manage  files  of  messages.  This  guide  covers  the  important 
features  that  let  the  user  accomplish  these  central  tasks. 

The  material  is  presented  in  a tutorial  sequence, 
intended  to  take  the  user  in  a natural  progression  through 
the  various  manipulations.  The  first  four  lessons  cover 
enough  to  let  the  user  accomnlish  basic  message  reading, 
writing  and  filing.  The  last  five  lessons  expand  on  this 
base  by  introducing  more  soohisticated  techniaues  in  all 
three  areas.  Having  progressed  through  the  nine  lessons, 
the  user  can  continue  to  use  the  guide  as  a reference  source 
with  the  aid  of  the  detailed  table  of  contents.  The 
material  is  well  laced  with  concrete  examples.  To  make  best 
use  of  what  is  presented,  however,  the  user  should  also  work 
parallel  examples  of  his  own. 

Since  the  guide  is  intended  to  be  introductory  in 
nature,  certain  advanced  features  and  techniques  are 
omitted.  For  complete  coverage  of  all  Hermes  details  see 
the  companion  Hermes  User  Guide. 


Paqe  79 


This  guide  is  a product  of  research  on  advanced 
tutorial  technioues  in  the  BBN  Intelligent  Terminal  Project. 
The  main  thrust  of  that  project  is  to  develop  sophisticated, 
compute  -based  tutorial  mechanisms  that  could  be  housed  m a 
computer  terminal  with  powerful  processing  capabilities  of 
its  own.  The  IT  project  has  selected  Hermes  as  a context 
for  tutorial  development  because  of  its  focus  on  message 
processing  - a general  problem  broadly  understood  by 
potential  IT  users. 

This  document  was  initially  preoared  to  establish  the 
framework  for  "live"  tutorial  sec-uences  to  be  implemented  m 
a computer.  However,  it  seemed  sufficiently  valuable  m its 
own  right  as  an  introduction  to  Hermes  that  we  are  now 
releasinq  it  as  a user  document  in  the  Hermes  Project. 


Page  80 


LESSON  1 

Hermes  is  a new  system  for  reading  and  processing  your  mail. 
This  manual  introduces  a subset  of  Hermes  that  will  allow 
you  to  read  messages,  send  messages  and  do  simple  message 
processing.  Type  HERMES  to  enter  Hermes.  (Parts  typed  by 
the  user  are  underlined.  Characters  like  carriage  return 
( <CR> ) are  shown  in  angle  brackets.) 

<CR> 

-+  13  329  24  Feb  76  GRIGNETTI  at  BBN-TEMEXA  Welcome 
-+  14  379  28  Feb  76  HAUSMANN  at  BBN-TENEXA  Quotation  of 
-+  15  40738  3 Mar  76  BROWN  at  8BN-TENEXD  New  Paper 

> 

Survey  of  messages 

Upon  entering  Hermes  an  initial  survey  is  printea  out 
of  the  RECENTMESSAGES  in  your  message  file  (those  received 
since  you  last  read  your  mail  using  Hermes) . Messages  read 
with  other  programs  are  still  marked  recent  and  are  included 
in  the  initial  survey  because  they  were  not  read  inside 
Hermes . 

Let's  look  at  the  first  lire  in  the  survey.  The 
stands  for  "unseen"  (messages  never  printed  out  before) ; the 
"+"  for  "recent"  (messages  that  came  in  since  your  last 
session  with  Hermes) . This  is  followed  bv  the  "message 


number"  by  which  you  will  refer  to  the  message.  Then  the 
character  count,  the  date,  and  the  author,  and  as  much  of 
the  subject  as  will  fit  on  one  line. 

Whenever  Hermes  is  finished  doinq  something  for  you,  it 
prints  a wedge  (>)  in  the  margin  to  indicate  it  is  waiting 
for  you  to  type  a command. 


Panic  Buttons 

Before  telling  you  about  Hermes  commands  let  us  make 
sure  you  understand  how  to  correct  mistakes  and/or  get  out 
of  sticky  or  unwanted  situations.  If  you  make  mistakes 
while  tvping  a command  you  can  correct  them  with  <CfRL-A>, 
<CTRL-W> , or  <DEL> . <CTRL-A>  erases  the  last  character  you 
typed;  <CTRL-W>  erases  the  last  word;  <DEL>  cancels  the 
entire  line.  To  abort  execution  of  a command  and  to  return 
to  Hermes  (causing  it  to  print  the  > orompt)  type  <CTRL-E>. 
To  abort  a long  printout,  type  <CTRL-0>;  this  will  cause 
Hermes  to  give  you  the  > prompt.  If  you  want  to  leave 
Hermes  altogether,  type  QUIT  <CR>. 


Printing  messages  with  <LF>  and 

To  orint  the  first  of  your  recent  messages,  you  type  a 
linefeed  (LF  on  your  keyboard).  I will  do  that  now. 


Page  82 


> <kF> 

Messaqe  13;  329  chars  UNSEEN  RECENT 

Mail  from  BBN-TENEXA  rcvd  at  24-FEE-76  1747-EST 

Date:  24  FEB  1976  1559-EST 

Sender:  GRIGNETTI  at  BBN-TENEXA 

Subject:  Welcome 

From  GRIGNETTI  at  BBN-TENEXA 

To:  Tutor 

Cc:  GRIGNETTI 

Message-ID:  <[ BBN-TENEXA] 24-FEB-76  1 5 : 59  : 44-EST . GRIGNETTI > 
Welcome  to  ”Our  first  lesson  on  HERMES. 

Good  luck! 

Mar io . 

> 

Let's  take  a look  at  this  message.  At  the  beginning  there 
are  a few  lines  of  "envelope"  information  headed  by  the 
words  Date:,  Sender:,  Subject:,  From:,  To:,  Cc:,  and 
Message-ID:;  these  are  called  "fields".  The  Date:,  Sender:, 
From:,  To:  and  Message-ID:  fields  always  appear  in  messages 
sent  using  Hermes.  The  Subject:  and  the  Cc:  fields  are 
optional.  The  meaning  of  Subject  is  clear  enough.  The  Cc : 
stands  for  Carbon  Copy;  people  whose  names  aDpear  there  will 
receive  a copy  of  the  message. 


The  From:  field  is  normally  the  same  as  the  Sender: 
field,  and  Hermes  sets  it  up  that  way  automatically. 
Sometimes,  however,  the  author  of  the  messaqe  is  not  the 
person  that  sends  it  out  (your  secretary  (Sender:  Secretary) 
sends  out  a message  for  you  (From:  you).)  In  these  cases  the 
field  can  be  specified  by  the  sender. 


From : 


Paqe  83 


There  is  another  obvious  field  that  is  not  preceeded 
explicitly  by  a name  --  the  text  of  the  message  itself  is  in 
the  Text:  field. 


To  print  each  subsequent  message  you  continue  typing 
linefeed  (<LF>) . To  back  up  one  message  and  print  it  again 
you  can  hit  the  ~ key.  With  these  two  commands  you  can  move 
up  and  down  your  "message  file"  printing  out  messages  in 
seauence.  The  message  you  just  printed  is  called  the 
"current  message"  (CMESSAGE) . (There  are  other  commands 
that  change  the  cmessage  that  you  will  learn  about  later.) 

In  between  these  one-character  commands  you  could  type  other 
commands  (that  you'll  learn  soon),  for  example,  to  reply  to 
the  current  message,  file  it  away  for  future  action,  send  a 
reply  to  someone  else,  etc.  After  doing  any  of  these  you 
can  continue  printing  your  messages  one  at  a time. 


Concepts  covered: 

Hermes 
> prompt 
initial  survey 
RECENTMESSAGES 
message  number 
fields 
To : 

Date : 

Sender : 

Subject : 

From : 

Cc : 

Message- ID : 

Text : 

<CTRL-A> 

<CTRL-W> 

< CTRL-0> 

< CTRL-E  > 


Page 


<DEL> 

<LF>  command 
command 
CMESSAGE 
message  file 


Paae  85 


LESSON  2 


Printinq  Messaqes  with  the  PRINT  Command 

Another  wav  of  printinq  messaqes  is  by  means  of  the 
PRINT  command.  You  mav  use  this  command  to  skip  anywhere  in 
the  messaqe  file  and  print  a message.  For  example,  to  print 
your  second  messaqe  you  could  tvpe  PRINT  followed  bv  "2", 
and  a <CR>: 


> P£.int  2 <CR> 

Message  2:  298  chars 

Mail  from  B8N-TENEXB  rcvd  at  19-DEC-75  1052-EST 

bate:  19  DEC  1975  1019-EST 

From:  White 

Subject:  Found 

To:  Tutor 

A sterling  silver  bracelet  was  found  at  the  Aquarium 
Thursday  night  near  the  coat  rack.  Please  claim  it. 
Mary 


The  PRINT  command  changes  the  setting  of  the  current 
message  (as  with  <LF>  and  ") ; CMESSAGE  is  now  set  to  2.  To 
check  this,  trv  using  the  " command  and  see  what  happens. 
(Remember  that  the  " command  prints  the  message  preceding 
the  current  message.) 


>2  <CR> 

Message  1;  398  chars 

Mail  from  3BN-TENEXA  rcvd  at  18-DEC-75  1128-EST 
Date:  18  DEC  1975  1052-EST 
From:  GOLDMAN 

Subject:  A new  order  of  widgets 
To:  Tutor 


Page  86 


A new  order  of  widgets  has  arrived  and  can  be  picked  up 
at  my  office.  Please  only  one  widget  to  a customer. 

— Frank 


Abbreviating  commands 


You  can  save  vourself  some  typing  by  invoking  the 
command  recognition  capabilities  of  Hermes.  After  typing  a 
few  initial  characters  of  a command,  you  may  hit  the  <ESC> 
key.  If  you  haven't  typed  enough  characters  to  soecify  a 
command  uniquely,  Hermes  will  sound  the  bell  to  indicate 
that  you  must  type  more  characters.  Otherwise,  the  rest  of 
the  command  will  be  printed  out  as  if  you  had  typed  it 
entirely.  In  addition  Hermes  will  print  a few  words 
(enclosed  in  parentheses)  to  cue  you  as  to  what  it  expects 
for  the  next  part  of  the  command.  I will  print  message  14 
now  using  <ESC>  afcer  PRINT  to  invoke  command  recognition. 


>print  (messages)  14  <CR> 

Message  14;  379  chars  UNSEEN  RECENT 

Mail  from  BBN-TENEXA  rcvd  at  28-FEB-76  1746-EST 

Date;  28  FEB  1976  1605-EST 

Sender:  HAUSMANN  at  BBN-TENEXA 

Subject:  Quotation  of  the  Week 

From:  HAUSMANN  at  BBN-TENEXA 

To:  Tutor 

Message-ID : <[ BBN-TENEXA] 28-FEB-76  1 6 : 0 5 : 30-EST . HAUSMANN> 

"Will  there  be  any  unforeseen  complications?" 

John  Seely  Brown 
26  January  1976 


Page  87 


Messaqe  Lists 

As  hinted  by  the  cue  words,  you  can  SDecify  a list  of 
messages  rather  than  a sinqle  one  after  PRINT  and  after  many 
other  Hermes  commands.  There  are  a lot  of  ways  of 
specifying  a messaqe  list.  A messaqe  list  can  be  a single 
messaqe,  like  6,  or  it  can  be  an  arbitrarily  ordered  list  of 
messages  like  7,8,3,  or  it  can  be  a sequential  list  of 
messaqes  like  3 through  8 which  could  be  specified 
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 or  3:8.  The  colon  means  "through".  To  specify 
a messaqe  list  like  5 throuqh  the  last  one  in  the  message 
file,  type  5:last.  To  specify  from  the  current  message 
(CMESSAGE ) to  the  last  message,  type  .:last.  The  stands 

for  the  CMESSAGE  — it  is  an  abbreviation. 

The  FILE  Command 

After  you  read  a message  you  may  wish  to  process  it 
further  by  either  filing  it  away  or  listing  it  at  the 
lineprinter.  Let's  file  CMESSAGE  in  a file  named 
QUOTES .TXT . I wiil  do  this  with  the  FILE  command  and 
command  recognition. 

>file  (messages)  1_4  (on  file)  auotes^txt  [Old  version]  £CR> 
Delete  messaqe  after  writing?:  no 
14 


A coov  of  the  message  is  now  on  QUOTES.TXT  and 


Page  38 


MESSAGE.TXT.  It  has  not  been  deleted  from  the  current  file. 

As  you  saw  in  the  initial  survey^  the  next  message 
(number  15)  is  very  long.  If  you  wanted  to  print  it  at  your 
terminal  you  could  use  the  <LF>  command.  Because  it  is  so 
long  you  would  probably  want  to  abort  the  printout  by  typing 
<CTRL-0> . 

The  LIST  Command 

A good  way  to  read  a long  message  is  to  list  it  at  the 
lineprinter.  To  do  that  you  use  the  LIST  command.  I will 
use  it  now  for  the  long  messaqe  (number  15) . 

>list  (messages)  15  <CP> 


So  far  we  have  dealt  mostly  with  manipulating  mail  that 
you  received.  In  the  next  lesson  we'll  turn  our  attention 
eo  sending  mail. 


Concepts  covered: 

PRINT  command 
FILE  command 
LIST  command 
CMESSAGE  = . 


Page  89 


LESSON  3 

The  REPLY  Command 


Frequently  while  reading  your  messages  one  at  a time, 
vou  may  wish  to  send  out  a reply.  An  easy  way  to  do  that  is 
by  usinq  the  REPLY  command.  You  type  REPLY,  followed  by  the 
number  of  the  message  you  are  replying  to,  and  a <CR>. 

Hermes  will  automatically  set  things  up  for  you  so  that  all 
you  have  left  to  do  is  to  type  the  text  of  your  reply.  when 
you  are  finished,  you  type  a <CTRL-Z>  to  tell  Hermes  you  are 
done  with  the  Text:  field.  Before  sending  out  the  reply, 
Hermes  will  check  with  vou  so  that  if  for  any  reason  you  are 
not  satisfied  with  the  message  it  will  not  be  sent. 

Let  s reolv  to  that  long  message  (number  15)  with  the 
text  "I'll  read  vour  paper  this  weekend".  it  is  important 
to  remember  to  type  a carriage  return  after  you  type  REPLY 
and  the  message  number.  (The  <CR>  will  no  longer  be 
printed  explicitly,  but  keep  in  mind  that  it  is  still  there 
at  the  ena  of  command  lines.)  I will  avail  myself  of  the 
help  provided  by  <ESC>. 

(t0  message)  15 
To:  Tutor 

Subject:  (NEW  PAPER) 

In-Replv-To:  Your  message  March  3,  1976 

(Type  text  of  reply,  to  <CTRL-Z>) 

Text : 

£®.?d  your  paper  this  weekend.  <CTRL-Z> 

Format?: "no  ~ ~~  ~ ~ 

Send?:  yes 

Message [BBN-TENEXA] 9-Apr-75  1 9 : 4 2 : 20-EST . TUTOR?  sent 


Paqe 


90 


Hermes  created  automatically  the  From:,  Subject:  and 

l n-Repl y-To : fields.  The  From:  field  of  the  message  replied 

to  becomes  the  To:  field  of  the  message  being  sent.  The 

Subject:  field  is  the  same  and  the  In-Reply-To:  field 

identifies  the  message  being  replied  to. 

We'll  see  the  usefulness  of  answering  NO  to  "Send?" 
very  soon. 

The  FORWARD  Command 

Sometimes  you  may  want  to  send  someone  a copy  of  a 
message  that  you  yourself  have  received.  You  may  do  so  with 
the  FORWARD  command.  Type  FORWARD,  the  message  number  and 
<CR> . You  will  immediately  be  prompted  for  the  To:  field.  t 
Type  the  addressee  and  a <CR> . Then  you  will  be  asked  if 
you  want  to  make  any  comments.  If  you  want  to  make  comments 
type  YES.  Type  your  comments  and  end  them  with  <CTRL  Z>  a 
you  would  with  the  Text:  field.  This  text  will  be  placed  at 
the  beginning  of  the  message.  Hermes  will  then  tyoe  Send? 
and  you  respond  with  YES  or  NO.  I will  now  forward  the 
message  containing  the  Quotation  to  Smith  with  the  text 
beginning  "For  your  collection  . 

'forward  (messages)  1 4 
loT~SmTEh 
Subject:  A Quote 
Comments  (to  Z)  : 

For  your  collection^  <CTRL-Z> 

Format?:  no 
Send?:  yes 


Paqe  91 


Messaqe  < [ BBN-TENEXA] 8-APR-76  19 : 43 : 35-EST .TUTOR>  sent. 

Concepts  covered: 

REPLY  command 
FORWARD  command 


Page  92 


LESSON  4 

The  COMPOSE  command 

A more  general  way  to  send  out  messages  is  to  use  the 
COMPOSE  command.  COMPOSE  works  pretty  much  like  SNDMSG , 
prompting  you  with  the  fields  you  need  to  send  an  ordinary 
message,  i.e.,  the  To:,  Cc : , Subject:  and  Text:  fields.  If 
you  don't  want  to  send  carbon  copies  to  anyone,  just  type  a 
<CR>  after  the  Cc : prompt.  Similarly  if  you  don't  wish  to 
specify  a subject  just  type  a <CR>  after  the  Subject:  field. 
If  you  want  to  send  the  message  (or  copies  of  it)  to  more 
than  one  person,  just  type  their  names  separated  by  commas, 
and  terminate  with  a <CR>.  You  can  correct  your  typing 
mistakes  using  <CTRL-A>,  <CTRL-W>  and  <DEL> , the  same  as 
with  Hermes  commands.  In  addition,  there  are  a few  more 
facilities  to  help  you  compose  your  message. 

If  a line  has  gotten  messy  because  of  too  many  mistakes 
and  corrections,  you  can  see  it  cleaned  up  by  typing 
<CTRL-R>  (R  for  Retype) . Typing  <CTRL-S>  will  show  the 
entire  field  you  are  typing. 

To  signal  Hermes  that  you  are  finished  typing  the  Text: 
field,  type  a <CTRL-Z>.  Hermes  will  then  ask  you  if  it  is 
OK  to  send  the  message,  and  you  should  answer  YES. 

(Answering  NO  allows  you  to  go  back  and  change  the  message 
as  described  below). 


I will  now  COMPOSE  a message  to  Green: 


>compose 

Prompted  messaqe  composition: 

To:  Green 

Cc : 

Subject:  Hermes 

Text : 

Hermes  is  great  fun  to  use . <CTRL-Z> 

Messaqe1 <T3BN-TENEXA18-ADt-76  19 : 44 : 46-EST. TUTOR)  sent. 


Drafting  a Message 

Occasionally  you  will  realize  you  made  a mistake  when 
it  is  too  late  or  too  inconvenient  to  fix  it  in  the  above 
described  manner.  It  is  here  that  answering  NO  to  Send? 
comes  handy.  If  vou  answer  NO,  Hermes  will  out  you  in  a 
"draft  state"  and  will  ind^  .te  this  by  printing  two  wedges 
in  the  margin  instead  of  one.  Once  in  the  draft  state,  you 
can  pick  out  individual  fields  and  work  on  them 
independently  of  the  others.  For  example,  typing  To: 
followed  by  a name  will  add  that  name  to  the  end  of  the  To. 
field  in  your  draft.  You  can  add  a new  field  to  your 
message  in  the  same  way,  for  example,  an  Fee:  field.  Fee: 
stands  for  "File  Carbon  Copy".  It  provides  a good  way  of 
takinq  a message  that  you  ha/e  created  and  storing  it  into  a 

file  for  later  reference. 

The  SHOW  Command 

To  see  the  whole  contents  of  a field  you  can  use  the 


Page  94 


SHOW  command.  To  use  it  simply  type  SHOW  followed  by  the 
name  of  the  field  you  want  to  see.  To  see  all  fields,  type 
SHOW  ALL. 

Ed i t ing 

Most  commonly,  the  mistakes  you  make  will  not  be  simple 
omissions  at  the  end  of  a field,  but  will  require  more 
complex  editing  operations  in  the  middle  of,  say,  the  Text: 
field.  At  this  point  you  may  call  any  of  three  editors  -- 
TECO,  NETED,  or  XED.  To  edit  a field,  you  type  the  name  of 
your  favorite  editor  followed  by  the  name  of  the  field.  If 
you  omit  the  latter,  Text:  is  assumed.  For  example,  to  edit 
Text:  using  TECO,  simply  type  TECO  and  a <CR>.  After  you 
are  done  with  the  changes  you  want,  tvce  ;H<F,SC>  and  you'll 
return  to  the  DRAFT  state.  (Do  not  use  EX<ESC>  or  ;U<ESC>.) 
After  you  are  done  and  you  are  satisfied  with  the  message, 
you  type  SEND.  This  will  send  the  message.  Then  you  type 
DONE  to  return  to  command  level. 

Let's  create  a message  to  Burton  using  the  COMPOSE 
command.  I will  answer  NO  to  "Send?"  in  order  to  enter  the 
Draft  state.  Then  I will  add  an  Fee:  field  — filing  a copy 
of  the  messaqe  in  the  file  EDITORS.TXT. 

>compose 

Prompted  messaqe  composition: 

To:  Burton 
Cc : White 
Subject:  Editors 


1 


Page  95 


Text : 

I to  use  TECO  when  I edi_t  text^  <CTRL-Z> 

Format?:  no 
Send?  no 

>>Fcc:  (filenames)  editors^txt  [New  file] 

>>sen<3  [Confirm] 

Message  < [ BBN-TENEXA] 8-Aor-76  19 : 47 : 30-EST . TUTOR>  sent. 

I 

i 

Concepts  covered: 

COMPOSE  command 
SHOW  command 
<CTRL-R> 

<CTRL-S> 
draft  state 
Fee:  field 
TECO,  NETED,  XED 
; h 


Page  96 


LESSON  5 

Selective  Printing  --  Filters 
The  SURVEY  Command 

Remember  that  th  initial  survey  we  got  when  we  entered 
Hermes  showed  only  RECENTMESSAGES . To  see  a survey  of  the 
whole  message  file  use  the  SURVEY  command. 


>survev 

r~  398  18  Dec  75  GOLDMAN  at  BBN-TENEXA  New  Widgets 

2 298  19  Dec  75  WHITE  at  BBN-TENEXA  Found 

3 303  25  Dec  75  AIGHES  at  BBN-TENEXA  Letter  from  the 

4 111  2 Jan  76  MORTON  at  BBN-TENEXD  Typewriter  needed 

5 142  18  Jan  76  AIGHES  at  BBN-TENEXA  Reminder 

6 546  20  Jan  76  MCCARTHY  at  ISID  Using  2-Color  Ribbons 

7 918  22  Jan  76  LUCA  at  BBN-TENEXA  Typewriter  Received 

8 489  28  Jan  76  SUSSMAN  at  BBN-TENEXA  IEEE  Speakers 

9 570  29  Jan  76  SMITH  at  ISID  A poll  on  voting  choices 

10  237  31  Jan  76  SUSSMAN  at  BBN-TENEXA  IEEE  tickets 

11  287  31  Jan  76  SUSSMAN  at  BBN-TENEXA  IEEE  proceedings 

12  327  5 Feb  76  SCOT  at  BBN-TENEXD  Quote  from  Abe 

13  329  24  Feb  76  GRIGNETTI  at  BBN-TENEXA  Welcome 

14  379  28  Feb  76  HAUSMANN  at  BBN-TENEXA  Quotation  of  the 

15  40738  3 Mar  76  BROWN  at  ISID  New  paper 


Filters 

Rather  than  taking  time  to  survey  your  whole  message 
file,  you  may  wish  to  see  only  a certain  group  of  messages, 
for  example  those  that  are  from  a certain  person  or 
delivered  after  a certain  date.  "Filters"  are  used  to  cut 
down  the  number  of  messages  that  you  are  working  with.  You 
may  filter  according  to  Sender,  the  date  before,  on,  or 
after  which  they  were  sent,  whether  they  are  seen,  unseen, 
deleted,  or  undeleted,  etc. 


Page 


97 


To  survey  all  messages  from  Sussman  tyoe: 


SURVEY  FROM:  SUSSMAN 


Here 


s what  results  when  the  above  line  is  typed  to  Hermes 


> survey 
8 

10 

11 


(messaqes)  from:  Sussman 
489  28  Jan  76  SUSSMAN  IEEE 
2 il  30  Jan  76  SUSSMAN  IEEE 
287  31  Jan  76  SUSSMAN  IEEE 


speakers 
tickets 
proceed inq  s 


The  ? Facility 

At  any  place  in  any  Hermes  command  you  may  type  "?"  to 
see  the  various  options  of  what  you  may  type  next.  This  is 
a good  way  to  become  more  familiar  with  Hermes 
capabilities.  1 will  now  do  the  same  survey  again,  but  this 
time  I'll  type  a ? to  see  all  the  various  seouences  and 
filters  that  could  be  used. 


>survey  (messaqes)  ? 
miq 

LASTMESSAGE 

CMESSAGE 

ALL 

PREVIOUS SEQUENCE 

CSEOUENCE 
Date : 

From: 

To : 

Cc : 

Bcc : 

I n-Repl y-To : 
Reference: 

Keywords : 

Precedence : 
Messaqe-Cl ass : 
Special-Handling  : 
Message-ID: 


Page 


98 


or  SURVEY  that  prompt  you  for  (messages) , you  can  type  a 
sinqle  message,  a " . " standing  for  CMESSAGE,  a list  of 
messages  or  a group  of  messages  further  specified  by  a 
filter  or  multiple  filters. 

Concepts  covered: 

SURVEY  command 
Filters 
? Facility 


Paje  99 


» 


l i 
I I 


LESSON  6 

The  CREATE  Command 

Rather  than  composinq  messaqes  directly,  usinq  the 
COMPOSE  command,  you  may  wish  to  proceed  in  a more  leisurely 
way  by  workinq  first  on  a draft  of  the  message  you  intend  to 
send.  You  begin  creating  a draft  by  typing  CREATE  <CR>. 
Hermes  will  print  two  wedges.  You  put  together  the  draft  by 
typinq  out  the  fields  of  your  choice,  one  at  a time,  with 
the  appropriate  text  for  each  field. 

Let  us  now  qo  into  more  detail  on  what  an  addressee 
list  looks  like  — the  contents  of  the  To:,  Cc:,  and  Bcc: 
fields.  (Bcc:  stands  for  "Blind  Carbon  Copy".)  You  recall 
that  an  address  list  may  be  a single  name  or  a list  of  names 
separated  bv  commas,  like: 

BROWN, SMITH , MURPHY 

Each  single  name  can  also  have  a site  associated  with  it, 
like : 

BROWN@BBNA 

If  you  find  that  your  address  list  is  longer  than  one  line, 
end  the  line  with  a comma  and  you  may  continue  the  list  on 
the  next  line. 

Sometimes  you  may  type  in  the  names  of  people  you  want 
to  send  messages  to  only  to  find  ,that  you  have  left  out  one 
name.  No  need  to  tvpe  the  whole  list  over  again.  You  can 
add  to  any  field  by  typing  the  field  name  again  and  what  you 


Paqe  100 


want  to  add.  This  will  be  appended  to  the  original  field. 
The  SAVE-FIELD  Command 

If  you  often  find  yourself  typing  the  same  list  of 
addressees  each  time  you  send  a message,  you  may  wish  to 
keep  around  the  names  on  a file.  Then  when  you  get  ready  to 
type  in  the  list  of  names,  you  may  instead  insert  the 
contents  of  the  file.  To  save  any  field  on  a file,  use  the 
SAVE-FIELD  command: 

>>to^  Brown, Bell, Smith 

>>save-f ield  (field)  to^  (on  File)  computer people  [New  file] 
The  ADD-FILE  Command 

To  retrieve  the  file  just  created  and  add  it  to  a 
field,  you  would  use  the  ADD-FILE  Command.  It  will  ask  you 
for  the  file  name  and  what  field  you  want  to  add  it  to.  You 
may  often  want  to  use  the  ADD-FILE  command  to  insert  the 
contents  of  a file,  say  a progress  report  or  a requisition 
order,  into  the  Text:  field.  Let's  say  you  have  a report 
you  want  to  send  out  which  you  want  to  precede  with  the 
heading  "Please  send  your  comments".  To  accomplish  this, 
enter  the  heading  and  then  use  ADD-FILE  to  bring  in  the  main 
text . 

>create 

> > t e x t V (characters  to  ~Z) 

Please  send  your;  comments^  <CTRL-Z> 


i 


Page 


101 


* m 


>>add-f ile  (filename)  report^txt 

> > 


f I 
i 1 


I could  have  appended  more  text  at  the  end  of  the  Text: 
field  by  typing  Text:  again  and  the  material. 

After  you  type  a field,  say  the  Text:  field,  you  may 
wish  to  see  if  you  have  typed  what  you  wanted.  Recall  that 
you  may  see  a field  by  typing  SHOW  followed  by  the  field 
name.  To  see  all  fields  type  SHOW  ALL. 


After  seeing  the  Text:  field  you  may  wish  to  make  some 
changes.  Remember  that  you  may  call  any  of  three  editors 
TECO , NETED,  or  XED.  To  enter  TECO,  type  TECO.  Make  the 
changes  using  the  available  TECO  commands,  then  return  to 

i . 

the  draft  state  using  ;H. 


**  ,!J 

i i 

t*'  it 


>>create 

> >to7" (Addressees)  Eausmann 
>>H*U  (characters  to  WZ) 

New  phone  (lumbers. _ <CTRL-Z> 

Format?:  n 

>>add-file  (filename)  tele  phone . ; 1 (to  part)  text;L 

to  tine  staff 

>>show  aH 
To:  HAUSMANN 

Subject:  A memo  to  the  staff 
New  phone  numbers 

New  phone  numbers  for  the  office  staff. 

See  the  directory  in  the  lirary. 

>>teco:  (field)  text: 

79  CHARS 
*r rary$br ary$ 

*j_h$ 

Replace  the  Text:  field?:  yes 

> > f o rm.at 

>>sencf  TConfirm] 


I 





Paqe  102 


Messages [BBN-TENEXA) 23-Apr-76  14 : 29 : 51-EST .TUTOR>  sent. 


Concepts  covered: 

CREATE  command 
SHOW  command 
SAVE-FIELD  command 
ADD-FILE  Command 


Page  103 


LESSON  7 

Housekeepinq  and  Your  Messaqe  File 

Once  in  awhile  you  should  go  through  your  message  file 
and  "clean  it  up".  That  is,  look  at  the  messages,  decide 
what  to  do  with  them;  either  delete  them,  leave  them,  or 
file  them  away  in  another  file.  You  may  wish  to  do  this 
every  time  you  qet  new  mail  in  Hermes.  Or  you  may  wait 
until  your  file  qets  unwieldy.  Whichever  way  you  choose, 
the  method  is  similar. 

You  should  begin  by  surveying  your  message  file.  If  it 
is  quite  lonq,  you  can  list  the  survey  on  the  lineprinter  by 
typing  "SURVEY  ALL  LPT;". 

>survey  (messages)  alj^  (on  file)  1 pt : (Confirm] 

The  DELETE  Command 

Let's  suppose  we  have  decided  to  delete  all  messages 
from  Aighes.  Remember  filters  may  be  used  with  any  command 
that  is  exoecting  a message  list.  They  can  be  put  to  good 
use  here  with  the  DELETE  command; 

>delete  (messages)  from  aighes 
3,5*" 

(Note  that  the  DELETE  command  only  marks  these  messages  for 


Page 


104 


deletion;  it  doesn't  physically  remove  them  until  you  leave 
Hermes . 


I want  to  file  the  oldest  messages  (those  received 
before  1-1-76)  into  a file  called  OLDMSG.TXT.  I can 
accomplish  this  by  the  FILE  command  with  a filter. 


>f ile  (messages)  before  1-1-76  (on  file)  oldmsg.txt  [Old 
version] 

Delete  message  after  writing?:  y. 

Message  3 is  marked  deleted:  Can't  be  filed. 

1,2 


A lineorinter  listing  of  messages  whose  Subject: 
contains  IEEE  will  be  sufficient  for  my  records: 


>list  (i 

mess 

ages)  sub j 

>delete 

(me 

ssagesj-  su 

87T0 , 11 

, 

Now  to 

do  a 

s 

urvey  of 

there  a 

re  a 

ny 

unseen 

> survey 

Message 

1 i 

s 

marked  d 

Message 

2 i 

s 

marked  d 

Message 

3 i 

s 

marked  d 

4 

111 

2 

Jan  76 

Message 

5 i 

s 

marked  d 

6 

546 

20 

Jan  76 

7 

913 

16 

Jan  76 

Message 

8 i 

s 

marked  c 

9 

570 

29 

Jan  76 

Message 

10 

is 

marked 

Message 

11 

is 

marked 

12 

327 

5 

Feb  76 

13 

329 

24 

Feb  76 

14 

379 

28 

Feb  76 

SCOT  at  BBN-TENEXD  Quote  from  Abe 


Paqe 


105 


-+  15  40738  3 Mar  76  RROWN  at  1SID  New  Paper 

Yes,  that  long  message  has  not  been  seen.  If  we 
to  look  at  the  first  few  lines  we  could  PRINT  it,  and 
<CTRL-0>  to  abort  the  printout  when  we've  seen  enough 

Concepts  covered: 

DELETE  command 


wanted 

use 


Page  106 


LESSON  8 
Current  Objects 
CSEQUENCE 

In  the  preceding  examples  we  have  used  filters  to  cut 
down  on  the  number  of  messages  that  we  are  loo  ing  at.  But 
this  use  of  filters  only  applied  to  the  message  sequence  for 
one  command.  Suppose  you  wish  to  refer  to  a particular 
message  sequence  over  and  over  again.  To  do  so  you  could 
make  use  of  an  object  called  the  CSEQUENCE  which  stands  for 

Current  sequence. 


The  CONSIDER  Command 

When  you  first  get  into  Hermes  CSEQUENCE  is  set  to 
ALLMESSAGES.  You  can  reset  it  with  the  CONSIDER  command. 

For  example,  suppose  you  want  to  create  a CSEQUENCE  that 
contains  all  message  that  have  anything  _o  do  with 
quotations.  You  would  do  this  by  typing: 

CONSIDER  SUBJECT:  QUOT 

Note  that  you  don't  have  to  type  the  whole  word  that  you  are 
searching  for.  Now  I will  set  CSEQUENCE  to  all  messages 
with  Subject:  typewriter: 

consider  (messages)  subject^  typewriter 


Page  107 


Now  watch  while  I type  SURVEY  followed  b/  <ESC>,  <ESC>. 

>survey  (messages)  CSEOUENCE 

4 111  2 Jan  76~MORTON_at  BBN-TENEXD  Typewriter  needed 
7 91 S 22  Jan  76  LUCA  at  BBN-TENEXA  Typewriter  received 

You  can  see  that  the  SURVEY  command  defaults  to  CSEQUENCE. 

Many  commands  do. 

I forgot  that  message  6 should  be  added  to  CSEQUENCE. 

It  also  has  something  to  do  with  typewriters.  I don't  need 
to  type  the  CONSIDER  command  all  over  again.  Instead  I can 
use  the  CSEQUENCE  editor.  To  add  messages  to  the  CSEQUENCE, 
type  ADD  and  the  message  list.  To  leave  the  editor  type 
DONE. 

>edit  (object)  cseouence 
>>add  (messages)  6 

> >show 
4,7,6 
>>done 

> 

Notice  that  when  we  typed  SHOW,  the  messages  were  no 
longer  arranged  in  ascending  order  by  date.  This  is  because 
the  seauence  was  not  put  together  one  message  at  a time  in 
order,  but  instead  it  was  put  together  bv  groups  and  single 
messages  all  out  of  order.  Suppose  now  we  want  to  reorder 
the  messages  by  date.  Again  we  enter  the  CSEQUENCE  editor. 
We  will  sort  the  messages  contained  bv  date  bv  tvping  SORT 
followed  by  DATE;  then  DONE  to  leave  the  editor. 


Page  10£ 


>edit  (object)  csequence 
>>sort  (by)  date 

> > show 
4,6,7“ 

> >done 

Now  that  we  have  a new  CSEQUENCE  about  typewriters  what 
can  we  do  with  it?  We  can  move  through  it  with  the  <LF>  and 
commands  handling  each  message  one  at  a time.  Or  we  can 
file  CSEQUENCE  in  a file,  let's  say  called  EQUIPMENT.TXT  for 
later  use: 

>f ile  (messages)  csequence  (on  file)  equipment ■ txt  [New 
filt'] 

Delete  message  after  writina?:  y 
4,6,7 

Now  we  will  introduce  a new  concept,  "CMESSAGE-FILE". 

, CMESS AGE -FILE ; the  GET  Command 

When  you  first  enter  Hermes,  the  file  that 
automatically  gets  read  in  is  named  MESSAGE.TXT.  This 
becomes  what  is  termed  the  "CMESSAGE-FILE"  (standing  for 
"Current"  message  file).  I have  just  created  a message  file 
called  EQUIPMENT.TXT.  Let's  focus  our  attention  on  it  now. 
In  other  words  let's  make  it  the  CMESSAGE-FILE.  This  is 
done  with  the  GET  command. 

>get  (message-file)  £2^ i.pment  Ltxt^l 
Expunge  and  re-number  the  mesiage-f ile? : y 


MESSAGE . TXT  is  no  longer  the  CMESSAGE-FILE . EQUIPMENT.TXT 
has  taken  its  place.  All  Hermes  commands  you  oerform  now 
will  be  done  on  that  file.  You  can  make  any  message  file 
that  you  created  with  the  FILE  command  into  the 
CMESSAGE-FILE.  This  gives  you  a way  of  keeping  down  the 
size  of  the  MESSAGE.TXT  file  by  filing  messages  away  into 
various  small  message  files  organized  by  subject,  or  author, 
etc.  You  may  then  access  them  with  the  GET  command  when  you 
want  to  work  with  their  contents. 

Concepts  covered: 

CSEQUENCE 
CONSIDER  command 
GET  command 


Page  110 


LESSON  9 

On-line  User  Aids 

The  HELP,  EXPLAIN,  and  DESCRIBE  Commands 

Before  leaving  you  now,  there  are  three  commands  for 
getting  information  about  Hermes  that  I would  like  to  tell 
you  about  - HELP,  EXPLAIN,  and  DESCRIBE.  The  first,  HELP, 
gives  a brief  introduction  of  the  on-line  aids  available  in 
Hermes.  You  simply  type  HELP.  It  proceeds  as  you  wish  it 
to  by  asking  if  you  wish  to  see  more  information  about 
specific  topics,  bypassing  topics  that  you  aren  t currently 
interested  in. 

The  EXPLAIN  command  permits  you  to  explore  a set  of 
brief  descriptions  of  the  main  concepts  in  Hermes.  These 
descriptions  are  arranged  in  a tree-like  structure  with 
nodes  higher  in  the  tree  being  more  general,  and  nodes  lower 
being  more  detailed.  To  use  this  command,  type  EXPLAIN 
followed  by  the  topic  you  wish  to  know  about. 

The  third  user  aid  command,  DESCRIBE,  provides 
reference  information  concerning  various  aspects  of  Hermes. 
The  command  is  available  at  the  top  level  (when  prompted  by 
a single  ">") , and  as  a subcommand  from  within  EXPLAIN. 
DESCRIBE  provides  a paragraph  or  two  of  reference 
information  concerning  the  topic  you  give  it.  To  use  it, 

type  DESCRIBE  followed  by  the  topic. 





Page  111 


With  both  EXPLAIN  and  DESCRIBE  there  is  a "?"  feature 
to  help  vou  narrow  down  the  topic  you  are  looking  for.  For 
example,  I m lookinq  for  a category  having  something  to  do 
with  the  topic  Profile.  I may  type  EXPLAIN  PROFILE  and  then 
tyoe  a "?"  to  see  all  the  topics  that  begin  with  those 
letters.  I will  do  that  now,  and  tuen  choose  one  of  the 
topics : 


>explain  (topic)  profile? 

PROFILE” 

PROFILE-CONTENTS 

>Explain  (topic)  profile -contents 
PROFILE-CONTENTS 

The  profile  contains  three  sort  of  information: 

a)  Switch  settings:  there  are  certain  aspects  of  HERMES 
which  are  tailorable  to  behave  in  one  of  a few  (often  3) 
different  ways.  Each  switch  controls  the  behavior  of  one  of 
these  aspects. 

b)  Templates:  these  are  you  choices  for  defaults,  and 
wn  personal  templates. 

c)  Filters:  these  are  your  choices  for  defaults,  and 


b) 

Templates 

you 

own 

personal 

c) 

Filters : 

you 

own 

personal 

1 . 

For 

something 

2. 

For 

something 

3.  Filters 

>> 

At  this  ooint  I may  choose  one  of  these  three  things  to  do, 
or  I may  use  DESCRIBE  or  EXPLAIN  again  for  a different 
topic.  Tvpe  DONE  at  the  >>  prompt  to  leave  the  EXPLAIN 
command . 


He 

fo 

me 


You  have  read  about  many  of  the  important  features  of 
rmes.  These  include  reading  messages,  preparing  messages 
r transmission,  and  creating  and  managing  files  of 
ssages.  Hermes  is  a powerful  and  large  system  and  only  a 


Page  112; 


subset  has  been  covered  in  this  introductory  document.  You 
can  expand  your  knowledge  about  Hermes  by  making  further  use 
of  HELP,  EXPLAIN,  DESCRIBE,  the  ? feature,  and  <ESC>. 

Concepts  covered: 

HELP  command 
EXPLAIN  command 
DESCRIBE  command 


