AD-A218  860 


The  Artificial  Intelligence 
and  Psychology  Project 


Departments  of 

Computer  Science  and  Psychology 

Carnegie  Mellon  University 


ELECT E 

;‘A  MAR  12 1990 

'  '  \ 

>.  't;  ^  ?» 


Learning  Research  and  Development  Center 
University  of  Pittsburgh 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


INDUCTION  OF  PARTIAL  ORDERS 
BEATS  CLASSIFICATION:  IMPROVEMENTS  TO  THE 
CIRRUS  PROTOCOL  ANALYSIS  SYSTEM 


Technical  Report  AIP  -  31 

Bernadette  Kowalski  &  Kurt  VanLehn 


Computer  Science  Department 
Carnegie  Mellon  University 
Pittsburgh,  PA.  15232 


14  January  1988 


This  research  was  supported  by  the  Computer  Sciences  Division,  Office  of  Naval  Research  and 
DARPA  under  Contract  Number  N00014-86-K-0678;  Reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  is 
permitted  for  purposes  of  the  United  Slates  Government.  Approved  for  public  release; 
distribution  unlimited. 


LASSIFiCATQN  OP  'hiS  ®AGe 


ta  REPORT  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 

Unclassified  _ 


2a  security  classification  authority 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


10  RESTRICT V£  MARKINGS 


2b  OECLASSiPCATiON  ,  XIWNGRAOING  schedule 


4  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  REPORT  NUM8£R(S) 

A  I  P  -  31 


3  DiSTRiBuTON  AwAicASiLi'Y  OF  REPOR 
Approved  for  public  release; 
Distribution  unlimited 


5  MONITORING  ORGamZATQN  RE=ORT  NuM8ERiSi 


6a  NAME  OF  PERFORMING  ORGANiZA”ON  |6o  OFf.cE  SvM80l  I  NAME  OF  MOMTORiNG  QRGaniZatON 

|  (if  applicable)  I  Computer  Sciences  Division 
Carnegie -Mel Ion  University  |  j  office  of  Naval  Research 


6c  AOORESS  C/fy.  Sfafe,  am 1  ZIP  Code) 

Department  of  Dsvchology 

Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania  15213 


?b  AOORESS  (C/ry.  Star*,  and  ZIP  Cod*) 

800  N.  Quincy  Street 
Arlington,  Virginia  22217-5000 


8a.  NAME  OF  FUNOiNG/ SPONSORING 
ORGANIZATION 

Same  as  Monitoring  Organizatioi 


8c.  AOORESS  (C/fy,  State,  and  ZIP  Cod*) 


80  OFF'CE  SYMBOL  9  PROCUREMENT  INSTRUMENT  IDENTIFICATION  NUMBER 
(If  applicable) 

N00014-86-K-0678 


10  SOURCE  OF  FUNDING  NUMBERS  p4000ub201 / 7-4-86 


PROGRAM  PROJECT 

ELEMENT  NO  NO 

N/A  N/A 


it  TITLE  (Include  Security  Classincatioo)  IXDUCTION  OF  PARTIAL  ORDERS  BEATS  CLASSIFICATION:  IMPROVEMENTS 
TO  THE  CIRRUS  PROTOCOL  ANALYSIS  SYSTEM 


PROJECT 

TASK 

WORK  UNIT 

NO 

NO 

ACCESSION  NO 

N/A 

N/A 

N/A 

12  PERSONAL  auThor(S)  ,  ,  .  „  ,  f  ,,  ,  , 

Kowalski.,  Bernadette  &  VanLehn,  tvurt 


13a  type  OF  REPORT 

Technical 


’3b  TIME  COVERED 
from  86Septl5To91Septli 


IS  PAGE  COUNT 

14 


COSATl  COOES 


FIELD  GROUP  SUB-GROUP 


'8  SuB.ECT  TERMS  (Conrmue  on  reverse  if  necessary  and  identify  by  block  number) 

Machine  Learning;  Artificial  Intelligence; 

Protocol  Analysis 


’9  ABSTRACT  ; Continue  on  reverse  if  necessary  and  identify  by  block  number) 


In  this  paper,  we  discuss  Clmii,  a  semi-automated  data  analysis  and  model  formation  system.  Cirms  slam 
with  a  half-order  model  for  a  dett  aet,  and  induces  the  remaining  knowledge  necessary  to  turn  the  model  into 
one  which  een  reproduce  subjects'  protocols.  TWi  knowledge  takes  the  form  of  scheduling  strategies  for  selecting 
tasks  from  an  unordered  agenda. 

The  first  Implementation  of  the  system,  Cinus-I.  used  a  standard  concept  formation  approach,  with  ID3  as  (he 
induction  algorithm.  Drawbacks  of  CIttus-I  ted  to  the  development  of  Cirrus  II.  which  is  based  on  induction  of  a 
partial  order.  This  approach  appears  to  be  applicable  to  many  standard  classification  problems  Moreover,  results 
from  computational  experiments  on  a  pilot  data  set  indicate  that  Cinus-U  outperforms  human  analysts.  /' 


20  DISTRIBUTION/ AVAILABILITY  OF  ABSTRACT 

□  uNCLASSiF.EO/UNLIMITED  ®  SAME  AS  RPT  Dot'C  users 

2’  ABSTRACT  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 

22a  NAVE  OF  RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

Dr.  Al«n  L.  Meyrowitz 

22b  telephone  (Include  Area  Code) 
(202)  696-4302 

22c  OFFICE  SYMBOL 

N00014 

DO  FORM  1473.84  mar 


83  APR  edition  may  oe  used  until  e*n*usted 
All  other  editions  ere  obsolete 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGE 


L'nclassif  ied 


1.  Introduction 


Cirrus  is  a  semi-automated  data  analysis  and  model  formation  system.  Like  Dendral  and  other 
systems  (Lindsay,  Buchanan.  Feigenbaum  &  Lederberg,  1980).  it  is  given  a  naif  order  model, 
which  is  a  model  chat  is  so  general  that  is  useless  by  itself.  Cirrus  specializes  the  half-order 
model  to  fit  a  given  data  set.  As  with  Dendral.  Cirrus  assumes  that  the  data  is  noisy,  so  a  perfect 
fit  is  not  expected.  The  resulting  model  should  nonetheless  be  an  accurate  postdiction  of  the 
given  data,  as  well  as  an  accurate  predictor  of  future  data. 

Cirrus  analyzes  protocol  data.  For  Cirrus,  a  protocol  is  assumed  to  be  a  sequence  of 
operator  applications,  and  the  enuty  producing  the  protocol  is  assumed  to  be  an  expert  doing 
routine  problem  solving.  In  many  task  domains,  there  is  good  evidence  that  human  experts  have 
acquired  a  large  set  of  procedures,  and  that  routine  problems  are  solved  by  selecting  a  procedure 
and  executing  it  (VanLehn,  in  press;  Chi,  Glaser  &  Rees,  1982).  However,  the  execution  process 
is  not  as  simple  as  that  used  to  execute  procedures  in  computer  programs.  Humans  exhibit  a 
great  deal  of  flexibility  in  how  they  apply  their  procedures  (VanLehn  &  Ball,  1987).  One  type 
of  flexibility  is  that  subjects  will  c.  permute  the  order  of  a  sequence  of  actions  on  different 
occasions.  Sometimes  they  might  do  A  then  B  then  C,  and  on  other  occasions,  they  might 
do  B  then  C  then  A.  This  flexibility  in  action  ordering  is  presently  a  source  of  some  mystery 
in  cognitive  psychology  As  a  first  step  towards  understanding  the  flexibility  of  expertise,  it 
seems  helpful  to  have  an  accurate  description  of  the  conditions  under  which  each  permutation 
is  observed.  Cirrus  was  designed  to  yield  exactly  such  a  description. 

The  half-order  theory  given  to  Cirrus  is  a  non-deterministic  procedure.  The  procedure  can 
be  executed,  even  in  its  original  underspecified  form  by  an  ae^nda-based  interpreter.  The  basic 


1 


cycle  consists  of  (1)  selecting  and  removing  a  task  from  the  agenda,  (2)  execunng  it,  which  may 
cause  creation  of  new  subtasks,  and  (3)  putting  the  new  subtasks,  if  any,  on  the  agenda.  A  task  is 
represented  as  the  name  of  an  operator  concatenated  to  a  list  of  arguments.  Some  operator'-  are 
primitive,  in  that  executing  them  causes  a  state  change  in  the  problem  state.  The  other  operators, 
called  macro-operators,  do  not  make  state -changes,  but  instead  create  new  subtasks. 

The  key  step  in  the  execution  cycle  is  the  first  one,  where  a  task  is  selected  from  the  agenda. 
The  half-order  theory  includes  no  information  on  how  to  do  this  selection.  It  is  the  job  of  Cirrus 
to  induce  it.  The  induced  information  is  called  a  scheduling  strategy. 

Hand  analysis  of  a  number  of  protocols  has  shown  that  selection  of  a  task  from  the  agenda 
is  partially  a  function  of  the  problem  state  (VanLehn  &  Ball,  1987).  Thus,  the  first  version  of 
Cirrus,  Cirrus-I,  represented  a  scheduling  strategy  as  a  classifier.  Given  a  problem  state,  the 
classifier  outputs  an  operator  name.  This  is  the  operator  that  should  be  chosen  from  the  agenda. 
The  induction  problem  is  thus  a  standard  one:  given  a  set  of  input-output  pairs,  each  consisting 
of  a  state  and  an  operator,  induce  a  function  that  reproduces  this  I/O  behavior.  The  function 
should  be  defined  over  all  its  range,  so  that  it  makes  predictiorc  about  the  future.  Of  course,  the 
induction  algorithm  must  be  biased,  with  the  usual  tradeoffs  of  parsimony  and  accuracy  in  the 
induced  classifier.  Cirrus-I  used  a  modified  version  of  ED3  as  its  induction  algorithm  (Quinlan. 
198J).  The  classifiers  it  induced  were  n-ary  decision  trees  whose  leaves  bore  the  name  of  the 
operator  to  be  output  by  the  classifier.  For  the  protocols  that  were  used  to  pilot-test  Cirrus,  a 
typical  classification  problem  involved  an  I/O  table  of  about  200  pairs  (VanLehn  &  Garlick, 
1987).  Problem  states  (the  input  halves  of  the  pairs)  were  represented  by  attribute  value  vectors 
with  about  50  attributes.  Operators  (the  output  halves  of  the  pairs)  numbered  about  12. 

This  approach  proved  to  have  several  fatal  flaws,  which  are  discussed  below.  A  number  of 


2 


other  classification  algorithms  were  tried  in  place  of  ID3.  with  poor  results. 

Eventually,  we  discovered  that  actually  making  the  induction  problem  harde.-  made  it  solv¬ 
able.  Instead  of  inducing  a  function  that  maps  problem  states  into  a  small  finite  set  of  operator 
names,  the  new  version  of  Cirrus,  Cirrus-n,  induces  a  partial  order  that  can  be  used  to  son  the 
agenda.  More  specifically,  it  induces  a  set  of  constraints ,  where  a  constraint  A>B  means  that 
task  A  is  preferred  over  task  B  whenever  both  are  on  the  agenda.  There  are  two  kinds  of  con¬ 
straints,  conditional  and  unconditional.  A  conditional  constraint  depends  on  the  problem  ;. 
and  an  unconditional  constraint  does  not.  Thus,  an  unconditional  constraint,  A>B,  means  that 
A  is  always  preferred  to  B.  A  conditional  constraint,  A>B  when  X,  means  that  A  is  preferred 
to  B  only  when  condition  X  is  true  of  the  problem  state.  Conditional  constraints  are  needed 
because  some  subjects’  agenda  choices  depend  on  the  problem  state,  as  mentioned  earlier.  Thus, 
a  scheduling  strategy  consists  of  a  set  of  constraints,  some  of  which  may  be  conditional.  It  is  the 
job  of  Cirrus-II  to  induce  such  a  scheduling  strategy  given  a  protocol.  This  induction  problem 
appears  more  difficult  (which  is  why  we  did  such  a  thorough  exploration  of  the  classification 
approach  before  taking  this  approach),  but  it  turns  out  to  run  faster  and  produce  better  results 
than  the  classification  approach. 

Given  this  representation  of  a  scheduling  strategy,  the  model  interpreter  chooses  an  item 
from  the  agenda  by  first  testing  the  conditions  on  the  conditional  constraints  in  order  to  assemble 
a  set  of  applicable  constraints.  It  then  walks  down  the  agenda,  selecting  the  task  or  tasks  that  are 
maximal  according  to  the  applicable  constraints.  Since  the  set  of  applicable  constraints  changes 
slowly,  a  version  of  the  RETE  algorithm  (Forgy,  1982)  is  used  to  speed  up  agenda  selection.1 
The  scheduling  strategy  induced  by  Cirrus-II  is  accurate  just  to  the  extent  that  (1)  it  always  finds 
This  technique  may  be  applicable  to  other  agenda-based  problem  solvers,  such  as  blackboard  architectures. 


3 


that  just  one  task  is  maximal  according  to  the  constraints,  and  ( 2)  that  task  is  m  fact  the  one 
that  the  subject  chose. 

The  solution  used  in  Cirrus-II  may  have  wide  applicability,  because  the  problem  faced  by 
Cirrus  seems  a  rather  common  one,  after  one  strips  away  ail  the  application-specific  details.  The 
problem  is  to  induce  a  function  of  two  arguments,  call  them  X  and  Y.  such  that  the  output  of 
the  function  is  always  a  member  of  the  set  Y.  This  is  like  a  function  whose  range  is  given  to  it 
as  an  argument.  Many  application  problems  might  correspond  to  this  one.  or  could  be  made  to 
correspond  to  this  one  fairly  easily.  For  instance,  suppose  that  the  problem  is  to  induce  a  one- 
argument  classifier,  f(X),  and  there  exists  some  reliable,  fast  approximation  to  F,  call  it  G(X), 
which  produces  a  set  of  classes  such  that  F(X)  is  guaranteed  to  be  in  the  output  set.  That  is,  G 
can  only  eliminate  some  of  the  possible  outputs,  rather  than  determine  the  output  cf  F  precisely. 
Given  this  fast,  reliable,  but  crude  approximation  to  F,  one  can  convert  the  original  problem  into 
the  problem  of  inducting  a  function  H  of  two  arguments,  where  the  second  argument  provides 
a  set  from  which  the  output  comes.  Then  F(X)  =  H(X,G(X)).  Thus,  traditional  classification 
techniques  can  be  used  to  induce  G,  and  the  techniques  employed  by  Cirrus  can  be  used  to 
induce  H. 

Given  this  conceptualization  of  the  problem,  it  is  simple  to  see  the  advantage  of  the  Cirrus-II 
approach  over  others.  The  Cirrus-I  approach  is  to  simplify  the  problem  by  ignoring  Y.  A  brute- 
force  remediation  of  its  ills  would  attempt  to  induce  a  classifier  of  both  arguments;  this  approach 
was  considered  and  rejected  for  reasons  discussed  below.  The  Cirrus-II  approach  simplifies  the 
problem  by  decomposing  the  target  function  F(X,Y)  into  Sort(S(X),Y),  where  S(X)  is  a  function 
that  produces  information  used  by  a  fixed,  well-defined  sorting  function  that  selects  a  member 
of  Y  for  output.  Our  experience  is  that  this  approach  produces  more  accurate  fits  to  the  data 


4 


and  more  easily  understood  models. 

This  paper  first  describes  the  representauons  of  Cirrus  in  more  detail  and  <ome  specifics 
about  the  protocols  that  we  have  been  using  to  pilot-test  the  system.  It  then  presents  the  problems 
that  Cirrus-I  had.  and  the  soluuon  used  by  Cirrus-II.  Results  from  our  computational  experiments 
are  presented  next,  followed  by  plans  for  further  extensions  and  tests  of  the  system. 

2.  Procedure  Representation 

Cirrus  assumes  that  the  procedural  knowledge  used  by  the  students  is  hierarchical  and  conditional 
in  nature.  See  Table  1  for  the  description  of  a  subtraction  procedure  in  this  format.  The  rule-like 
entities  stand  for  macro-operators,  which  reduce  a  task  (left  side  of  arrow)  to  subtasks  (on  the 
right  side  of  arrow).  Conditionality  is  notated  to  the  right  of  the  subtasks. 

The  appropriateness  and  adequacy  of  various  control  regimes  are  discussed  in  detail  in 
(VanLehn  &  Garlick,  1987)  and  (VanLehn  &  Ball,  1987);  an  agenda-based  control  strategy  was 
chosen  as  the  strategy  that  is  parsimonious  (in  that  it  makes  the  least  number  of  assumptions) 

and  yet  is  still  adequate  to  account  for  the  data.  As  an  illustration  of  this  control  regime,  Figure 

in 

1  shows  the  execution  trace  of  the  subtraction  procedure  of  Table  1. 

In  order  to  be  able  to  use  an  agenda-based  control  strategy  with  the  subtraction  task-subtask 
hierarchy  knowledge,  we  need  to  have  information  about  the  correct  operator  to  choose  from 
an  agenda,  given  the  state  of  the  agenda  and  the  external  problem  state.  This  is  the  learning 
problem  which  is  addressed  by  Cirrus. 


5 


3.  Cirrus’  Learning  Task 


Essentially,  what  Cirrus  needs  to  learn  are  concepts  that  specify  which  task  to  choose  from 
an  agenda,  given  a  particular  external  problem  state,  a  particular  agenda  state,  and  a  particular 
history  of  previously  applied  operators.  This  state  information,  which  we  call  the  total  state,  ;< 
represented  as  a  set  of  attribute-value  pairs. 

For  example,  consider  the  subtraction  problem,  worked  by  Paul,  in  Figure  1.  w  hich  consists 
of  the  execution  trace  of  the  problem,  the  action-sequence  protocol,  and  the  agenda  trace.  The 
first  phase  of  Cirrus  involves  plan  recognition;  it  does  this  by  treating  the  subtraction  knowledge 
in  Table  1  as  a  context-free  grammar,  and  parses  the  protocol  as  if  it  were  a  string  which  had  been 
produced  by  this  grammar.  The  output  of  this  stage  is  a  parse  tree  (see  Figure  2)  which  is  also  a 
task-subtask  representation  of  the  problem  solution;  the  leaves  consist  of  the  primitive  operator 
applications  present  in  the  original  protocol,  and  the  interior  nodes  represent  the  application  of 
macro-operators. 

The  task-subtask  tree  is  then  traversed  in  an  order  which  obeys  certain  conventions  discussed 
in  (VanLehn  &  Garlick,  1987),  that  incorporate  the  by- now  standard  hypothesis  that  people 
ordinarily  expand  goal  trees  depth-first  rather  than  breadth-first  (Newell  &  Simon,  1972).  The 
output  of  this  phase  is  a  sequence  of  pairs,  each  pair  consisting  of  the  task  which  was  chosen  from 
the  agenda  (the  name  of  the  tree  node  which  was  traversed),  and  the  attribute-value  representation 
of  the  total  state  at  that  instant. 

Cirrus  now  has  all  the  information  necessary  to  begin  inducing  scheduling  concepts.  It 
is  at  this  point  that  the  major  difference  between  Cirrus-I  and  Cirrus-II  occurs.  In  order  to 
facilitate  the  explanation  of  this,  we  will  initially  discuss  the  solution  used  by  Cirrus-I.  and 
discuss  its  functionality  and  limitations.  Then,  we  will  go  on  to  discuss  a  solution  which  turns 


6 


an  unmanageable  machine  learning  problem  into  one  that  can  be  attacked  fairly  easiiv  and  a  as 
implemented  as  Cirrus-11. 

3.1.  Flaws  in  Cirrus-I 

The  scheduling  strategy  induced  by  Cirrus-I  was  represented  as  a  decision  tree.  The  internal 
nodes  of  the  tree  consist  of  attribute  tests  on  the  total  state.  Each  leaf  of  the  tree  contains  an 
operator’s  name  which  indicates  the  task  to  be  chosen  from  the  agenda. 

The  problem  of  inducing  the  decision  tree  can  be  considered  as  a  classification  problem. 
Each  operator  is  equivalent  to  a  different  concept  or  class;  a  given  total  state  can  be  said  to 
be  in  the  class  corresponding  to  the  operator  that  was  actually  chosen  from  the  agenda  at  that 
rime.  A  modified  version  of  Quinlan’s  ID3  algorithm  (Quinlan,  1986)  is  used  to  perform  the 
classification  task.  A  diagram  of  Paul’s  decision  tree  appears  in  (VanLehn  &  Garlick.  1987). 

The  major  drawback  inherent  in  representing  the  scheduling  information  this  wav  is  that  it 
outputs  operator  names  and  not  tasks  (a  task  is  an  operator  name  plus  arguments).  This  is  a 
problem  because  it  is  possible  for  the  same  operator  to  appear  on  the  agenda  multiple  times  in 
different  tasks.  For  example,  when  a  "borrow-across-zero"  operation  is  undertaken,  the  Add/10 
operator  will  appear  at  least  twice  on  the  agenda.  The  scheduling  knowledge  as  outlined  above 
would  arrive  at  a  decision  to  choose  Add/10  from  the  agenda,  but  then  be  stuck  because  it  would 
not  know  which  Add/10  to  choose. 

A  brute-force  solution  is  to  induce  classifiers  that  treat  distinct  tasks  as  distinct  classes. 
This  approach  does  not  work  well  because  it  creates  classes  that  are  too  specialized,  and  thus 
do  not  allow  the  induced  classifier  to  adequately  schedule  agenda  states  that  it  was  not  trained 
on.  For  instance,  the  classifier  may  output  a  task  that  is  not  on  the  current  agenda,  even  though 
it  appeared  on  the  agenda  of  similar  total  states  during  training.  We  considered  four  separate 


7 


modifications,  each  one  adding  extra  structure  to  allow  task  relationships  to  be  expressed  We 
also  tried  replacing  ID3  with  the  noise-handling  version  of  Mitchell’s  candidate-elimination 
algorithm  (Mitchell,  1 97X .  None  of  these  approaches  worked  well  (see  KowaNki  &  Van  Lehr., 
in  preparation  >. 

Another  di  aw  back  of  Cirrus- 1  is  that  it  produced  large  decision  trees,  rangir.e  in  >;ze  from. 
30  to  50  nodes  in  number,  and  extending  to  depths  of  7  or  8.  Besides  being  computational^ 
expensive  to  produce,  large  trees  resulted  in  limited  readability,  making  it  difficult  to  recover 
any  sense  of  the  overall  strategy  that  the  subject  was  using.  It  also  meant  that  noise  points 
which  occurred  in  the  protocol  data  extended  their  influence  throughout  various  parts  of  the  tree, 
decreasing  understandability  by  an  even  greater  degree. 

3.2.  Cirrus-II’s  Solution 

Cirrus-II  was  designed  to  overcome  these  problems.  Scheduling  information  is  represented 
as  relative  order  relationships  between  pairs  of  tasks  that  take  column  argument  relations  into 
account.  Ordering  relationships  are  called  constraints.  Examples  of  constraints  are:  Diff  > 
Add/10  when  they  are  in  the  same  column",  "Deer  >  Diff  wh~n  Deer  is  in  a  column  left- 
adjacent  to  the  column  in  which  Diff  is  located  ",  etc. 

The  original  pairs  produced  by  the  tree-walking  phase  can  now  be  used  to  generate  con¬ 
cepts  of  a  different  type.  For  example,  suppose  that  the  agenda  contains  the  following  tasks: 
Sublcol2,  Diffi,  Add  10j.  Scratch\fark2,  Decn2:  suppose  further  that  the  chosen  task  was 
ScratchMark2,  and  that  the  attribute-value  representation  of  the  problem  state  is  AV.  Instead 
of  forming  the  pair  <ScratchMark  -  AV>,  a  number  of  pairs  are  formed.  Each  pair  in  the  set 
represents  a  single  constraint  which  must  have  held  in  order  for  the  given  task  to  have  been 
"Columns  are  numbered  from  right  to  left  and  subsenpts  indicate  arguments  (columns)  of  the  tasks 


8 


chosen.  For  example,  the  following  constraints  'among  others)  hold  during  this  particular  care 
ScratchMark  >  SLB1COL:  same-column  ScratchMark  >  Diff :  lefl-adjaeent  I ;  t  ^  c  rc 
are  N  +  1  tasks  on  the  agenda,  and  one  is  chosen,  then  more  than  N  constraints  are  rnxiaced. 
because  there  are  multiple  ways  to  characterize  relationships  between  the  arguments  of  cxo  tu'*' 

At  this  point,  it  would  seem  that  we  have  a  classification  task  again;  each  constraint  mat 
,s  possible  in  the  representational  vocabulary  corresponds  to  a  distinct  class.  However,  a  eoe" 
total  state  wall  usually  be  a  member  of  many  different  classes.  So,  the  classification  problem  has 
now  become  one  of  classifying  a  given  problem  state  into  a  set  of  non-disjoint  classes.  This  is 
a  non-tnvial  problem,  especially  considering  the  total  number  of  classes  (approximately  1000 1 
and  the  added  difficulty  of  noise  being  present  in  the  protocols. 

We  now  introduce  the  concept  of  complementary  constraints.  A  pair  of  complementary 
constraints  would  be  a  pair  such  as  Deer  >  Diff:  left-adjacent"  and  "Diff  >  Deer:  right- 
adjacent".  So,  if  Diffi  and  Decn  were  on  the  agenda,  the  first  constraint  would  vote  to  fiave 
Decr2  chosen  from  the  agenda,  and  the  second  would  vote  to  have  Diffi  chosen.  In  the  instances 
where  the  first  constraint  is  applicable,  the  second  constraint  is  necessarily  violated,  and  vice 
versa. 

Hand  analysis  (VanLehn  &  Ball,  1987)  indicated  that  the  scheduling  strategy  of  a  given 
student  can  be  represented  by  a  set  of  constraints  such  that  the  majority  of  the  constraints  are 
never  violated.  In  fact,  in  the  case  of  Pau*,  about  250  from  the  possible  1000  constraints  were 
relevant,  and  of  these,  only  14  are  violated.  These  14  occur  in  7  complementary  pairs:  either 
one  or  the  other  of  the  constraints  in  a  complementary  parr  will  apply  in  a  given  situation, 
but  not  both.  We  can  now  recast  the  classification  problem  above  as  a  small  senes  of  simple 
discrimination  problems.  It  is  only  necessary  to  consider  each  relevant  complementary  pair,  and 


9 


use  an  induction  algorithm  to  induce  the  necessary  conditions  for  the  application  of  one  or  the 
other.  ED3  is  used  to  perform  this  function. 

Cirrus-II  produces  multiple  decision  trees,  instead  of  just  one.  as  produced  by  Cirrus-I  On 
our  pilot  data  sets,  these  decision  trees  range  m  size  from  3  to  15  nodes,  and  extend  to  depths  of 
4  or  5.  As  a  result  of  the  reduced  size,  the  trees  are  more  readable,  and  more  readily  integrated 
into  an  overall  strategy  for  a  subject.  This  readability  allows  the  occurence  of  noise  in  the 
protocols  to  be  localized  to  a  small  number  of  decision  trees  for  each  student,  thus  allowing 
the  presence  of  noise  to  be  made  explicit  to  the  experimenter,  and  not  allowing  it  to  cloud  rh' 
overall  results.  For  those  decision  trees  based  on  non-noisy  data,  the  trees  are  smaller  (3  to  8 
nodes,  depth  of  2  to  4). 

4.  Results 

Cirrus-II  is  fully  implemented,  including  the  model  interpreter.  The  results  obtained  have  been 
almost  perfect:  Cirrus-II  correctly  models  each  student  at  every  choice  point,  except  for  one 
ambiguous  point  in  the  protocol  of  one  student.  Furthermore,  the  classification  trees  produced 
have  been  very  helpful  in  the  formulation  of  strategies  to  describe  each  student’s  behavior.  In 
comparison,  when  these  same  protocols  were  analyzed  by  hand  (VanLehn  and  Ball.  1987),  up 
to  one-third  of  the  choice  points  were  left  undetermined.  So.  not  only  does  Cirrus-II  do  the 
job  it  was  designed  to  do.  it  outperforms  the  human  analysts  in  its  ability  to  fully  recreate  the 
students’  protocols. 

Another  experiment  is  to  show  both  Cirrus  and  the  human  analysts  only  the  first  halves  of 
each  subject’s  protocol.  They  produce  models,  and  the  models’  fits  are  evaluated  against  the 
second  halves  of  each  protocol.  We  have  not  yet  performed  this  experiment,  because  the  human 


10 


analysts  are  too  familiar  with  our  pilot  data.  We  are  in  the  process  of  obtaining  more  data  (see 
below). 

5.  Further  Work 

There  are  some  areas  of  Cirrus-II  which  require  further  work.  These  include  allowing  the 
theorist  greater  flexibility  in  using  an  attribute-value  representation  by  making  it  possible  to 
assign  weights  to  attributes,  consistent  with  the  importance  which  the  theorist  wishes  to  attich 
to  them.  We  also  have  some  ideas  about  integrating  the  knowledge  in  the  separate  decision  trees 
to  form  coherent  overall  strategies  automatically.  Cirrus-11  will  soon  have  the  ability  to  induce 
the  macro-operator  conditions,  and  will  almost  certainly  use  ID3  for  this  task. 

While  it  is  certainly  the  case  that  subjects  working  subtraction  problems  cannot  be  compared 
directly  to  experts  working  in  a  knowledge-rich  problem  domain,  one  of  the  most  exciting  areas  of 
further  research  with  Cirrus  will  involve  testing  the  system’s  ability  to  analyze  experts  pert  -rming 
more  complicated  tasks.  A  preliminary  study  has  been  done  in  this  area,  using  action- seq  1 'nee 
protocols  generated  by  experts  in  a  somewhat  richer  mathematical  domain.  Protocols  \  *re 
collected  from  expert  subjects  working  with  Sketch,  an  intelligent  tutoring  system  (Trowbridge, 
Larkin  &  Scheftic,  1987).  Their  task  was  to  transform  the  graphs  of  basic  transcendental 
functions  appropriately  to  produce  a  graph  which  was  the  correct  representation  of  a  given 
equation.  Initial  results  are  very  promising. 


11 


I'AUL:  PHOBLEM  #4 

r^Hi  i-i  ■ 

2 

a  3 

4  4 

3 

4  4 

to.  V 

1 

2 _ 

a 

5 

n 

4  4 

s 

ih 

4  4 

9 

£|  9 

Protocol:  ScratchMark2  Add/lOj  Diffi  Decr2  Diff2 


Initial  agenda:  {Subj} 

{Sub2  Sublcoli} 

{Sub2  Regroupj  Diffj} 

{Sub2  From2  Add/lOj  Diffi } 

{Sub2  Scratchmark2  Decr2  Add/10i  DifFj } 
{Sub2  Decr2  Add/10i  Diffi} 

{Sub2  Decr2  Diffj} 

{Sub2  Decr2} 

{Sub2} 

{Sublcol2} 

{Diff2} 

Final  agenda:  {} 


Figure  1:  Paul’s  problem  #4,  his  protocol,  and  the  agenda  trace 


12 


Macro-operators 


1  Sub[  — ►  Sublcoli  Sub|,i 

2  Subi  — ►  Sublcoli 

3  Sublcoli  — ►  Show/Topi 

4  Sublcoli  —  Diffj 

5  Sublcoli  —  Regroup)  Diff| 

6  Regroupi  — *  Fromi+i  Add/lOf 

7  Fromi  —  ScratchMarki  Decrj 

8  Fromi  —  Regroupi  Fromi 


Column  i  +  l  is  not  blank 

Column  i+l  is  blank 

Bottom  of  column  i  is  blank 

Top  of  column  i  >  bottom  of  column  i 

Top  of  column  i  <  bottom  of  column  i 

True 

Top  of  column  i  ^  0 
Top  of  column  i  =  0 


Primitive  Operators 


ShowTopi 

Diff, 

Add/lO| 

ScratchMarki 

Decri 


Copy  top  of  column  i  into  the  answer  slot  of  column  i 

Take  the  difference  in  column  i  and  write  it  in  the  answer  slot 

Add  10  to  the  top  of  column  i 

Put  a  slash  through  the  top  digit  of  column  i 

Decrement  the  top  digit  of  column  i 


Table  1:  Operators  for  subtraction  (VanLehn  &  Garlick,  1987) 


Figure  2:  The  parse  tree  for  Paul’s  problem  #4  (VanLehn  &  Garlick.  1987) 


13 


REFERENCES 


Chi.  Glaser,  R.  &  Rees.  E.  (1982)  Expertise  in  problem  solving.  In  R.J.  Sternberg  (Ed.) 

Advances  in  the  Psychology  of  Human  Intelligence  (V ol.  1).  Hillsdale,  NJ:  Erlbaum. 

Forgv,  C.L.  (1982)  Rete:  a  fast  algorithm  for  the  many  pattem/many  object  pattern  match  problem 
Artificial  Intelligence.  19,  pp.  17  -  37. 

Kowalski,  B.  &  VanLehn,  K.  (in  preparation)  Cirrus-II:  Induction  of  Partial  Orders,  to  appear  as  Tech¬ 
nical  Report,  Departments  of  Computer  Science  and  Psychology,  Camegie-Mellon  University, 
Pittsburgh,  PA. 

Lindsay,  R.K.,  Buchanan,  B.G.,  Feigenbaum,  E.A.  &  Lederberg,  J.  (1980)  Applications  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  in  Organic  Chemistry:  The  DENDRAL  project.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Mitchell,  T.M.  (1978)  Version  Spaces:  An  Approach  to  Concept  Learning.  Ph.D.  Dissertation: 
Department  of  Electrical  Engineering,  Stanford  University,  Stanford  CA. 

Newell,  A.  &  Simon,  H.  (1972)  Human  Problem  Solving.  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ:  Prentice-Hall. 

Quinlan,  J.R.  (1983)  Learning  efficient  classification  procedures  and  their  application  to  endgames. 
In  R.S.  Michalski,  J.G.  Carbonell  &  T.M.  Mitchell,  (Eds.),  Machine  Learning:  An  artificial 
intelligence  approach.  Palo  Alto:  Tioga  Publishing  Company. 

Quinlan,  J.R.  (1986)  The  effect  of  noise  on  concept  learning.  In  R.S.  Michalski,  J.G.  Carbonell  & 
T.M.  Mitchell,  (Eds.),  Machine  Learning:  An  artificial  intelligence  approach,  Volume  II.  Los 
Altos,  CA:  Morgan- Kaufmann. 

Trowbridge,  D.,  Larkin,  J.  &  Scheftic,  C.  (1987)  Computer-based  tutor  on  graphing  equations.  In 
Proceedings  of  National  Education  Computer  Conference.  Eugene,  OR:  ICCE. 

VanLehn,  K.  (in  press)  Problem  solving  and  cognitive  skill  acquisition.  In  M.I.  Posner  (Ed.)  Foun¬ 
dations  of  Cognitive  Science.  Cambridge,  MA:  MTT  Press. 

VanLehn,  K.  &  Ball,  W.  (1987)  Flexible  execution  of  cognitive  procedures.  Technical  Report  PCG-5, 
Dept,  of  Psychology,  Camegie-Mellon  University,  Pittsburgh,  PA. 

VanLehn,  K.  &  Garlick,  S.  (1987)  Cirrus:  An  automated  protocol  analysis  tool.  In  Langley,  P. 
(Ed.)  Proceedings  of  the  4th  International  Workshop  on  Machine  Learning.  Los  Altos,  CA: 
Morgan-Kaufmann. 


