AD-A202  382  ^ 


T«cMail  Resort  1043 


|43 _ 

Computation 

and 

Pre-Parametric 

Design 

DECl2fi<»|l 
'  ^ 


Karl  T.  Ulric 


MIT  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 


UNCLASSIFIED 


1ECU"I'*<'  Cl  *S5>'IC  ATION  O'  B*ce  'B'Hsn  Oai*  Eniatarf) 


REPORT  documentation  PAGE 


AI-TR  1043 


4.  title  rantf  Su»cM(«i 


Computation  and  Pre-Parametric  Design 


RE/VD  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 


1.  RCCIBlENT'S  CATALOe  NUMSER 


t.  Tyre  of  report  •  period  covered 

technical  report 


•  .  PERFORMINO  ORC.  report  NUMtER 


7.  autmoria; 


Karl  T.  Ulrich 


contract  or  grant  numcerk) 

-  N00014-85-K-0124 


f.  performing  ORGANIIATION  name  and  AOORElt 


10.  program  element.  PROJECT.  TASK 

AREA  0  RORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 


Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
545  Technology  Square 
Cambridge,  MA  02139 


II.  CONTROLLING  office  NAME  ANO  ADDRESS 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
1400  Wilson  Blvd. 

Arlington,  VA  22209  _ 


lA.  monitoring  AGENCY  NAME  •  AODRESSfll  BlUaaanl  Iram  CaniratMnE  OMIcaJ  It.  SECURITY  CLASS.  r*MAI*  raparfj 

Office  of  Naval  Research  UNCLASSIFIED 

Information  Systems 
Arlington,  VA  22217 


•  1.  report  DATE 

September  1988 


IS.  NUMBER  OF  pages 

197 


IT.  distribution  STATEMENT  (4l  W«  miimaE  In  •lacS  SO,  M  BIIImmiI  fraw  R*p«h; 


It.  KEY  WORDS  (Canllmt*  an  AlBa  II  nacaatarY  ana  laanlllr  Of  OlacA  nanOarJ 

design 

engineering  problem  solving 
physical  reasoning 


20.  ABSTRACT  rCanlInna  an  raaaraa  alBa  II  nacaaaarr  anW  IBanlllF  Of  OlacS  nanOaO 


My  work  is  broadly  concerned  with  the  question  How  can  designs  he  synthesized 
computationally?  The  project  deals  primarily  with  mechanical  devices,  and  focuses 
on  pre- parametric  design:  design  at  the  level  of  detail  of  a  blackboard  sketch  rather 
than  at  the  level  of  detail  of  an  engineering  drawing.  The  primary  goal  of  this  research 
is  to  develop  principles  upon  which  future  computational  tools  for  pre-parametric 
design  will  be  built,  by  developing  research  ideas  to  a  level  of  detail  where  computer 


DD  1473  COITION  OF  I  NOV  SS  IS  OBSOLETE 

S/N  0:01-0|4>  S40I  I 


UNCLASSIFIED 


security  classification  of  this  page  rWTicn  Oat*  BnlwM 


Block  20,  cont. 


programs  can  be  used  as  tools  for  validation.  I  explore  the  project  ideas  in  the  domain 
of  single-input  single-output  dynamic  systems,  like  pressure  gages,  accelerometers, 
and  pneumatic  cylinders. 

Four  ideas  are  at  the  core  of  the  design  procedures  presented  in  this  document: 
1)  A  design  problem  should  be  broken  into  two  subproblems —  generating  schematic 
descriptions  and  then  generating  physical  descriptions.  This  strategy  reduces  the 
problem  solving  complexity  and  clarifies  the  problem  solving  procedures.  2)  A  formal 
schematic  language  is  an  important  hallmark  of  a  schematic  synthesis  problem.  3)  A 
transformation  that  compresses  many  different  schematic  descriptions  into  a  single 
minimal  representation  allows  for  a  concise  description  of  the  domain  knowledge, 
and  a  straightforward  schematic  synthesis  procedure.  4)  Efficient  designs  are  ones  in 
which  many  functions  are  provided  by  the  same  structural  element.  This  property 
of  design  is  called  function  sharing,  and  is  a  key  component  of  my  procedure  for 
generating  physical  descriptions  from  schematic  descriptions. 


Computation  and 
Pre-Parametric  Design 

by 

Karl  Thatcher  Ulrich 

Submitted  to  the  Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering  on  July  29, 

1988  in  partial  fulfillment  of  the  requirements  for  the  degree  of  Doctor  of 
Science  in  Mechanical  Engineering. 

Abstract 

y't 

My  work  is  broadly  concerned  with  the  question  How  can  designs  be  synthesized 
computationally?  The  project  deals  primarily  with  mechanical  devices,  and  focuses 
on  pre- parametric  design:  design  at  the  level  of  detail  of  a  blackboard  sketch  rather 
than  at  the  level  of  detail  of  an  engineering  drawing.  The  primary  goal  of  this  research 
is  to  develop  principles  upon  which  future  computational  tools  for  pre-parametric 
design  will  be  built,  by  developing  research  ideas  to  a  level  of  detail  where  computer 
programs  can  be  used  as  tools  for  validation.  I  explore  the  project  ideas  in  the  domain 
of  single-input  single-output  dynamic  systems,  like  pressure  gages,  accelerometers, 
and  pneumatic  cylinders,  -j 

—Four  ideas  are  at  the  core  of  the  design  procedures  presented  in  this  document: 
1)  A  design  problem  should  be  broken  into  two  subproblems —  generating  schematic 
descriptions  and  then  generating  physical  descriptions.  This  strategy  reduces  the 
problem  solving  complexity  and  clarifies  the  problem  solving  procedures.  2)  A  formal 
schematic  language  is  an  important  hallmark  of  a  schematic  synthesis  problem.  3)  A 
transformation  that  compresses  many  different  schematic  descriptions  into  a  single 
minimal  representation  allows  for  a  concise  description  of  the  domain  knowledge, 
and  a  straightforward  schematic  synthesis  procedure.  4)  Efficient  designs  are  ones  in 
which  many  functions  are  provided  by  the  same  structural  element.  This  property 
of  design  is  called  function  sharing,  and  is  a  key  component  of  my  procedure  for 
generating  physical  descriptions  from  schematic  descriptions. 


Acknowledgments 


This  technical  report  is  a  revised  version  of  my  doctoral  thesis  in  mechanical 
engineering.  Many  people  contributed  to  the  work  described  in  this  report.  In 
particular;  my  thesis  advisor,  Warren  Seering;  members  of  my  thesis  committee, 
Randy  Davis,  Dave  Gossard,  and  Patrick  Winston;  and  fellow  students,  Mike  Caine, 
Andy  Christian,  Steve  Eppinger,  Steve  Gordon,  Peter  Meckl,  Ken  Pasch,  Neil  Singer. 
Erik  Vaaler,  and  A1  Ward. 

This  research  was  performed  at  the  MIT  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory.  The 
laboratory’s  research  is  funded  in  part  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency  of  the  United  States  Department  of  Defense  under  contract  number  N00014- 
85-K-0124.  I  received  specific  support  for  this  project  from  the  National  Science 
Foundation  under  grant  number  8618776-DMC  and  from  an  IBM  Pre-Doctoral  Fel¬ 
lowship  for  Manufacturing  Research. 

I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  that  thanks  to  the  faculty,  staff,  and  students, 
the  MIT  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  is  a  very  supportive  research  environment. 


Contents 


1  Introduction  1 

1.1  PROJECT  SUMMARY  .  1 

1.1.1  Motivating  Scenario  .  1 

1.1.2  Framework  for  Project .  2 

1.1.3  Major  Ideas .  5 

1.2  Goals  and  Strategy .  5 

1.2.1  Objectives .  5 

1.2.2  Motivation .  6 

1.2.3  Approach .  6 

1.3  SOME  PROPERTIES  OF  DESIGN .  7 

1.3.1  Design  is  a  Transformation  Between  Descriptions .  7 

1.3.2  Design  Is  Combinatorial .  7 

1.3.3  Fundamental  Trade-Off  Between  Expressiveness  and  Complexity  8 

1.3.4  Design  is  Exactly  Solvable  at  Best,  Intractable  at  Worst  ...  10 

1.3.5  Global  Optimality  is  Usually  Unrealistic .  10 

1.4  DESIDERATA  FOR  DESIGN  RESEARCH .  11 

1.4.1  Definition  of  the  Design  Task .  11 

1.4.2  Representing  Specifications  and  Designs  .  11 

1.4.3  Identifying  Techniques  for  Controlling  Complexity .  12 

1.4.4  Computer  Program  Demonstration  of  Results .  12 

1.5  GUIDE  TO  THIS  DOCUMENT .  12 

2  The  Concept  of  Schematic  Synthesis  15 

2.1  WHAT  IS  SCHEMATIC  SYNTHESIS? .  15 

2.2  WELL-DEFINED  PROBLEMS .  16 

2.2.1  Formality .  16 

2.2.2  Problem  match .  17 

2.2.3  Deri vability  of  Behavior .  17 


2.3  EXAMPLE  SYNTHESIS  PROBLEMS .  18 

2.4  SCHEMATIC  SYNTHESIS  AS  FIRST  STEP .  22 

2.4.1  Reduction  in  Problem  Complexity .  22 

2.4.2  Decoupling  Functional  and  Structural  Design  Issues .  23 

3  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution  25 

3.1  SUMMARY .  25 

.  3.2  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION .  26 

3.2.1  Single-Input  Single-Output  Dynamic  Systems .  27 

3.2.2  Example  Problems  and  Solutions .  28 

3.2.3  Representing  Schematic  Descriptions .  28 

3.2.4  Deriving  Behavior  From  Schematic  Descriptions .  34 

3.2.5  Specifying  a  Problem .  36 

3.3  SOLUTION  TECHNIQUE .  40 

3.3.1  Generating  Candidate  Designs .  40 

3.3.2  Classifying  Behavior .  41 

3.3.3  Modifying  Candidate  Schematic  Descriptions .  42 

3.4  EXAMPLES .  50 

3.4.1  Current  Meter .  51 

3.4.2  Speedometer .  53 

3.4.3  Rate-of-climb  indicator .  57 

3.4.4  Accelerometer .  59 

3.5  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS .  61 

3.5.1  Utility  of  the  Technique .  61 

3.5.2  Completeness  of  the  Technique  .  63 

3.5.3  Why  the  Technique  Works .  64 

3.5.4  Extensibility .  66 

3.5.5  Lessons  from  the  Dynamic  Systems  Example .  68 

3.5.6  Implementation .  69 

4  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions  73 

4.1  INTRODUCTION  TO  FUNCTION 

SHARING .  74 

4.1.1  The  Concept  Of  Function  Sharing .  74 

4.1.2  Function  Sharing  is  Important .  74 

4.1.3  Why  Function  Sharing  is  Possible .  78 

4.1.4  Summary  of  Function  Sharing  Procedure .  78 

4.2  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION  AND 

REPRESENTATION .  79 

4.2.1  Dynamic  Systems .  79 

4.2.2  Physical  Representation .  81 


VI 


4.2.3  Nominal  Functional  Specification .  82 

4.2.4  Example  Physical  Design  Description .  83 

4.2.5  Function  Sharing  Problem  Definition  in  the  Dynamic  Systems 

Domain .  87 

4.3  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE .  87 

4.3.1  Example  of  Function  Sharing  Procedure .  87 

4.3.2  Deleting  a  Structural  Element .  88 

4.3.3  Recognizing  Alternative  Features .  92 

4.3.4  Modifying  Alternative  Features .  96 

4.3.5  Multi-Function  Elements .  96 

4.3.6  Control  .  97 

4.4  IMPLEMENTATION  AND  RESULTS .  98 

4.4.1  Scope  and  Goals  of  the  Implementation .  98 

4.4.2  Three  Example  Runs .  99 

4.4.3  Some  Program  Details . 103 

4.5  ANALYSIS  OF  FUNCTION  SHARING 

PROCEDURE  . 105 

4.5.1  Meaning  of  Physical  Descriptions . 105 

4.5.2  Clobbering  Existing  Functions . 106 

4.5.3  Design  Knowledge  Level . 106 

4.5.4  Novelty  in  Mechanical  Design . 109 

4.5.5  Extensibility . Ill 

4.5.6  Miscellaneous  Issues  . 112 

5  Discussion  115 

5.1  CONTRIBUTIONS . 115 

5.1.1  Mechanical  Design  Concepts  Can  Be  Generated 

Computationally . 116 

5.1.2  Separation  of  Schematic  and  Physical  Descriptions  . 116 

5.1.3  Synthesizing  SISO  Dynamic  Systems . 118 

5.1.4  Function  Sharing  Can  Be  Explained  and  Automated  . 118 

5.1.5  Novel  Designs  can  be  Generated  by  Unbiased 

Application  of  Design  Operators . 119 

5.2  FUTURE  WORK . 119 

5.2.1  Lessons  for  the  Future . 120 

5.2.2  Future  Projects . 121 

A  Literature  Review  125 

A.l  DIRECTLY  RELEVANT  PAPERS . 126 

A.2  INDIRECTLY  RELEVANT  PAPERS . 130 


Vll 


B  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features  133 

B.l  Summary  . 133 

B.2  INTRODUCTION  . 134 

B.2.1  Function,  Structure  and  Conceptual  Design  . 134 

B.2. 2  Scope,  Objectives  and  Approach . 135 

B.3  CENTRAL  CONCEPTS . 135 

B.3.1  Knowledge  Representation . 136 

B.3.2  Design  Procedure . 138 

B.4  AN  EXAMPLE . 139 

B.4.1  The  Task  . 139 

B.4. 2  System  Knowledge . 139 

B.4.3  Methods  .  . . 142 

B.4. 4  Output . 144 

B.5  DISCUSSION . 144 

B.5.1  Feedback . 148 

B.5. 2  Conflict  Resolution . 148 

B.5. 3  Context . 149 

B. 5. 4  Abstraction  and  Analogy . 149 

B.6  RELATED  WORK . 150 

B. 7  REFERENCES . 150 

C  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design  153 

C. l  ABSTRACT . 153 

C.2  INTRODUCTION  . 154 

C. 2.1  Conceptual  Design  Problems  Have  Multiple  Goals . 154 

C.*^  2  Design  And  Debug  Is  One  Solution  Technique . 155 

C.3  KEY  CONCEPT . 156 

C.3.1  Perspectives  Allow  Control  of  Debugging . 156 

C.4  AN  EXAMPLE . 158 

C.4.1  A  Domain  With  Two  Distinct  Design  Perspectives . 158 

C.4. 2  Using  Perspectives  in  Design  and  Debug . 159 

C.4.3  Initial  Design  and  Abstractions . 161 

C.4.4  Debugging  Procedures . 163 

C.4. 5  Instantiation  procedures . 164 

C.4. 6  Evaluation . 164 

C.4. 7  Choosing  the  Next  Design . 165 

C.5  ANALYSIS  . 165 

C.5.1  This  Approach  is  Successful  in  the  Blocks  Domain . 166 

C.5. 2  Perspectives  Make  Sense  as  an  Organizational  Tool  for  Enforc¬ 
ing  Debugging  Modularity . 166 


vm 


C.5.3  Criteria  For  Successful  Application  To  Other 

Domains . 167 

C.5.4  The  Cost  of  Using  a  Non-directed  Control  Strategy . 168 

C.6  EXTENSION  TO  OTHER  DOMAINS . 169 

C.6.1  The  Speedometer  Revisited . 169 

C. 6.2  Status  of  Research . 170 

C.7  RELATED  RESEARCH . 170 

C. 8  REFERENCES . 172 

D  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting?  173 

D. l  ORIGIN  OF  THESE  CLASSIFICATIONS . 174 

D.2  FOUR  CATEGORIES  OF  INTERESTING  DESIGNS  . 174 

D. 2.1  Novel  Combination . 175 

D.2. 2  Geometrical  Exploitation . 178 

D.2. 3  Application  of  Natural  Phenomena . 181 

D.2. 4  Function  Sharing . 183 

D.3  USING  THESE  IDEAS . 185 

D.3.1  Teaching  Design . 185 

D.3.2  Research  Directions . 186 


List  of  Figures 


I 


1.1  Scenario  illustrating  the  design  of  an  accelerometer . 

1.2  Problem  decomposition  . . 

1.3  Trade-off  between  expressiveness  and  computational  complexity  .  .  , 

2.1  Schematic  description  of  a  process  plant . 

2.2  Schematic  description  of  an  analog  circuit  . 

2.3  Schematic  description  of  a  kinematic  linkage . 

3.1  Example  SISO  dynamic  systems  problems  and  solutions . 

3.2  Example  Bondgraphs . 

3.3  Bondgraph  notation  . 

3.4  Example  schematic  synthesis  problem  specification  and  one  solution.  . 

3.5  Graph-simplification  rewrite  rules . 

3.6  Individual  bondgraph  groups  that  isolate  1 — C’s  and  0 — I’s . 

3.7  Current  meter  synthesis  . 

3.8  Current  meter  synthesis  (continued) . 

3.9  Current  meter  synthesis  (continued) . 

3.10  Speedometer  synthesis . 

3.11  Rate-of-climb  meter  example . 

3.12  Accelerometer  synthesis  . 

4.1  Example  of  function  sharing . 

4.2  Illustration  of  function  sharing  procedure . 

4.3  Example  of  structural  element  represented  as  a  collection  of  orthogo¬ 
nally  configured  rectangular-prismatic  sections . 

4.4  Example  of  physical  description  of  a  design . 

4.5  Complete  physical  description  of  pressure  gage . 

4.6  Eliminating  the  fluid  resistance . 

4.7  Eliminating  the  fluid  capacitance . 


3 

4 
9 

19 

20 
21 

29 

30 
32 
39 
46 
49 

54 

55 

56 
58 
60 
62 

75 

80 

82 

83 

84 

89 

90 


4 


.  f 


« 


XI 


LIST  OF  FIGURES 


1 


4.8  Organization  of  function  sharing  recognition  and  modification  proce¬ 
dures .  93 

4.9  Knowledge  for  other  functions  in  dynamic  systems  domain .  94 

4.10  Knowledge  for  other  functions  in  dynamic  systems  domain  (continued).  95 

4.11  Accelerometer  example  1 . 100 

4.12  Accelerometer  example  2 . 102 

4.13  Rate-of-climb  example  1 . 104 

4.14  Modification  invalidates  primary  function  of  element . 107 

4.15  Knowledge  level  for  fluid  resistance . 108 

4.16  A  surprising  design . 110 

B.l  Shaft  coupling  knowledge . 137 

B.2  Fastener  task  situation . 140 

B.3  Fasteners  in  the  knowledge  base . 140 

B.4  Structural  framework  for  a  fastener . 141 

B.5  The  knowledge  base  description  of  a  fastener . 143 

B.6  Example  output . 145 

B. 7  Other  example  fasteners . 146 

C. l  Debugging  to  meet  two  goals . 157 

C.2  Components  available  in  the  blocks  domain . 159 

C.3  A  valid  design . 160 

C.4  Program  architecture . 162 

C. 5  Speedometer  debugging . 171 

D. l  Easily  insertable  and  removable  fastener . 176 

D.2  Bicycle  wheel . 177 

D.3  A  threading  tap . 178 

D.4  Novel  ski  boot  sole . 179 

D.5  I-beam  cross  section  . 180 

D.6  Stranded  cable  . 181 

D.7  Strain  gage  . 182 

D.8  Thermocouple . 182 

D.9  Fluorescent  lights . 183 

D.IO  Resistive  heating  crucible . 184 

D.ll  Automobile  body  as  electrical  ground . 185 

D.12  Digital  circuit  chip  leads . 186 


Introduction 


Chapter  1 


P 

I 


■ 


1.1  PROJECT  SUMMARY 

My  work  is  broadly  concerned  with  the  question  How  can  designs  be  synthesized 
computationally?  This  project  deals  primarily  with  mechanical  devices,  and  focuses 
on  pre-parametric  design:  design  at  the  level  of  detail  of  a  blackboard  sketch  rather 
than  at  the  level  of  detail  of  an  engineering  drawing.  This  type  of  design  is  called 
pre-parametric  because  it  is  concerned  with  specifying  gross  design  configurations 
rather  than  particular  numerical  values  for  pre-determined  parameters.  Throughout 
this  document,  I  use  the  words  conceptual,  preliminary,  and  pre-parametric  inter¬ 
changeably. 

1.1.1  Motivating  Scenario 

Design  is  a  very  broad  class  of  problem  solving,  but  this  project  is  focused  quite 
narrowly.  In  order  to  give  a  general  idea  of  the  problem  solving  task  that  I  have 
addressed,  this  subsection  describes  a  problem  that  can  be  solved  by  the  computer 
program  that  implements  the  ideas  in  this  document. 

Although  some  of  the  ideas  are  quite  general,  the  details  of  this  project  are 


1 


Chapter  1:  Introduction 


centered  on  the  domain  of  single-input  single-output  dynamic  systems.  Instruments, 
sensors,  and  actuators  fall  into  this  class  of  devices,  and  examples  include  pressure 
gages,  pneumatic  cylinders,  voltmeters  and  speedometers.  Figure  1.1  illustrates  the 
way  in  which  my  system  solves  the  problem  of  designing  an  accelerometer.  The 
problem  is  specified  as  that  of  designing  a  device  that  will  produce  a  deflection,  i, 
that  is  proportional  to  a  reference  frame  acceleration,  a.  The  first  design  step  is  to 
generate  a  design  description,  in  terms  of  idealized  components,  that  will  produce  the 
desired  behavior.  In  this  case,  the  description  includes  a  mass  connected  by  a  spring 
and  a  damper  to  ground.  The  second  step  is  to  transform  this  idealized  description 
into  an  efficient  physical  description  that  represents  the  structure  of  the  actual  device 
to  be  built.  In  the  figure,  the  final  description  shows  a  cantilever  beam  that  is  thick  at 
one  end  surrounded  by  a  viscous  fluid.  In  this  project,  the  final  physical  description 
can  be  thought  of  as  a  suggestion  of  a  design  configuration.  That  is,  the  program 
does  not  produce  dimensions  for  the  cantilever  beam,  but  rather  suggests  that  there 
be  a  cantilever  beam  that  is  thick  at  one  end.  The  generation  of  design  descriptions 
at  this  level  of  detail  is  what  I  mean  by  pre-parametric  design. 


1.1.2  Framework  for  Project 

The  scenario  illustrated  in  figure  1.1  shows  two  distinct  problem  solving  steps:  first 
the  system  produces  an  idealized  description  of  the  device,  then  the  system  produces 
a  description  suggesting  the  structure  of  the  device.  These  two  steps  correspond 
to  my  decomposition  of  the  research  task.  I  call  the  description  produced  by  the 
first  design  step  a  schematic  description  and  the  description  produced  by  the  second 
design  step  a  physical  description.  This  distinction  is  shown  in  figure  1.2.  My  design 
procedure  consists  of  two  subprocedures:  1)  generate  a  schematic  description  from 
a  specification  (chapters  2  and  3),  and  2)  generate  a  physical  description  from  a 
schematic  description  (chapter  4). 


L, 


1.1:  PROJECT  SUMMARY 


OUTPUT 


acceleration,  a 


I 


Chapter  1:  Introduction 


Figure  1.2:  Problem  decomposition 


1.2:  Goals  and  Strategy 


1.1.3  Major  Ideas 

This  project  uses  the  domain  of  single-input  single-output  dynamic  systems  to  ex¬ 
plore  computation  and  pre-parametric  design.  Four  ideas  are  at  the  core  of  the  design 
procedures  presented  in  this  document. 

1.  Break  a  design  problem  into  two  subproblems —  generating  schematic  descrip¬ 
tions  and  then  generating  physical  descriptions.  This  reduces  the  problem 
solving  complexity  and  clarifies  the  problem  solving  procedures. 

2.  A  formal  schematic  language  is  an  important  hallmark  of  a  well-defined  schematic 
synthesis  problem. 

3.  A  transformation  that  compresses  many  different  schematic  descriptions  into 
a  single  minimal  representation  allows  for  a  concise  description  of  the  domain 
knowledge  and  a  straightforward  schematic  synthesis  procedure. 

4.  Efficient  designs  are  ones  in  which  many  functions  are  provided  by  the  same 
structural  element.  This  property  of  design  is  called  function  sharing.  Function 
sharing  is  a  key  component  of  my  procedure  for  generating  physical  descriptions 
from  schematic  descriptions. 


1.2  Goals  and  Strategy 

1.2.1  Objectives 

The  primary  goal  of  this  research  is  to  develop  principles  upon  which  future  compu¬ 
tational  tools  for  pre-parametric  design  will  be  built.  I  have  focused  exclusively  on 
the  information  processing  tasks  associated  with  conceptual  design,  and  have  ignored 
entirely  the  important  issues  related  to  how  a  computational  tool  might  be  designed 
to  interact  effectively  with  a  human  designer. 

i 


6 


Chapter  1:  Introduction 


1.2.2  Motivation 


Pre-parametric  design  is  the  stage  of  design  receiving  perhaps  the  least  attention 
both  in  research  and  in  practice.  Yet  it  is  at  this  stage  that  the  basic  direction  of  a 
project  is  determined.  As  a  design  project  progresses  in  time,  the  cost  of  changing 
the  fundamental  design  concept  escalates  roughly  exponentially.  In  the  first  days  of 
a  project,  changing  the  design  strategy  costs  practically  nothing.  Once  a  fabrication 
facility  has  been  built  for  the  design,  a  change  in  the  concept  may  cost  millions  of 
dollars.  Because  of  this  characteristic  of  design,  engineers  should  be  very  confident 
that  they  have  selected  a  design  concept  wisely.  One  approach  to  this  selection 
process  is  to  generate  tens  or  hundreds  of  alternative  concepts  early  in  the  project, 
rather  than  one  or  two  (as  is  current  industrial  practice).  An  important  application 
of  computation  is  in  aiding  this  concept  generation  activity. 


1.2.3  Approach 


The  general  approach  of  this  project  has  been  to  develop  research  ideas  to  a  level 
of  detail  where  computer  programs  can  be  used  as  tools  for  validating  the  ideas 
and  for  exploring  their  consequences.  Specifically,  I  have  approached  the  problem  of 
synthesizing  pre-parametric  design  concepts  computationally  by  selecting  a  bounded 
problem  domain,  by  decomposing  the  problem  into  subproblems,  by  devising  rep¬ 
resentation  languages  for  describing  the  designs,  and  by  developing  techniques  for 
guiding  the  synthesis  process  within  the  space  of  possible  designs  defined  by  the  rep¬ 
resentation  languages.  Finally  I  have  used  computer  implementations  of  these  ideas 
to  clarify  my  thinking  and  to  test  the  results. 


l.S:  SOME  PROPERTIES  OF  DESIGN 


7 


1.3  SOME  PROPERTIES  OF  DESIGN 

Design  has  traditionally  been  viewed  as  the  art  of  engineering,  yet  most  of  this 
document  is  devoted  to  illustrating  procedures  for  performing  design  tasks.  To  place 
these  procedures  in  the  proper  perspective  and  to  help  demystify  the  design  task, 
this  section  describes  some  very  general  properties  of  all  engineering  design. 


1.3.1  Design  is  a  Transformation  Between  Descriptions 

Design  can  be  thought  of  as  a  transformation  between  descriptions  of  devices.  Gen¬ 
erally,  design  transforms  a  functional  description  into  a  structural  description.  Struc¬ 
tural  descriptions  may  be  communicated  with  drawings,  models,  text,  or  tables  of 
numbers.  The  medium  of  description  constitutes  a  design  language.  These  languages 
are  often  informal  in  the  case  of  blackboard  sketches  by  human  designers,  or  may 
adhere  to  formal  definitions  in  the  case  of  an  engineering  drawing  or  a  computer- 
language  description.  In  either  case,  designs  are  constructed  from  primitive  building 
blocks  that  might  be  lines,  features,  components,  or  systems. 

1.3.2  Design  Is  Combinatorial 

The  design  process  is  combinatorial —  that  is,  designs  are  collections  of  primitive 
elements,  and  many  different  elements  can  be  combined  in  many  different  ways. 
Consider  for  example  the  relatively  simple  design  problem  of  selecting  a  shaft,  two 
bearings,  two  grease  seals,  and  two  bearing  retaining  devices  for  a  specified  spirdle 
configuration.  If  there  are  10  possible  shaft  dimensions  and  materials,  500  possible 
bearings,  50  possible  seals  and  15  possible  retaining  devices,  then  the  unbridled 
complexity  of  the  design  problem  is  3,750,000  potential  designs.  As  with  many  other 
information  processing  tasks,  combinatorial  complexity  makes  design  difficult. 


8 


Chapter  1:  Introduction 


1.3.3  Fundamental  Trade-OfF  Between  Expressiveness  and 
Complexity 


The  primitive  elements  of  a  design  language  determine  the  space  of  possible  solutions 
to  a  design  problem.  A  designer  can  only  generate  structural  descriptions  that  can 
be  formed  from  these  elements.  A  simple  example  iUustrates  this  point.  Imagine  an 
arch  designer.  If  the  designer  can  work  with  only  rectangular  blocks  then  arch  1  can 
be  generated  but  not  arch  2  or  arch  3  (figure  1.3). 

The  constraints  imposed  by  the  choice  of  design  primitives  are  the  cause  of  a 
fundamental  trade-off  between  the  expressiveness  of  the  design  language  and  the 
complexiiy  of  the  design  problem.  As  design  languages  become  more  expressive, 
the  space  of  possible  designs  increases.  Again,  consider  the  arch  example.  If  we 
allow  arch  designs  to  contain  three  rectangular  blocks  and  specify  that  blocks  can 
be  joined  at  any  of  10  points  along  the  circumference  of  a  block,  there  are  about 
20,000  ways  the  blocks  can  be  pul  together.  If  we  increase  the  expressiveness  of 
the  design  language  by  using  triangular  blocks  that  can  be  joined  at  any  of  3  points 
along  their  circumference,  the  24  triangular  blocks  (equivalent  in  area  to  the  3  rect¬ 
angular  blocks)  can  be  put  together  in  about  10^^  ways.  Notice  that  this  increase 
in  expressiveness  allows  the  system  to  design  many  more  kinds  of  arches,  but  at  a 
large  cost  in  the  complexity  of  the  design  problem.  This  trade-off  between  the  ex¬ 
pressiveness  of  the  design  language  and  the  complexity  of  the  resulting  design  space 
is  the  primary  reason  novel  conceptual  design  is  difficult.  Although  expressiveness  is 
necessary  to  allow  for  the  generation  of  a  wide  variety  of  designs,  simply  increasing 
the  expressiveness  of  a  design  language  swamps  the  designer  with  alternatives.  So, 
any  increase  in  expressiveness  must  be  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  designer’s 
ability  to  control  the  complexity  of  the  design  space. 


l.S:  SOME  PROPERTIES  OF  DESIGN 


9 


10 


Chapter  1:  Introduction 


1.3.4  Design  is  Exactly  Solvable  at  Best,  Intractable  at 
Worst 

Design  is  a  very  broad  category  of  intelligent  behavior.  Some  design  problems  have 
exact,  globally  optimal  solutions.  Some  design  problems  are  intractable. 

Consider  the  problem  of  designing  a  constant  cross-section  rectangular  box  beam 
1  M  long.  The  design  can  specify  either  a  particular  aluminum  alloy  or  a  particular 
steel  alloy.  The  beam  wall  thickness  must  be  at  least  .002  M.  The  design  problem 
consists  of  specifying  a  height,  width  and  thickness  for  the  beam  to  provide  the 
greatest  bending  strength  per  unit  mass.  Mathematical  optimization  techniques  can 
find  the  global  optimum  for  this  problem  exactly  and  in  a  reasonable  (polynomial) 
amount  of  time. 

Now  consider  the  (somewhat  contrived)  problem  of  designing  a  key  for  a  door 
lock.  The  lock  has  12  tumblers  and  the  key  should  have  notches  with  an  integer 
depth  from  1  to  10.  The  designer  is  provided  with  a  black  box  computer  simulation 
of  the  lock  that  will  reply  whether  or  not  a  key  design  will  open  it.  There  are  10** 
alternative  designs,  and  the  designer  has  no  choice  but  to  try  them  exhaustively. 
This  problem  is  not  solvable  in  a  reasonable  amount  of  time. 

In  practice  most  design  problems  fall  between  these  extremes.  It  is  rare  to  be 
able  to  solve  a  problem  exactly.  But,  it  is  also  rare  that  problems  are  posed  in  a  way 
that  a  designer  is  forced  to  blindly  search  for  solutions. 

1.3.5  Global  Optimality  is  Usually  Unrealistic 

Except  in  some  mathematically  parameterized  design  problems,  design  spaces  are 
very  sparse  and  riddled  with  local  optima.  In  these  cases,  the  notion  of  global 
optimality  is  not  relevant.  There  is  usually  no  way  of  placing  a  bound  on  the  best 
solutions.  There  is  also  typically  an  infinity  of  solutions. 

Designers  will  usually  accept  designs  that  meet  most  of  their  specifications.  In 


1.4:  DESIDERATA  FOR  DESIGN  RESEARCH 


11 


better  cases,  the  designer  will  have  several  acceptable  designs  to  choose  from.  In 
general  there  is  no  way  of  knowing  if  other,  better  designs  exist. 

1.4  DESIDERATA  FOR  COMPUTATIONAL 
DESIGN  RESEARCH 

Design  is  a  complex,  vague,  human  activity  involving  information  processing  of  many 
different  types.  I  believe  that  this  attribute  of  the  design  problem  suggests  some 
desiderata  for  design  automation  research.  In  particular,  a  completed  piece  of  re¬ 
search  ideally  addresses  four  subtasks:  1)  definition  of  the  specific  design  task  be¬ 
ing  addressed;  2)  development  of  a  representation  for  specifications  and  designs;  3) 
identification  of  the  techniques  used  by  the  system  for  controlling  design  space  com¬ 
plexity;  and  4)  demonstration  of  the  design  techniques  with  a  computer  program 
implementation. 

1.4.1  Definition  of  the  Design  Task 

The  first  important  step  in  computational  design  research  is  defining  the  design  task. 
What  is  the  domain?  What  is  the  transformation  we  would  like  to  perform?  What 
are  the  inputs,  what  are  the  outputs?  What  knowledge  is  required  to  perform  this 
transformation?  The  explicit  identification  of  the  design  task  makes  the  problem 
accessible  to  other  design  researchers.  Without  this  identification,  the  research  con¬ 
tribution  can  never  be  clearly  identified. 

1.4.2  Representing  Specifications  and  Designs 

Coupled  to  the  identification  of  the  design  task  is  the  development  of  representations 
for  the  specification  of  the  design  problem,  the  description  of  the  design,  and  the 


12 


Chapter  1:  Introduction 


knowledge  that  will  be  required  to  synthesize  the  design.  The  representation  lan¬ 
guages  must  be  carefully  chosen  since  they  constrain  what  can  be  expressed  about 
the  design.  Any  computational  system  that  performs  design  tasks  must  have  some 
representation,  but  the  explicit  identification  of  the  representation  helps  to  clarify 
exactly  what  design  tasks  the  system  can  perform. 

1.4.3  Identifying  Techniques  for  Controlling  Complexity 

All  successful  design  systems  must  incorporate  some  means  of  controlling  the  combi¬ 
natorial  complexity  of  the  design  problem.  Some  systems  will  use  design  rules  culled 
from  human  experience;  some  will  use  constraint  propagation,  branch  and  bound 
search,  or  gradient  techniques.  The  techniques  that  a  system  uses  can  usually  be 
explained  independently  of  the  particular  domain  of  application.  An  explanation  of 
the  relative  importance  of  multiple  techniques  is  also  very  useful  in  assessing  why  a 
particular  approach  is  or  is  not  successful. 

1.4.4  Computer  Program  Demonstration  of  Results 

Writing  computer  programs  helps  to  eliminate  fuzzy  conceptual  thinking,  and  helps 
to  prove  the  validity  of  design  techniques.  The  process  of  formalizing  a  representation 
and  design  procedure  to  the  point  where  it  can  be  encoded  in  a  computer  program 
unearths  conceptual  bugs.  Computer  programs  may  also  be  necessary  to  empirically 
validate  results,  since  in  many  cases,  design  techniques  will  be  heuristic. 

1.5  GUIDE  TO  THIS  DOCUMENT 

This  document  describes  several  different  branches  of  a  single  project  aimed  at  under¬ 
standing  how  mechanical  design  concepts  can  be  synthesized  computationally.  The 
most  coherent  story  is  told  by  the  five  main  chapters,  while  some  of  the  peripheral 


1.5:  GUIDE  TO  THIS  DOCUMENT 


13 


work  is  described  in  the  appendices.  In  total  there  are  nine  chapters —  five  in  the 
body  of  the  document,  four  in  the  appendices. 

MAIN  CHAPTERS: 

•  Chapter  1  is  the  introduction  to  the  document.  It  contains  a  description  of  the 
objectives,  motivation  and  approach  of  the  project,  as  well  as  some  background 
on  computation  and  design.  Finally,  It  outlines  four  desiderata  for  research  in 
computation  and  design. 

•  I  break  the  global  problem  of  generating  design  concepts  into  two  parts:  gen¬ 
erating  schematic  descriptions  and  generating  physical  descriptions.  Chapter 
2  describes  the  concept  of  a  schematic  description  and  gives  several  examples 
of  well-defined  schematic  synthesis  problems. 

•  Chapter  3  is  an  example  of  a  solution  to  a  well-defined  schematic  synthesis 
problem  in  the  domain  of  mechanical  devices  that  can  be  described  by  networks 
of  idealized  elements.  It  is  presented  as  an  example  illustrating  some  of  the 
desirable  properties  of  a  solution  technique  for  schematic  synthesis  problems  in 
general. 

•  Chapter  4  highlights  an  important  property  of  mechanical  devices —  function 
sharing.  I  explain  function  sharing  as  a  general  idea  and  then  present  a  specific 
procedure  and  a  computer  program  for  performing  function  sharing  in  the 
dynamic  systems  domain.  Function  sharing  is  one  way  to  perform  the  second 
part  of  my  design  problem  decomposition —  generating  physical  descriptions 
from  schematic  descriptions. 

•  Chapter  5  delineates  the  contributions  made  by  this  r^^search  and  discusses 
future  projects  that  follow  naturally  from  this  work. 


APPENDICES: 


14 


Chapter  1:  Introduction 


•  Appendix  A  is  the  literature  review  associated  with  this  project.  In  this  chap¬ 
ter,  I  give  one  paragraph  descriptions  of  the  publications  that  have  contributed 
directly  to  this  project,  and  one  or  two  sentence  descriptions  of  those  that 
have  contributed  in  secondary  ways.  The  objective  of  this  chapter  is  to  give 
researchers  in  the  field  of  computation  and  conceptual  design  a  headstart  on 
finding  relevant  literature. 

•  Appendix  B  describes  an  early  chunk  of  work  I  did  on  novel  combination — 
the  combination  of  several  structural  attributes  of  different  known  devices  in 
order  to  design  a  new  device.  The  novel  combination  ideas  were  developed  in 
the  context  of  designing  new  kinds  of  fasteners. 

•  Appendix  C  explains  a  way  of  organizing  design  reasoning  in  order  to  meet 
several  design  goals  simultaneously.  I  call  this  reasoning  debugging  based  on 
perspectives.  The  major  idea  is  to  organize  design  reasoning  into  several  ex¬ 
plicitly  separated  problem  solving  perspectives  (as  if  forming  a  committee  of 
experts  from  different  fields).  This  organization  allows  the  program  and  pro¬ 
grammer  to  control  the  focus  of  problem  solving  effort  in  a  design  problem. 

•  Appendix  D  outlines  some  of  my  preliminary  thoughts  on  what  makes  a  me¬ 
chanical  design  concept  interesting,  creative  or  elegant.  This  thinking  lead  to 
the  work  on  function  sharing  in  chapter  4,  but  could  also  lead  to  several  other 
fruitful  areas  of  research. 

•  The  literature  references  are  listed  at  the  end  of  the  document. 


Chapter  2 


Overview 

The  strategy  of  this  project  has  been  to  devise  techniques  for  producing  schematic 
descriptions  from  specifications  and  then  for  producing  physical  descriptions  from 
schematic  descriptions.  Schematic  descriptions  are  graphs  of  functional  elements. 
Examples  include  digital  circuit  diagrams,  analog  circuit  diagrams,  and  process  plant 
flow  diagrams.  This  chapter  outlines  some  desiderata  for  schematic  synthesis  prob¬ 
lems,  gives  some  example  schematic  languages  and  synthesis  problems,  and  explains 
why  schematic  synthesis  is  a  good  first  step  in  solving  pre-parametric  design  prob¬ 
lems. 

2.1  WHAT  IS  SCHEMATIC  SYNTHESIS? 

In  this  project,  schematic  descriptions  are  defined  as  graphs  of  functional  elements. 
A  design  described  schematically  consists  of  a  specification  of  its  constituent  func¬ 
tional  elements  and  their  interconnections.  The  key  distinction  between  schematic 


15 


16 


Chapter  2:  The  Concept  of  Schematic  Synthesis 


descriptions  and  other  types  of  design  descriptions  is  that  schematic  descriptions 
generally  contain  no  information  about  the  design’s  geometrical  and  material  prop¬ 
erties.  Generating  a  schematic  description  in  response  to  a  specification  of  desired 
device  behavior  is  schematic  synthesis. 

2.2  HALLMARKS  OF  WELL-DEFINED 

SCHEMATIC  SYNTHESIS  PROBLEMS 

There  are  three  major  hallmarks  of  v’ell-defined  schematic  synthesis  problems:  for¬ 
mality,  problem  match,  and  derivability  of  behavior. 

2.2.1  Formality 

Formality  refers  to  the  degree  of  precision  with  which  the  description  language,  the 
specification  language,  and  the  modification  operators  are  defined.  In  order  for  the 
description  language  to  be  formal,  there  must  be  a  well-defined  set  of  primitive 
functional  elements,  and  a  specification  of  how  the  primitives  can  be  assembled 
together.  The  key  requirement  is  that  there  be  a  way  of  determining  whether  or  not 
a  description  is  well-formed.  Design  specifications  are  expressed  in  some  language. 
This  language  should  also  be  formal —  there  must  be  a  well-defined  way  of  specifying 
the  desired  properties  of  the  schematic  description.  Design  systems  often  modify 
particular  schematic  descriptions.  These  modifications  should  be  drawn  from  a  set 
of  modification  operators.  The  requirement  on  modification  operators  is  that  well- 
formed  descriptions  remain  well-formed  after  a  modification  is  executed. 


2.2:  WELL-DEFINED  PROBLEMS 


17 


2.2.2  Problem  match 

Formality  in  the  description  language,  specification  language  and  modification  op¬ 
erators  is  not  enough  to  ensure  a  good  schematic  synthesis  problem.  The  formally- 
defined  problem  must  also  correspond  in  an  appropriate  way  to  the  real  design  do¬ 
main  of  interest.  This  correspondence  consists  of  an  appropriate  choice  of  functional 
elements —  elements  that  match  the  desired  description  granularity. 

Granularity  refers  to  an  expressiveness-complexity  trade-off.  The  functional  el¬ 
ements  can  be  very  simple,  requiring  complex  collections  of  elements  to  generate 
complex  behavior;  or  the  functional  elements  can  be  very  complex,  requiring  only 
simple  collections  of  elements  to  generate  complex  behavior.  In  the  case  of  fine¬ 
grained  functional  elements,  the  range  of  possible  descriptions  that  can  be  built  from 
a  small  set  of  elements  is  large;  in  the  case  of  complex  functional  elements,  a  more 
limited  set  of  designs  can  be  built,  assuming  that  in  both  cases  the  overall  com¬ 
plexity  of  the  device  behavior  is  equal.  The  benefit  therefore  of  using  a  fine-grained 
description  language  is  expressiveness;  the  cost  is  the  computational  complexity  of 
the  synthesis  problem.  A  well-defined  schematic  synthesis  problem  involves  a  set  of 
functional  elements  just  fine-grained  enough  to  cover  the  desired  range  of  designs. 


2.2.3  Derivability  of  Behavior 

Appropriately  chosen  schematic  languages  allow  for  derivation  of  device  behavior 
from  a  description  of  the  behavior  of  each  of  its  functional  elements  and  their  inter¬ 
connections.  The  derived  behavior  should  also  be  expressed  in  such  a  way  that  it 
can  be  compared  to  the  specification  language  of  the  problem.  The  derivability-of- 
behavior  hallmark  ensures  that  there  is  a  way  of  evaluating  a  design. 


18 


Chapter  2:  The  Concept  of  Schematic  Synthesis 


2.3  EXAMPLES  OF  SCHEMATIC  LANGUAGES 
AND  SYNTHESIS  PROBLEMS 

This  section  gives  concrete  examples  of  schematic  synthesis  problems.  Although  I 
present  these  problems  informally,  in  each  case,  the  textual  and  graphical  descriptions 
shown  here  could  be  formalized. 

Process  plants 

Figure  2.1  is  a  schematic  description  of  a  section  of  a  process  plant.  The  functional 
elements  are  idealized  pumps,  heat  exchangers,  mixers,  condensers,  etc.  A  synthesis 
problem  in  this  domain  might  be:  given  a  library  of  equipment  elements,  generate  a 
schematic  description  of  a  plant  that  will  refrigerate  water. 

Analog  circuits 

.Figure  2.2  shows  the  schematic  description  of  an  analog  circuit.  The  description 
consists  of  idealized  elements —  resistors,  diodes,  operational  amplifiers —  connected 
together  in  a  graph.  A  synthesis  problem  in  this  domain  might  be:  generate  a  circuit 
that  will  take  a  voltage  signal  input  and  produce  a  proportional  current  through  a 
load  that  has  a  time- varying  impedance. 

Kinematics 

Figure  2.3  shows  a  schematic  description  of  a  planar  kinematic  chain.  In  the  kine¬ 
matics  domain,  functional  elements  are  links  and  joint  types.  A  problem  in  this 
domain  might  be:  given  a  library  of  joint-types  and  a  range  on  link  lengths,  spec¬ 
ify  the  number  of  links,  their  lengths,  their  topology  and  their  joint  types,  in  order 
to  produce  a  straight-line  motion  (within  some  tolerance  band)  along  90  degrees  of 
input  link  rotation. 


I 


2.S:  EXAMPLE  SYNTHESIS  PROBLEMS_ 


Figure  2.1:  Schematic  description  of  a  process  plant. 


Figure  2.3:  Schematic  description  of  a  kinematic  linkage. 


22 


Chapter  2:  The  Concept  of  Schematic  Synthesis 


2.4  WHY  SCHEMATIC  SYNTHESIS  IS  A 
GOOD  FIRST  DESIGN  STEP 

The  task  of  generating  a  physical  description  of  a  design  from  a  behavioral  specifica¬ 
tion  can  be  broken  into  two  steps:  1)  generate  a  schematic  description  of  the  design 
in  terms  of  functional  elements;  then  2)  from  the  schematic  description,  generate  a 
physical  description  of  a  device  that  approximates  the  schematic  description.  The 
generation  of  a  schematic  description  as  a  first  step  in  design  is  justified  because  the 
strategy  reduces  the  complexity  of  the  problem  solving  task  and  decouples  functional 
and  structural  design  issues. 


2.4.1  Reduction  in  Problem  Complexity 

Abstraction  is  one  strategy  for  reducing  the  complexity  of  a  problem.  A  schematic 
description  is  an  abstraction  of  a  design,  excluding  all  physical  information  except 
for  topology  from  the  design.  Working  on  a  design  problem  first  in  this  space  is  a 
less  complex  problem  than  trying  to  design  directly  in  the  design  space  described 
by  the  physical  representation  language  of  the  domain.  In  general  there  will  be 
many  fewer  functional  elements  in  a  schematic  description  language  than  there  will 
be  structural  elements  in  a  physical  description  language.  Therefore  the  space  of 
possible  schematic  descriptions  is  usually  considerably  smaller  than  the  space  of 
possible  physical  descriptions.  Given  these  factors,  an  approach  to  reducing  the 
complexity  of  the  synthesis  process  is  to  work  first  in  the  smaller  space  of  schematic 
descriptions,  and  then,  with  the  resulting  schematic  description  as  a  starting  point, 
work  in  the  physical  description  space. 


S.4:  SCHEMATIC  SYNTHESIS  AS  FIRST  STEP 


23 


2.4.2  Decoupling  Functional  and  Structural  Design  Issues 

Focusing  the  initial  problem  solving  effort  on  schematic  descriptions  decouples  the 
functional  and  structural  aspects  of  the  design  problem.  Generating  a  schematic 
description,  without  concern  for  a  possible  physical  implementation,  forces  the  de¬ 
sign  system  to  get  the  ideal  device  behavior  right  first.  This  strategy  makes  sense 
since  only  devices  with  correct  schematic  descriptions  will  meet  the  design  specifica¬ 
tions.  Once  the  schematic  description  is  right,  the  synthesis  of  an  efficient  physical 
implementation  can  proceed. 

In  the  next  chapter,  I  present  a  technique  for  generating  schematic  descriptions 
of  lumped-parameter  dynamic  systems.  The  particular  technique  I  have  developed 
is  exact  and  in  fact  is  a  good  strategy  for  human  designers  trying  to  solve  the  same 
kinds  of  problems.  This  is  an  instance  of  how  focusing  initially  on  schematic  synthesis 
can  lead  to  better  designs. 


1 


A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem 
and  Solution 


Chapter  3 


3.1  SUMMARY 

This  chapter  describes  a  specific  schematic  synthesis  problem  and  one  of  its  solution 
techniques. 

The  domain  consists  of  devices  that  can  be  described  as  networks  of  lumped- 
parameter,  idealized  elements  in  the  translational-mechanical,  rotational-mechanical, 
fluid-mechanical,  and  electrical  media.  Such  devices  include  speedometers,  accelerom¬ 
eters,  pneumatic  cylinders  and  pressure  gages. 

Schematic  descriptions  of  these  devices  are  represented  with  bondgraphs  which 
are,  in  effect,  transformations  of  generalized  analog  circuit  diagrams  that  make  Kir- 
choff  current  and  voltage  junctions  explicit. 

Problems  are  specified  in  this  domain  by  specifying  a  dynamic  model  of  the  input 
and  output  environment  of  the  device  to  be  designed.  These  models  are  represented 
as  chunks  of  bondgraphs.  Further  problem  specification  is  made  by  identifying  the 
desired  relationship  between  a  quantity  in  the  input  graph  chunk  and  a  quantity  in 


25 


26 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


the  output  graph  chunk.  The  problem  is  to  synthesize  a  graph  containing  the  input 
and  output  bondgraph  chunk  that  will  perform  the  desired  transformation  between 
quantities. 

The  solution  technique  is  based  on  three  steps:  1)  generate  a  candidate  design;  2) 
classify  the  behavior  of  the  candidate;  3)  based  on  the  derived  behavior  and  domain 
knowledge,  modify  the  candidate  (if  possible)  to  bring  it  in  line  with  the  specification. 

The  procedure  for  generating  a  candidate  design  is  based  on  the  observation  that 
any  device  with  a  non-trivial  relationship  between  two  quantities  must  contain  a 
physical  connection  between  the  two  quantities.  The  generation  procedure  produces 
a  set  of  candidate  designs  from  which  all  valid  designs  must  be  derivable  by  addition 
of  bondgraph  elements  only. 

A  candidate  design  is  classified  by  deriving  its  equations  of  motion  and  extracting 
from  them  their  global  behavior. 

Finally,  candidate  designs  are  modified  by  first  transforming  them  to  a  compact 
representation  in  which  a  single  description  captures  the  behavior  of  infinite  sets  of 
particular  designs.  After  this  compression,  the  required  design  modifications  become 
clear.  The  modifications  are  carried  out  on  the  compact  description  of  the  design  and 
the  compacting  transformation  is  reversed  to  yield  a  modified  version  of  the  original 
candidate  design. 

The  key  idea  behind  this  technique  is  that  an  abstract  characterization  of  the 
essential  properties  of  the  design  descriptions  expedites  the  analysis  and  modification 
of  candidate  designs. 

3.2  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION 

This  section  describes  my  choice  of  the  lumped -parameter  dynamic  systems  domain, 
explains  the  schematic  description  representation,  defines  problem  specifications,  and 
shows  how  device  behavior  can  be  derived  from  schematic  descriptions. 


3.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION 


27 


3.2.1  Single-Input  Single-Output  Dynamic  Systems 

The  domain  in  which  I  have  applied  the  schematic  synthesis  concepts  consists  of 
devices  that  can  be  described  as  networks  of  lumped-parameter  idealized  elements, 
and  whose  behavior  can  be  specified  by  a  relationship  between  a  single  input  quantity 
and  a  single  output  quantity.  I  call  this  domain  SISO  dynamic  systems  or  just 
dynamic  systems.  Examples  of  devices  in  this  domain  include  pressure  gages,  signal 
filters,  speedometers,  pneumatic  cylinders,  and  accelerometers. 

The  lumped-parameter  elements  used  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  are  ideal¬ 
ized  generalized  resistances,  capacitances,  inertances,  as  well  as  transformers  and  gy- 
rators.  These  elements  have  instances  in  the  fluid-mechanical,  translational-mechanical, 
rotational-mechanical  and  electrical  media.  For  example,  in  the  electrical  medium 
the  elements  are  idealized  resistors,  capacitors  and  inductors.  In  the  translational- 
mechanical  medium  the  elements  are  idealized  dampers,  springs  and  masses.  In  the 
rotational- mechanical  medium  the  elements  are  idealized  rotary  dampers,  torsional 
springs,  and  rotary  inertias.  And  in  the  fluid-mechanical  medium  the  elements  are 
idealized  fluid  resistances,  fluid  capacitances,  and  fluid  inertances.  In  addition  to 
these  elements  there  are  elements  that  can  transform  quantities  in  one  medium  to 
quantities  in  another  medium-  like  idealized  motors,  piston-cylinders,  or  racks-and- 
pinions.  This  domain  can  be  thought  of  as  a  kind  of  generalized  analog  circuit  do¬ 
main  in  that  the  elements  impose  constraints  on  generalized  effort  and  flow  variables 
(corresponding  to  voltage  and  current)  and  their  interconnections  obey  generalized 
Kirchoff’s  laws. 

I  chose  this  domain  for  three  reasons; 

1.  There  already  exists  a  well-defined  schematic  language  for  describing  devices 
in  this  domain. 


2.  The  domain  is  of  engineering  interest  and  importance. 


28 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


3.  The  domain  fits  well  with  the  second  part  of  the  global  design  problem  ad¬ 
dressed  by  this  document:  generating  efficient  physical  descriptions  from  schematic 
descriptions  (Chapter  4). 

3.2.2  Example  Problems  and  Solutions 

Figure  3.1  shows  several  schematic  synthesis  problems  in  the  dynamic  systems  do¬ 
main  along  with  a  sketch  version  of  example  solutions.  The  figure  is  intended  to  give 
a  rough  sense  of  what  this  chapter  is  about  and  of  the  kinds  of  problems  my  tech¬ 
nique  addresses.  The  first  problem  is  the  design  of  a  pressure  gage.  The  solution  is 
to  connect  the  pressure  source  and  output  spring  with  a  piston-cylinder.  The  second 
problem  is  to  design  a  device  to  produce  a  voltage  on  a  resistor  that  is  proportional  to 
an  input  velocity.  The  solution  is  to  use  a  rack  and  pinion  connected  to  a  generator. 
The  third  problem  is  to  produce  a  pressure  in  a  fluid  capacitance  that  is  proportional 
to  an  input  angular  velocity.  The  solution  is  to  connect  the  input  through  a  rotary 
damper  to  a  rack  and  pinion.  The  rack  is  then  attached  to  a  piston-cylinder  con¬ 
nected  to  the  capacitance.  The  final  problem  is  to  convert  a  voltage  to  an  angular 
deflection.  The  solution  is  to  connect  the  voltage  source  with  a  series  resistor  to  a 
motor  that  is  attached  to  the  output.  The  output  is  also  connected  to  ground  with 
a  torsion  spring. 


3.2.3  Representing  Schematic  Descriptions 

I  use  hondgraphs  as  a  schematic  description  language.  The  rest  of  this  chapter  relies 
heavily  on  the  syntax  and  notation  associated  with  this  representation. 

Bondgraphs 


For  the  dynamic  systems  domain,  bondgraphs  provide  a  useful  schematic  language 
for  representing  designs.  Bondgraphs  are  a  modeling  and  analysis  tool  invented  by 


S.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION 


velocity  to  volte 


Figure  3.1;  Example  SISO  dynamic  systems  problems  and  solutions. 


30 


Chapter  3:  A  Srhematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


Figure  3.2:  Example  Bondgraphs 

Paynter  [PaynterGl].  The  following  section  is  a  cursory  description  of  the  bond- 
graph  language;  a  much  more  detailed  treatment  of  bondgraphs  is  in  [Rosenberg83]. 
Bondgraphs  are  a  formal  language  for  describing  the  exchange  of  energy  in  systems 
composed  of  lumped-parameter  elements.  A  bondgraph  conveys  the  information 
contained  in  a  block  diagram,  a  signal  flow  graph  or  a  linear  graph  with  a  single 
uniform  syntax  for  systems  in  the  electrical,  translational-mechanical,  rotational- 
mechanical,  and  fluid-mechanical  media.  Figure  3.2  shows  three  systems  described 
with  sketches  and  with  bondgraphs.  Corresponding  elements  share  the  same  labels. 
The  bondgraph  notation  is  shown  in  figure  3.3. 


3.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION 


31 


Bondgraph  definitions 

Bondgraphs  are  constructed  &om  ports  and  bonds,  which  are  the  vertices  and  edges 
of  a  graph  structure.  There  are  three  kinds  of  ports:  1-ports,  2-ports  and  n-ports. 
There  is  one  kind  of  bond.  Our  bondgraph  notation  is  specified  in  figure  3.3. 

A  bond  is  a  representation  of  a  path  for  power  flow.  In  my  use  of  bondgraphs, 
associated  with  each  bond  is  an  effort  variable  and  a  flow  variable.  In  the  electrical 
medium,  the  effort  is  voltage  and  the  flow  is  current.  In  the  translational-mechanical 
medium  the  effort  is  force  and  the  flow  is  velocity.  In  the  rotational-mechanical 
medium  the  effort  is  torque  and  the  flow  is  angular  velocity.  In  the  fluid- mechanical 
medium  the  effort  is  pressure  and  the  flow  is  volumetric  flowrate.  The  product  of 
these  two  variables  is  the  power  associated  with  the  bond.  A  bond  between  two  ports 
indicates  an  exchange  of  power  between  the  two  ports. 

A  1-port  represents  the  lumped-parameter  elements.  There  are  four  basic  types 
of  1-ports;  sources,  generalized  inertances,  generalized  capacitances,  and  generalized 
resistances.  Each  of  these  types  of  one-ports  exists  in  each  of  the  media.  Sources 
are  used  to  describe  inputs  that  specify  an  effort  or  a  flow.  For  example,  voltage 
sources  are  described  as  sources  of  effort  in  the  electrical  medium  (SE*E),  and  fluid 
flow  sources  are  described  as  sources  of  flow  in  the  fluid  medium  (SF*F).  The  other 
1-ports  constrain  the  relationship  between  the  effort  and  flow  on  the  bond  associated 
with  the  1-port.  For  example,  an  electrical  resistance  constrains  the  voltage  and 
current  on  a  bond  to  be  related  by  the  resistance  parameter  (Ohm’s  law).  Similarly, 
a  mass  constrains  the  derivative  of  the  velocity  on  the  mass  to  be  related  to  the  force 
on  the  mass  by  the  mass  parameter  (Newton’s  law).  This  constraint  between  the 
effort  and  flow  on  a  1-port  is  called  the  l-port  constitutive  law. 

2-ports  represent  elements  that  transform  quantities  in  one  medium  to  quantities 
in  another  medium.  There  are  two  types  of  2-ports:  gyrators  and  transformers. 
Transformers  convert  effort  in  one  medium  to  effort  in  another  medium,  and  flow  in 


32 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


BONDGRAPH 

ELEMENTS  SYMBOL 


l-porta 


Voltage 

Current 

Force 

2  Velocity 
u 

3  Torque 

o 

"  Ang.  velocity 
Pressure 
Flow 


SE*E 

SF*E 

SE*T 

SF*T 

SE*R 

SF*B 

SE*F 

SF*F 


(SE*E=  source  of  effort 
in  electrical  medium) 


inductor 

capacitor 

resistor 

mass 

*  spring 

g  damper 

^  rotary  inertia 

^  rotary  spring 

g  rotary  damper 

^  fluid  inertance 

fluid  capacitor 
fluid  resistance 


I*E - 

C*E - 

(I*E=  inertance  in 

R*E - 

electrical  medium) 

1*T - 

C‘T - 

R*T - 

I*R - 

C*R - 

R*R - 

I*F - 

C*F - 

R»F - 


2-ports 

transformer 

- TF  — 

gyrator 

- GY  — 

n-ports 

sero  junction 

-  —  ■  Q  — 

one  junction  1 

.\ 


Figure  3.3:  Bondgraph  notation 


3.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION 


33 


one  medium  to  flow  in  another  medium.  Gyrators  convert  effort  in  one  medium  to 
flow  in  another  medium,  and  flow  in  one  medium  to  effort  in  another  medium.  A 
motor  is  an  example  of  a  system  that  approximates  a  gyrator  (torque  is  related  to 
current;  angiilar  velocity  to  voltage),  a  rack  and  pinion  is  an  example  of  a  system  that 
approximates  a  transformer  (torque  is  related  to  force;  angular  velocity  to  velocity). 

N-ports  represent  the  junctions  of  bonds.  There  are  two  types  of  n-ports:  one- 
junctions  and  zero-junctions.  One-junctions  represent  junctions  of  bonds  that  all 
share  a  common  flow,  and  whose  efforts  sum  to  zero.  Zero-junctions  represent  junc¬ 
tions  of  bonds  that  all  share  a  common  effort,  and  whose  flows  sum  to  zero.  (The 
choice  of  names  for  these  junctions  is  an  unfortunate  historical  convention).  These 
two  types  of  n-ports  represent  the  generalized  version  of  the  constraints  imposed  by 
Kirchoff’s  current  and  voltage  laws  for  electrical  circuits. 

Bondgraphs  can  be  composed  by  connecting  smaller  chunks  of  bondgraph  with 
bonds  between  n-ports.  So  a  chunk  of  bondgraph  consisting  of  a  voltage  source 
bonded  to  a  zero-junction  can  be  connected  to  a  resistor  bonded  to  a  one-junction 
by  establishing  a  bond  between  the  zero-junction  and  the  one-junction.  The  induc¬ 
tive  definition  of  a  bondgraph  is  as  follows.  A  1-port  connected  to  an  n-port  is  a 
bondgraph.  A  2-port  connected  to  an  n-port  at  each  of  its  ports  is  a  bondgraph. 
Two  bondgraphs  connected  by  bonds  between  n-ports  form  a  bondgraph. 

Now  that  the  bondgraph  language  is  fully  defined,  the  notation  in  figure  3.2 
should  be  clear.  The  pressure  source,  the  fluid  resistance,  and  the  piston-cylinder 
share  the  same  flow  (fluid  flowrate)  and  so  are  attached  to  the  same  1-junction.  The 
piston  and  the  spring  share  the  same  effort  (the  force  across  the  spring  is  the  same 
as  the  force  on  the  piston)  and  so  are  attached  to  the  same  0-junction.  The  mass, 
damper,  and  the  other  spring  all  share  the  same  flow  (velocity)  and  so  are  attached 
to  the  same  1-junction. 


34 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


3.2.4  Deriving  Behavior  From  Schematic  Descriptions 

In  order  to  evaluate  a  schematic  description  with  respect  to  a  design  specification,  a 
design  system  must  be  able  to  derive  behavior  from  schematic  descriptions.  In  this 
domain,  behavior  consists  of  a  nominal  characterization  of  the  equations  of  motion 
for  the  system.  Deriving  this  behavior  from  a  bondgraph  involves  two  steps:  1) 
derive  the  equations  of  motion,  and  2)  characterize  the  equations  in  terms  of  their 
global  properties. 

Deriving  equations  of  motion 

The  derivation  of  equations  from  bondgraphs  is  straightforward,  and  consists  of  three 
steps. 

1.  Impose  constraints  from  generalized  Kirchoff’s  laws.  Assign  a  unique  effort 
variable  to  each  zero- junction  and  assign  a  unique  flow  variable  to  each  of  the 
bonds  on  the  junction.  Assign  a  unique  flow  variable  to  each  one-junction  and 
assign  a  unique  effort  variable  to  each  of  the  bonds  on  the  junction.  Establish 
equations  that  state  that  the  flow  variables  on  a  zero-junction  sum  to  zero, 
and  that  the  effort  variables  on  a  one-junction  sum  to  zero.  (Writing  these 
equations  requires  the  assignment  of  an  arbitrary  direction  to  the  variables  on 
each  bond.) 

2.  Impose  constraints  from  1-port  constitutive  laws.  For  each  1-port  (capacitance, 
resistance,  inertance,  or  source)  establish  the  appropriate  constraint  between 
effort  and  flow  variables  on  the  1-port  bond. 

3.  Solve  the  equations.  Given  the  equations  generated  in  steps  one  and  two,  elim¬ 
inate  all  of  the  effort  and  flow  variables  except  for  the  variables  corresponding 
to  the  desired  input  variable  and  the  desired  output  variable. 


S.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION 


35 


The  result  of  this  procedure  is  a  differential  equation  relating  the  input  variable 
and  its  derivatives  to  the  output  variable  and  its  derivatives. 

Characterizing  the  equations 

The  next  step  in  deriving  the  behavior  of  the  bondgraph  is  to  characterize  its  equa¬ 
tions  of  motion.  Based  on  an  idea  from  control  theory  [OgataTO],  I  have  developed 
a  characterization  technique  aimed  at  determining  the  nominal  relationship  between 
the  input  quantity  and  output  quantity.  The  procedure  for  characterizing  the  equa¬ 
tions  is  as  follows: 

Given  a  differential  equation  consisting  of  sums  of  derivatives  of  the  input  and 
output  quantities  (with  constant  factors): 

1.  Rearrange  the  equation  so  that  the  terms  consisting  of  derivatives  of  the  input 
are  on  the  righthand  side  (RHS),  and  the  terms  consisting  of  derivatives  of  the 
output  are  on  the  lefthand  side  (LHS). 

2.  Perform  a  LaPlace  transformation  on  the  expression  leaving  an  equation  be¬ 

tween  polynomials  in  the  LaPlace  operator,  s,  and  the  input  and  output  quan¬ 
tity.  (In  the  case  of  equations  of  this  form,  the  LaPlace  transform  is  performed 
by  simply  replacing  a”  for  Multiply  both  sides  of  the  equation  by 

s  raised  to  some  power  to  eliminate  any  s  terms  in  the  denominators  of  any 
fractions.  Factor  out  as  many  a’s  as  possible  from  both  sides  of  the  equation. 
If  an  s  term  can  be  factored  out  of  both  sides  of  the  equation,  simplify  the 
equation  by  dividing  both  sides  by  the  lower-order  of  the  two  factored-out  s 
terms. 

3.  The  order  of  the  remaining  factored  out  s  term  is  called  the  type  number  of  the 
system.  If  the  a  term  is  on  the  RHS,  then  the  type  number  is  positive.  If  the 
a  term  is  on  the  LHS,  then  the  type  number  is  negative. 


36 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


As  an  example  consider  the  following  equation  between  an  input  pressure  and  an 
output  velocity  (corresponding  to  piston-cylinder  connected  to  a  mass,  a  spring  and 
a  damper): 


+  biV  +  kV  = 


Performing  the  LaPlace  transform  leaves: 

mVs^  +  bVs  +  kV  =  APs 

Since  there  is  one  s  that  can  be  factored  out  of  the  RHS,  the  system  has  a 
type  number  of  1,  meaning  that  the  input  pressure  changes  with  the  integral  of 
the  output  velocity  (position).  The  intuition  behind  this  characterization  is  that  the 
type  number  of  the  equations  specifies  which  integrals  or  derivatives  of  the  input  and 
output  quantity  are  nominally  related.  For  example  a  system  with  an  effort  input 
and  a  flow  output  that  has  a  type  number  of  1  would  produce  a  flow  proportional  to 
the  derivative  of  the  effort,  or  the  integral  of  flow  (position,  angle,  charge  or  volume) 
proportional  to  the  effort.  The  complete  equations  are  important  in  refining  the 
particular  details  of  a  design,  and  when  choosing  design  parameters,  but  only  this 
type  number  specification  is  important  in  getting  the  gross  relation  between  input 
and  output  quantities  right.  One  important  property  of  this  derivation  procedure  of 
behavior  from  bondgraphs  is  that  it  is  algorithmic  and  can  be  automated. 

3.2.5  Specifying  a  Problem 

A  schematic  synthesis  problem  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  is  specified  by  a 
relationship  between  an  input  quantity  and  an  output  quantity.  This  specification 


S.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION 


87 


includes  three  parts:  1)  specification  of  the  variables  of  interest,  2)  specification  of  a 
relationship  between  variables,  and  3)  specification  of  the  input  and  output  dynamic 
model. 

1.  The  specihcation  of  the  variables  of  interest  simply  involves  identifying  either 
an  effort  or  flow  variable  in  the  desired  medium.  For  example,  if  a  voltmeter 
is  desired,  the  input  is  a  voltage  (or  effort  in  the  electrical  medium)  and  the 
output  is  perhaps  a  velocity  (flow  in  the  translational-mechanical  medium). 
Note  that  the  input  and  output  variables  must  be  efforts  or  flows.  Derivatives 
and  integrals  of  these  efforts  or  flows  are  specified  when  the  relationship  between 
variables  is  specified. 

2.  Specifying  a  relationship  between  variables  requires  the  identification  of  the  ap¬ 
propriate  derivative  or  integral  desired  of  the  input  and  output  variables.  For 
example  if  I  want  a  displacement  in  response  to  a  voltage,  I  specify  that  the 
nominal  relationship  between  the  voltage  and  velocity  will  be  a  first  deriva¬ 
tive  (ie.  velocity  will  correspond  to  change  in  voltage,  so  displacement  will 
correspond  to  voltage).  If  I  want  a  displacement  proportional  to  voltage  rate- 
of-change,  then  I  specify  that  the  output  velocity  will  be  nominally  related  to 
the  second  derivative  of  the  input  voltage.  This  specification  is  represented  as 
a  type  number.  For  example,  the  first  derivative  case  is  type  1,  and  the  second 
derivative  case  is  type  2.  The  problem  specification  can  only  include  nominal, 
steady-state  behavior  of  the  device.  That  is,  the  dynamic  response  of  the  de¬ 
vice  is  not  part  of  the  specification.  The  assumption  is  that  in  pre-parametric 
design,  engineers  first  want  to  get  the  nominal  behavior  right,  and  will  then 
optimize  parameters  to  get  a  particular  frequency  response. 

3.  The  third  part  of  the  specification  is  the  specification  of  the  dynamic  model 
of  the  input  and  output.  If  for  example,  I  want  to  design  a  voltmeter  that 


38 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


measures  the  voltage  of  a  source  that  is  unregulated  or  is  unable  to  provide 
very  much  power,  I  will  specify  the  input  as  consisting  of  an  idealized  voltage 
source  (one  that  can  provide  an  arbitrary  amount  of  power)  in  series  with  a 
resistance.  This  is  a  good  model  of  a  battery.  And  if  my  voltmeter  must 
actuate  a  spring-loaded  indicator,  I  would  specify  the  output  flow  as  acting  on 
a  translation-mechanical  compliance  (a  spring). 

In  summary,  a  specification  consists  of  an  effort  or  flow  variable  in  a  selected 
medium,  an  identification  of  the  derivative  or  integral  relation  of  interest  (indicated 
with  a  type  number),  and  a  specification  of  a  lumped-parameter  model  of  the  in¬ 
put  and  output.  These  three  components  of  the  specification  are  translated  in  the 
bondgraph  language  as  the  identification  of  either  a  one-junction  or  a  zero-junction 
as  the  input  and  output  junction;  and  bondgraph  chunks  associated  with  the  input 
and  output  junction  that  model  the  input  and  output  behavior. 

Consider  the  following  complete  specification.  In  designing  an  aircraft  instrument 
that  must  actuate  a  spring-loaded  valve  with  a  displacement  proportional  to  rate-of- 
change  in  air  pressure,  I  specify  the  following  (shown  in  figure  3.4): 

1.  The  Input  port  is  a  zero-junction  in  the  fluid-mechanical  medium.  The  output 
port  is  a  one-junction  in  the  translational-mechanical  medium  (corresponding 
respectively  to  the  air  pressure  and  the  velocity  of  the  valve). 

2.  The  relationship  between  output  velocity  and  input  pressure  should  be  one  of 
second  derivative-  yielding  the  desired  relationship  between  displacement  and 
rate-of-pressure,  and  so  would  be  specified  as  a  type  2  system. 

3.  The  input  bondgraph  chunk  is  a  pressure-source  attached  to  the  input  zero- 
junction,  followed  by  a  fluid  resistance  attached  to  a  one-junction.  The  output 
bondgraph  chunk  is  a  translational-mechanical  compliance  directly  attached  to 
the  output  one-junction. 


Figure  3.4:  Example  schematic  synthesis  problem  specification  and  one  solution. 


40 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


The  synthesis  problem  is  to  now  find  a  bondgraph  that  will  behave  as  specified. 
A  satisfactory  solution  would  be  the  bondgraph  shown  at  the  bottom  of  figure  3.4. 


3.3  SOLUTION  TECHNIQUE 


The  solution  to  the  schematic  synthesis  problem  is  based  on  the  following  strategy; 

1.  Generate  a  set  of  candidate  schematic  descriptions  from  which  all  possible 
solutions  can  be  obtained  through  augmentations  to  the  description. 

2.  Derive  and  classify  the  behavior  of  the  candidate  descriptions. 

3.  Based  on  the  behavior  of  the  candidate  descriptions,  the  desired  behavior,  and 
domain  knowledge,  modify  the  candidates  to  meet  the  specifications. 

The  following  three  subsections  correspond  to  these  three  problem  solving  steps. 
There  are  several  possible  procedures  that  could  be  used  that  are  based  on  different 
orderings  of  the  ideas  in  these  three  steps.  I  chose  the  division  of  the  procedure  into 
these  steps  and  this  ordering  of  the  steps  for  clarity  of  presentation. 

3.3.1  Generating  Candidate  Designs 

Part  of  the  input  to  the  schematic  synthesis  problem  is  two  bondgraph  chunks  cor¬ 
responding  to  the  input  and  output  environment  of  the  device.  The  procedure  for 
generating  a  set  of  candidate  designs  is  based  on  the  observation  that  any  schematic 
description  that  performs  a  transformation  from  a  quantity  in  the  input  graph  chunk 
to  a  quantity  in  the  output  graph  chunk  must  contain  either  a  bond  between  the  two 
graph  chunks  or  a  sequence  of  idealized  transforming  elements  (2-ports)  that  connects 
the  two  chunks.  I  call  this  sequence  a  power  spine. 


S.S:  SOLUTION  TECHNIQUE 


41 


Concept  of  a  power  spine 

A  bondgraph  with  a  non-trivial  relationship  between  a  quantity  associated  with  one 
n-port  and  a  quantity  associated  with  another  n-port  must  have  some  sort  of  power 
connection  between  the  two  n-ports.  In  order  to  create  a  power  connection  between 
two  n-ports  there  must  be  a  minimum  of  either  a  bond  between  the  n-ports  (if  the 
n-ports  are  of  the  same  medium)  or  a  sequence  of  2-ports  between  the  n-ports  (if 
the  n-ports  are  of  different  media).  Any  device  that  meets  the  design  specifications 
must  be  derivable  from  augmentations  to  this  connection  between  the  n-ports. 

Connecting  input  to  output 

The  synthesis  strategy  for  generating  a  candidate  design  is  to  generate  a  set  of 
schematic  descriptions  consisting  of  the  input  and  output  graph  chunks  connected 
by  a  power  spine.  These  candidate  descriptions  are  generated  exhaustively  subject 
to  the  constraint  that  the  number  of  intermediate  inter-medium  transformations  be 
small  (<  3).  The  size  limitation  is  a  constraint  imposed  by  engineering  practice — 
because  of  cost  and  reliability,  it  rarely  is  a  wise  design  strategy  to  use  more  than 
three  media  in  a  SISO  dynamic  system. 

The  most  important  property  of  the  candidate  designs  generated  by  constructing 
the  power  spine  is  that  it  is  minimal.  Minimality  in  this  context  means  that  any 
design,  containing  fewer  than  three  inter- medium  transformations,  that  meets  the 
design  specification  must  be  derivable  through  the  addition  of  bondgraph  elements 
to  one  of  the  candidate  designs. 

3.3.2  Classifying  Behavior 

Given  a  minimal  schematic  description  that  will  provide  a  relationship  between  input 
and  output,  the  next  step  is  to  classify  this  initial  description.  It  is  possible  that  the 
candidate  designs  meet  the  specifications,  it  is  also  possible  that  there  is  a  mismatch 


42 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


between  the  specified  behavior  and  the  actual  behavior  of  the  candidate  devices, 
requiring  some  modification  to  the  initial  designs.  The  degree  of  agreement  between 
the  behavior  of  the  candidate  descriptions  and  the  specifications  is  determined  by 
first  deriving  the  equations  of  motion  for  the  system  and  then  categorizing  these 
equations  according  to  type  number.  If  the  type  number  of  the  candidate  matches 
the  type  number  of  the  specification,  then  coincidentally  the  candidates  meet  the 
design  specifications,  and  the  synthesis  problem  is  solved.  More  likely,  a  modification 
to  the  design  is  required. 

At  this  point  the  synthesis  problem  can  also  be  assessed  as  being  impossible. 
Since  increasing  the  type  number  of  a  system  requires  the  addition  of  elements  and 
decreasing  the  type  number  of  a  system  requires  the  removal  of  elements,  it  is  not 
possible  to  decrease  the  type  number  of  a  candidate  design.  This  is  because  there 
are  no  elements  to  remove  from  a  candidate  design.  The  input  and  output  graph 
chunks  can  not  be  modified  since  they  are  part  of  the  problem  specification;  and  no 
elements  can  be  removed  from  the  power  spine  since  the  spine  is  a  minimal  connection 
between  the  input  and  output  graph  chunks  (assuming  a  given  set  of  inter-medium 
transformations).  Therefore,  if  the  specification  of  the  design  calls  for  a  type  number 
that  is  less  than  that  of  the  candidate  design,  the  synthesis  problem  has  no  solution. 


3.3.3  Modifying  Candidate  Schematic  Descriptions 

The  final  step  is  to  modify  a  candidate  design  that  does  not  exhibit  the  specified 
behavior.  This  proc.^ss  involves  four  steps:  1)  transform  the  candidate  design  to  a 
compact  description;  2)  based  on  explicit  domain  knowledge,  derive  a  set  of  modifica¬ 
tions;  3)  perform  the  modifications  on  the  compact  design;  4)  reverse  the  compacting 
transformation.  The  rest  of  this  subsection  is  divided  into  parts  corresponding  to 
these  steps.  I  describe  the  steps  at  an  intuitive  level  and  then  give  a  procedure  for 
carrying  them  out. 


S.  S:  SOL  UTION  TECHNIQ  UE 


43 


Transform  the  candidate  design  to  a  compact  description 

The  key  concept  that  allows  for  efRcient  modification  of  faulty  designs  is  the  use  of  a 
compact  representation  that  highlights  only  the  features  of  the  schematic  description 
that  contribute  directly  to  its  nominal  behavior.  The  transformation  of  a  bondgraph 
to  its  compact  representation  consists  of  first  converting  the  graph  to  a  generalized 
equivalent  graph  containing  only  an  effort  source,  and  then  applying  some  simplifying 
rewrite  rules.  The  rewrite  rules  eliminate  bondgraph  elements  that  do  not  influence 
the  type  number  of  the  graph.  The  procedure  for  performing  this  transformation  is 
as  follows: 

•  If  the  bondgraph  contains  a  flow  source,  replace  the  source  with  an  effort  source 
and  a  gyrator.  This  step  does  not  alter  the  behavior  of  the  graph  except  that 
the  equations  of  motion  will  be  in  terms  of  an  effort  input  instead  of  a  flow 
input.  This  transformation  allows  problems  involving  effort  or  flow  sources 
to  be  compressed  into  problems  involving  only  effort  sources,  minimizing  the 
amount  of  information  about  the  domain  necessary  to  perform  the  synthesis. 

•  The  next  step  converts  a  graph  in  terms  of  particular  media  (electrical,  fluid, 
etc.)  into  a  graph  containing  only  generalized  resistances,  capacitances,  and 
inertances.  Starting  from  the  input  port  of  the  graph,  traverse  the  graph  con¬ 
verting  1-ports  in  a  particular  medium  to  generalized  1-ports.  When  a  trans¬ 
former  is  encountered,  remove  it.  When  a  gyrator  is  encountered,  remove  it, 
converting  all  inertances  in  the  un-traversed  graph  to  capacitances  and  all  ca¬ 
pacitances  in  the  un-traversed  graph  to  inertances.  Additionally  in  the  gyrator 
case,  for  n-ports  in  the  un-traversed  graph,  exchange  one-junctions  for  zero- 
junctions  and  zero-junctions  for  one-junctions.  These  steps  yield  a  graph  with 
the  same  characteristics  as  the  starting  graph  but  remove  the  complexity  of 
dealing  with  variables  and  parameters  in  different  media.  Transformers  do  not 


44 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


influence  the  nominal  form  of  the  equations  of  motion  of  a  system  and  gyrators 
basically  influei.ce  the  equations  by  converting  effort  variables  to  flow  variables 
and  vice  versa.  By  swapping  zero-junctions  and  one-junctions;  and  inertances 
and  capacitances,  the  effects  of  a  gyrator  are  maintained  even  though  it  has 
been  removed.  Removing  transformers  and  gyrators  compresses  the  space  of 
possible  schematic  descriptions  about  which  the  design  system  must  reason. 

•  The  final  step  is  to  use  the  rewrite  rules  to  eliminate  bondgraph  elements  that 
do  not  influence  the  type  number  of  the  graph.  Use  any  of  the  rewrite  rules  in 
figure  3.5  that  apply  to  the  graph;  where  the  A’s  and  B’s  stand  for  any  1-port, 
and  the  X’s  and  Y’s  stand  for  any  n-port  such  that  ports  with  the  same  variable 
are  of  the  same  type.  Eliminating  these  non-essential  elements  completes  the 
transformation  of  the  schematic  description  into  a  compact  representation. 

An  example  of  a  situation  in  which  a  rewrite  rule  would  be  applied  is  an 
inertance  and  a  capacitance  were  both  attached  to  the  same  one-junction.  In 
this  case,  rule  1  would  be  used  (in  reverse)  to  expand  the  one-junction  into  two 
one-junctions  with  a  resistance  on  one  and  an  inertance  on  the  other.  Then  rule 
6  would  be  applied  to  eliminate  the  inertance.  These  operations  are  justified 
because  the  inertance  adds  only  transient  effects  to  the  behavior  of  the  system 
when  it  shares  the  same  flow  with  a  capacitance.  The  nominal  system  behavior 
will  be  the  same  without  the  inertance. 

Rewrite  rules  are  applied  based  on  a  match  between  the  condition  pattern  in 
the  rule  and  a  region  of  the  compact  graph.  The  rewrite  rules  must  only  be 
performed  on  the  regions  of  the  compact  graph  that  correspond  to  the  input 
and  output  bondgraph  chunks;  but  not  on  pieces  of  graph  that  span  elements 
from  both  the  input  and  the  output  chunk.  This  is  because  in  the  next  design 
step  modifications  to  the  graph  will  be  made  at  the  point  in  the  graph  where 
the  input  and  output  graph  chunks  meet.  Once  a  new  element  is  added  to 


I 


I 


S.S:  SOLUTION  TECHNIQUE 


45 


the  graph  as  part  of  a  design  operation,  the  pattern  on  which  a  rewrite  rule 
was  based  would  no  longer  be  valid.  Since  design  modifications  will  never 
be  made  to  the  input  and  output  graph  chunks  (they  are  part  of  the  design 
environment),  the  pattern  on  which  a  rewrite  rule  is  based  in  these  cases  will 
not  change. 

•  Retain  a  record  of  the  original  graph,  the  transformation  operations  that  were 
performed,  and  the  rewrite  rules  that  were  applied.  This  records  the  corre¬ 
spondence  between  the  compact  description  and  the  original  candidate  design, 
providing  information  necessary  for  the  reversal  of  the  compacting  transforma¬ 
tion. 

The  graph  now  consists  of  a  single  effort  source  and  a  network  of  idealized  iner- 
tances,  capacitances  and  resistances.  This  graph  is  a  minimal  characterization  of  the 
candidate  schematic  description.  A  "raph  in  this  minimal  characterization  represents 
an  infinite  set  of  graphs  that  have  the  same  type  number. 

Based  on  domain  knowledge,  generate  modifications 

The  power  of  the  compacting  transformation  in  this  domain  is  that  now  all  of  the 
domain  knowledge  can  be  expressed  concisely. 

1.  In  the  case  of  a  bondgraph  of  type  -1,  adding  a  1 — R  (a  new  one-junction  with 
an  attached  R)  along  the  power  spine  will  make  it  a  type  0.  The  only  possible 
case  in  which  a  graph  can  have  a  type  number  of  -1  is  when  a  1 — I  group  is 
attached  directly  to  an  effort  source.  One  instance  of  this  case  is  a  mass  with 
a  constant  force  applied  to  it.  The  mass  accelerates  at  a  constant  rate  and 
therefore  the  derivative  of  the  velocity  is  proportional  to  the  force  (type  -1). 
Adding  a  resistance  (a  translational  damper  in  this  case)  creates  a  situation  in 
which  the  velocity  is  proportional  to  the  force. 


Elimination 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


Figure  3.5:  Graph-simplification  rewrite  rules 


S.S:  SOLUTION  TECHNIQUE 


47 


2.  In  all  other  cases,  the  type  of  a  system  is  exactly  the  number  of  isolated  1 — C 
or  0 — I  groups  along  the  power  spine  of  the  graph.  An  explanation  of  isolation 
is  given  below. 


The  intuition  behind  an  isolated  1 — C  or  0 — I  is  as  follows.  Capacitances  and  in- 
ertances  are  the  only  bondgraph  elements  that  have  constitutive  relations  containing 
derivatives.  That  is,  the  relationship  between  the  effort  and  the  flow  on  a  capacitance 
or  an  inertance  is  an  equation  between  one  quantity  and  the  derivative  or  integral 
of  the  other  quantity.  This  is  in  contrast  to  resistances  and  sources  whose  relations 
contain  no  derivatives  or  integrals.  The  only  way  to  change  the  type  number  of  a 
system  is  to  add  elements  that  add  derivatives  to  the  equations  of  motion. 

There  are  certain  conditions  under  which  a  capacitance  or  an  inertance  can  influ¬ 
ence  the  behavior  of  the  graph.  Imagine  a  mass  connected  to  ground  by  a  spring.  If 
a  force  is  applied  to  the  mass,  after  some  dynamic  effects,  it  comes  to  rest  at  an  equi¬ 
librium  position  that  is  determined  by  the  stiffness  of  the  spring  and  the  magnitude 
of  the  applied  force.  In  this  case,  the  type  number  of  the  system  is  not  influenced  by 
the  mass.  The  deflection  of  a  different  system  containing  only  a  spring  with  the  same 
applied  force  would  be  the  same  as  for  the  system  with  the  spring  and  the  mass.  In 
this  example  the  mass  is  not  isolated,  but  the  capacitance  is  isolated.  I  call  a  capac¬ 
itance  or  an  inertance  that  does  influence  the  type  number  of  the  system  isolated. 
The  power  spine  of  a  graph  connects  the  input  n-port  to  the  output  n-port.  The 
spine  can  be  thought  of  as  a  string  of  bondgraph  groups  of  the  form  (i — A,  y — B, 
z — C)  where  x,  y  and  z  are  n-ports  and  A,  B,  and  C  are  1-ports.  The  bondgraph 
groups  1 — C  and  0 — I  cause  differentiation  of  the  input  if  they  are  isolated.  This 
differentiation  is  what  determines  the  type  number  of  a  system.  An  isolated  1 — C 
or  0 — I  group  is  one  whose  neighbors  (on  either  side  of  it  in  the  power  spine  string) 
are  isolating  groups. 


48 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


•  An  isolating  group  for  a  1 — C  is  a  0 — R,  a  0 — I,  or  a  0 — SE;  a  1 — I  or  1 — R 
occurring  as  the  last  1-port  in  the  bondgraph  sequence;  or  combinations  of  1 — 
R’s  or  1 — I’s  and  any  other  isolating  groups.  This  last  case —  a  combination  of 
1 — R’s  or  1 — I’s  and  any  isolating  group —  is  also  an  isolating  group  because  a 
1 — R  or  a  1 — I  next  to  1 — C  does  not  influence  the  type  number  of  a  graph. 

•  The  isolating  groups  for  a  0 — I  are  either  1 — R’s  or  1 — C’s;  0 — C’s  or  0 — R’s 
occurring  as  the  last  1-port  in  a  bondgraph  sequence;  or  combinations  of  0 — C’s 
or  0 — R’s  and  any  other  isolating  group. 

•  Each  of  these  isolation  cases  is  shown  in  flgure  3.6.  The  arrows  in  the  graph 
chunks  shown  in  the  figure  indicate  the  location  of  the  isolating  group  with 
respect  to  the  isolated  1 — C  or  0 — I. 

Given  this  statement  of  the  domain  knowledge,  the  derivation  of  modification 
operators  is  trivial.  Except  in  the  case  of  systems  of  type  -1,  the  difference  between 
the  type  number  of  the  candidate  design  and  the  type  number  of  the  specification 
is  equal  to  the  number  of  new  isolated  1 — C’s  or  0 — I’s  that  must  be  created  in  the 
graph.  If  one  isolated  group  must  be  created  then  an  isolated  0 — I  or  a  1 — C  could 
be  added,  or  a  non-isolated  0 — I  or  1 — C  already  in  the  graph  could  be  isolated  by 
adding  an  isolating  group. 

Carry  out  modifications  on  compact  description 

The  only  constraint  that  must  be  enforced  when  creating  new  isolated  groups  is  that 
new  bondgraph  elements  be  added  to  the  power  spine  only  between  the  compact 
descriptions  of  the  input  and  output  graph  chunks.  This  is  because  the  input  and 
output  graph  chunks  are  part  of  the  environment  of  the  design  and  can  not  be 
modified. 


S.S:  SOLUTION  TECHNIQUE 


40 


1  0  0  0 

I  Isolated  ^‘  |  |  | 

C  I  R  SE 


OR 


4r- 1  —  I 

1 - R 


0  11 
I  Isolated  by:  |  | 

I  C  R 


OR 


^ —  0 - C 

^0 - R 


OR 


Figure  3.6:  Individual  bondgraph  groups  that  isolate  1 — C’s  and  0 — I’s 


50 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


Reverse  compacting  transformation 

The  final  synthesis  step  is  to  reverse  the  compacting  transformation  on  the  modified 
design  in  order  to  arrive  at  instantiations  in  specific  media.  The  reverse  transforma¬ 
tion  is  straightforward: 

1.  Add  the  elements  removed  by  rewrite  operations. 

2.  Change  the  generalized  graph  back  to  specific  media  by  re-introducing  the 
transformers  and  gyrators. 

3.  Change  any  effort  source  and  gyrator  pairs  back  to  flow  sources. 

The  only  decision  that  must  be  made  in  this  process  is  where,  with  respect  to 
the  newly  added  1-ports,  the  gyrators  and  transformers  should  be  reintroduced.  The 
approach  I  have  taken  to  this  decision  is  to  create  a  version  of  the  design  for  each 
possible  location  of  the  1-ports  with  respect  to  the  gyrators  and  transformers.  There 
is  a  range  of  possible  positions  in  the  various  media  associated  with  the  graph  for  lo¬ 
cations  of  the  newly-added  1-ports.  Specifically,  the  1-ports  can  be  located  anywhere 
along  the  power  spine  of  the  graph  except  for  within  the  regions  associated  with  the 
input  and  output  of  the  device,  as  long  as  the  order  in  which  the  1-ports  occur  is 
maintained.  1 -ports  can  be  moved  across  transforming  2-ports  by  simply  changing 
the  medium  associated  with  the  1-port.  1-ports  can  be  moved  across  gyrating  2-ports 
by  changing  the  medium  associated  with  the  l-port  as  well  as  swapping  O’s  and  I’s 
and  C’s  and  I’s. 


3.4  EXAMPLES 


This  section  is  aimed  at  clarifying  the  synthesis  technique  by  presenting  some  con¬ 
crete  examples.  I  present  four  examples —  one  in  detail,  and  three  with  highlights 


S.4:  EXAMPLES 


51 


only.  An  important  point  is  that  these  examples  are  concerned  only  with  idealized 
behavior;  many  of  these  schematic  descriptions  would  be  very  difficult  to  realize 
physically.  In  my  problem  decomposition,  the  physical  implementation  issues  are 
faced  at  the  next  design  step. 

3.4.1  Current  Meter 

This  example  is  illustrated  by  figures  3.7  through  3.9.  Imagine  that  an  engineer 
wanted  to  design  a  device  that  would  take  as  an  input  a  current  from  an  electrical 
circuit  and  actuate  a  mass  with  a  displacement  proportional  to  the  current.  Perhaps 
the  device  is  to  serve  as  a  kind  of  governor  on  an  electric  motor  circuit —  an  increase 
in  motor  current  will  move  a  mass,  causing  an  increase  in  the  rotary  inertia  of  the 
system.  The  problem  can  be  stated  in  the  dynamic  systems  representation  as  follows; 
synthesize  a  graph  that  will  connect  graph  chunk  A  with  graph  chunk  B  (shown  in 
the  figures)  such  that  the  integral  of  the  flow  on  the  output  n-port  is  proportion  to 
the  flow  on  the  input  n-port  (ie.  a  system  with  a  type  number  of  1),  The  solution 
technique  proceeds  according  to  the  steps  developed  in  the  preceding  section. 

1.  Construct  the  power  spine.  In  this  case  the  power  spine  is  a  gyrator  and  a 
transformer.  The  bondgraph  elements  that  form  the  power  spine  are  between 
the  two  vertical  dotted  lines.  These  could  be  thought  of  as  a  motor  and  a 
rack-and-pinion  that  connect  the  electrical  graph  chunk  to  the  translational 
mechanical  graph  chunk.  Just  one  candidate  design  is  shown  although  there 
will  in  general  be  several  possible  power  spines  that  connect  the  input  graph 
chunk  to  the  output  graph  chunk  and  that  consist  of  fewer  than  three  gyrating 
or  transforming  elements. 

2.  Derive  the  behavior  of  the  candidate  design.  Deriving  the  equations  of  motion 
that  relate  the  output  flow  to  the  input  flow  reveals  that  the  candidate  design  is 


52 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


a  type  0  system —  the  output  flow  (a  velocity)  is  proportional  to  the  input  flow 
(a  current).  Since  the  candidate  design  does  not  meet  the  speciflcation,  the 
transforming  and  modification  steps  must  be  carried  out.  Fortunately  since  the 
type  number  of  the  system  must  be  increased  (from  0  to  1),  the  modification 
is  possible. 


3.  Transform  the  candidate  design  to  its  compact  representation.  Because  the 
input  to  the  candidate  design  is  a  flow  source,  the  first  step  is  to  replace  this 
source  with  an  effort  source  and  a  gyrator.  This  is  because  all  designs  are 
transformed  to  contain  only  an  effort  source.  The  next  step  is  to  remove  all 
of  the  gyrating  and  transforming  elements,  replacing  particular  instances  of 
inertances,  capacitances,  resistances  and  sources  with  generalized  inertances, 
capacitances,  resistances,  and  sources.  Note  that  removing  a  gyrator  requires 
swapping  one-junctions  and  zero- junctions  on  all  the  downstream  n-ports  and 
swapping  inertances  and  capacitances  on  downstream  1-ports.  The  final  com¬ 
pacting  step  is  to  execute  any  rewrite  rules  that  may  apply.  Rule  1  can  be  used 
to  separate  the  1 — I  and  1 — R  that  share  the  same  n-port.  Then  rule  6  can  be 
used  to  eliminate  the  1 — I. 


4.  Derive  appropriate  modifications.  The  design  is  specified  to  be  a  type  1 
system —  a  displacement  (integral  of  output  flow)  proportional  to  current  (the 
input  flow).  Since  the  candidate  design  is  of  type  0,  a  1 — C  group  or  a  0 — 1 
group  will  have  to  be  added  to  the  power  spine.  Observing  the  compacted 
design  reveals  that  a  1 — C  group  can  be  added  along  the  power  spine  and  will 
be  isolated  (will  have  a  SE — 0  and  a  1 — R  on  the  left  side,  and  a  1 — I  on  the 
right  side).  Adding  a  0 — I  will  however  require  adding  another  1 — R  to  its 
right,  since  it  would  otherwise  not  be  isolated  on  its  right  side. 


S.4:  EXAMPLES 


53 


5.  Carry  out  the  modifications.  Adding  the  two  derived  graph  chunks  creates  two 
new  compact  descriptions  of  designs  that  are  both  type  1. 

6.  Reverse  the  compacting  transformation.  The  next  step  is  to  reverse  the  steps 
executed  during  the  compacting  transformation  (only  design  A  is  shown).  First 
the  inertance  is  added  back  to  the  design,  reversing  rewrite  rules  6  and  1.  Next 
the  gyrators  and  transformers  are  re-introduced.  Finally  the  effort  source  and 
gyrator  are  replaced  by  a  flow  (current)  source. 

7.  Consider  other  locations  for  newly  added  l-ports  along  the  power  spine.  In 
the  previous  step,  1  chose  to  leave  the  added  1-port  to  the  left  of  the  gyrator 
and  transformer  in  the  power  spine.  The  final  step  is  to  instantiate  the  other 
possible  locations  for  this  1-port  along  the  power  spine.  It  can  go  between  the 
gyrator  and  transformer  or  on  the  right  side  of  the  transformer.  Note  that 
moving  a  0 — I  across  a  gyrator  changes  it  to  a  1 — C.  I  show  the  resulting 
configurations  using  mnemonic  icons  for  the  bondgraph  elements. 


3.4.2  Speedometer 

The  next  example  is  the  synthesis  of  a  speedometer-like  device.  The  input  is  a  flow 
source  in  the  rotational  mechanical  medium.  The  output  is  a  flow  on  a  rotational 
inertia.  The  desired  relationship  is  between  the  position  of  the  inertia  and  the  velocity 
at  the  input  (type  1  system). 

1.  The  first  step  is  to  generate  a  power  spine  and  to  derive  its  behavior.  In  this 
example,  the  power  spine  is  two  gyrators  (these  might  be  thought  of  as  back- 
to-back  motor-like  and  generator-like  elements).  The  behavior  of  the  candidate 
design  is  that  of  a  type  0  system. 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


C*E 


Input 

SF*E -  1 - 0  H 

Graph  chunk  A 

R*E 


!  Output 

I-  1 - I*T 

I 

Graph  chunk  B 


C-E  '0' 


construct  power  spine 


SF*E- 


1 

0  — 

OY  It  ^ 

I*T 


R*E 


derive  behavior 


Type  0  system  (output  velocity  proportional  to  input  current) 

43-  transform  to  compact  representation 


C*E 


SF/E -  GY -  1 -  0- 


R*E 


GY - TF  ■ 


—  1 - I*T 

(convert  to  effort  source) 


SE -  0 -  t 


1  ■  -  I  (remove  TFs  and  GYs) 


SE- 


I - j  (apply  rewrite  rules) 


R 


Figure  3.7:  Current  meter  synthesis 


S.4:  EXAMPLES 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


3.4:  EXAMPLES 


57 


2.  The  next  step  is  to  convert  the  design  to  its  compact  representation.  This 
involves  replacing  the  flow  source  with  an  effort  source  and  gyrator  and  then 
removing  the  gyrating  elements. 

3.  Then,  appropriate  modifications  are  derived.  A  1 — C  or  a  0 — I  must  be  added 
to  the  power  spine  to  change  the  behavior  from  type  0  to  type  1.  In  order  to 
isolate  the  1 — C  it  must  be  paired  with  a  0 — R.  The  0 — I  must  be  paired  with 
a  1 — R.  These  operations  are  then  executed,  yielding  two  modified  designs. 

4.  Reversing  the  transformations  is  the  next  step.  Finally,  the  added  l-ports  are 
moved  around  along  the  power  spine  to  create  all  of  the  possible  instantiations 
of  the  modified  designs.  Only  one  such  instantiation  is  shown  in  the  figure. 


3.4.3  Rate-of-climb  indicator 

I  used  the  rate-of-climb  indicator  example  in  the  last  section  to  illustrate  how  prob¬ 
lems  are  specified.  Recalling  the  scenario,  the  input  is  an  effort  (pressure)  source 
in  series  with  a  fluid  resistance,  the  output  is  a  flow  on  a  spring.  The  desired  rela¬ 
tionship  is  between  the  deflection  on  the  spring  (integral  of  the  flow)  and  the  rate  of 
pressure  change  on  the  input  (derivative  of  the  effort). 

1.  First  the  power  spine  is  generated.  In  this  case,  it  is  simply  a  transformer 
between  the  fluid  chunk  and  the  translational  mechanical  chunk  (a  piston- 
cylinder  like  element).  The  behavior  of  this  candidate  design  is  that  of  a  type 
1  system  (ie.  the  deflection  of  the  spring  is  proportional  to  pressure  not  rate- 
of-pressure). 

2.  Next  the  candidate  design  is  simplified  by  removing  the  transformer.  Note 
that  after  removing  the  transformer,  it  appears  as  if  rewrite  rule  4  could  be 
used  to  eliminate  the  resistance.  The  rewrite  rules  can  however  only  be  applied 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


Figure  3.10:  Speedometer  synthesis 


3.4:  EXAMPLES 


50 


to  the  initial  graph  chunks  and  not  across  the  power  spine.  This  is  because  I 

the  addition  of  elements  to  the  power  spine  would  invalidate  the  results  of  the 
rewrite  rules. 

3.  The  appropriate  modification  is  the  addition  of  a  1 — C  and  a  0 — R,  or  the  I 

addition  of  a  0 — I.  These  modifications  are  executed. 

4.  The  reverse  transformation  operations  are  made  and  the  added  1-ports  moved 
around  within  the  power  spine  to  generate  the  final  designs.  Only  one  design 
is  shown. 


3.4.4  Accelerometer 

I  used  the  accelerometer  example  as  the  motivating  scenario  in  the  introduction  to 
this  document.  This  subsection  shows  how  a  schematic  description  of  an  accelerom¬ 
eter  can  be  derived.  An  accelerometer  is  a  device  that  produces  a  displacement 
proportional  to  an  acceleration  of  the  device  reference  frame.  In  this  case,  the  input 
is  a  flow  (velocity)  source  and  the  output  is  a  flow  (velocity)  on  a  spring.  The  desired 
relationship  is  between  the  derivative  of  the  input  (acceleration)  and  the  integral  of 
the  output  (position).  This  constitutes  a  type  2  system. 

1.  The  first  step  is  to  generate  the  power  spine.  In  this  case  it  is  simply  a  bond 
between  the  input  and  output  chunks.  The  resulting  device  is  of  type  0.  (Since 
an  ideal  translational  mechanical  flow  source  can  specify  an  arbitrary  velocity 
independent  of  force,  the  spring  has  no  effect  on  the  input). 

2.  Transforming  the  candidate  design  is  trivial  in  this  case,  since  the  graph  con¬ 
tains  no  2-port  elements.  The  only  required  operation  is  replacing  the  flow 
source  with  a  generalized  effort  source. 


60 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


Figure  3.11:  Rate-of-climb  meter  example 


S.5:  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS 


61 


3.  In  order  to  create  two  isolated  1 — C  or  0 — I  groups,  the  only  modification  that 
is  required  is  either  to  add  a  0 — I  to  the  power  spine  or  to  add  a  1 — C  flanked 
on  both  sides  by  1 — R’s. 

4.  Reversing  the  transformation  simply  requires  converting  the  effort  source  back 
to  a  flow  source. 

3.5  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS 

This  chapter  has  presented  a  formal  solution  to  a  synthesis  problem  that  people  have 
traditionally  solved  in  an  ad  hoc,  heuristic  way.  Synthesizing  devices  in  this  domain 
is  simple  given  the  right  representation  and  abstractions.  This  section  analyzes  the 
success  of  the  technique,  explores  its  extension  within  the  dynamic  systems  domain 
and  to  other  domains,  outlines  some  lessons  to  be  learned  from  this  instance  of 
a  schematic  synthesis  problem  and  solution,  and  discusses  the  computer  program 
implementation  of  these  ideas. 

3.5.1  Utility  of  the  Technique 

When  I  began  thinking  about  the  SISO  dynamic  systems  synthesis  problem,  I  gave 
several  engineers  some  sample  problems  to  see  how  they  performed  the  task;  most 
of  them  found  ways  to  avoid  doing  the  exercise.  One  or  two  engineers  actually 
found  a  solution.  No  one  found  more  than  one  solution.  The  technique  I  have 
developed  provides  all  possible  solutions  (containing  fewer  than  three  inter- medium 
transformations)  to  a  specified  solution.  This  results  in  an  improvement  in  the  state 
of  the  art  in  this  area  of  synthesis.  Not  only  are  these  techniques  useful  for  computer 
programs  but  also  are  useful  for  pencil  and  paper  approaches.  The  results  of  this 
single  experience  suggest  that  design  in  general  will  benefit  from  formalizing  some 


62 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Prcblem  and  Solution 


S.5:  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS 


63 


domains  and  &om  finding  synthesis  techniques  in  those  domains.  In  many  ways 
human  engineers  have  been  successful  because  they  have  been  able  to  find  some 
solution  to  a  problem.  Synthesis  techniques  for  even  fairly  simple  engineering  tasks 
can  help  engineers  find  a  much  greater  number  of  feasible  solutions. 

3.5.2  Completeness  of  the  Technique 

My  schematic  synthesis  technique  is  in  a  trivial  sense  incomplete-  it  will  not  generate 
all  possible  designs  that  meet  the  problem  specifications.  The  incompleteness  results 
from  two  factors.  First,  there  are  an  infinity  of  designs  that  meet  the  specifications 
due  to  the  fact  that  a  pair  of  inter-medium  transforming  or  gyrating  elements  can 
always  be  added  to  a  design  to  create  a  new  design.  An  example  of  this  case  is  a 
back-to-back  motor-generator  pair  added  to  an  electrical  device.  Second,  elements 
that  do  not  change  the  nominal  behavior  of  a  design  can  always  be  added  to  a  design 
to  create  a  new  design.  An  example  of  the  second  case  is  the  addition  of  a  redundant 
capacitance  to  a  1-port  that  already  has  a  capacitive  element.  Because  of  this  situa¬ 
tion,  completeness  should  be  defined  with  respect  to  the  compact  representation  of 
the  design,  after  all  of  the  extraneous  elements  have  been  removed,  and  the  design 
has  been  converted  to  a  generalized  form  without  transformers  and  gyrators.  Un¬ 
der  these  conditions  the  technique  is  complete.  The  completeness  rests  on  the  fact 
that  the  type  number  of  a  system  is  determined  by  the  number  of  isolated  1 — C’s 
and  0 — I’s.  This  can  be  proven  by  the  following  argument.  A  positive  type  number 
indicates  the  number  of  times  the  input  quantity  has  been  differentiated.  There  are 
only  two  possible  ways  a  quantity  can  be  differentiated  in  this  domain.  Either  a 
capacitance  differentiates  an  effort  to  produce  a  flow,  or  an  inertance  differentiates 
a  flow  to  produce  an  effort.  Resistances  serve  to  convert  efforts  to  flows  and  vice 
versa.  In  my  compact  representation,  the  only  sources  are  effort  sources.  The  only 
way  to  differentiate  an  effort  source  is  to  connect  it  to  a  capacitance  (an  instance  of 


64 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


this  case  is  a  force  source  attached  to  a  spring)  or  to  connect  it  to  a  series  resistance 
(to  convert  the  effort  to  a  flow)  and  then  to  a  parallel  inertance  (to  differentiate  the 
flow  into  an  effort).  These  two  cases  correspond  to  single  isolated  capacitances  and 
inertances.  Since  the  power  spine  of  a  device  is  a  sequence  of  elements,  this  argument 
applies  to  an  arbitrary  number  of  differentiations.  For  each  additional  differentiation 
(increase  in  the  type  number)  an  isolated  capacitance  or  inertance  must  be  added. 
Because  the  synthesis  technique  produces  all  possible  ways  of  modifying  a  design  in 
order  to  increase  the  number  of  isolated  capacitances  and  inertances  in  the  graph,  it 
produces  a  complete  set  of  compact  designs. 

3.5.3  Why  the  Technique  Works 

My  solution  to  the  problem  of  schematic  synthesis  is  possible  because  of  some  prop¬ 
erties  of  the  domain  and  also  because  of  choices  that  I  made  in  approaching  the 
problem. 

The  right  schematic  representation 

Bondgraphs  are  a  good  representation  for  the  dynamic  systems  synthesis  problem. 
Bondgraphs  are  formal  and  they  make  the  right  features  of  the  design  explicit. 

Because  bondgraphs  are  a  formal  language  there  is  a  well-defined  way  of  compos¬ 
ing  descriptions  and  a  way  to  decide  if  a  description  is  well-formed.  These  properties 
are  a  necessary  but  not  sufficient  requirement  for  the  development  of  design  opera¬ 
tors.  The  ideas  of  isolated  capacitances  and  inertances,  and  the  compacting  trans¬ 
formation  operators  are  built  upon  this  formal  foundation.  In  the  case  of  the  SISO 
dynamic  systems  synthesis  problem,  I  did  not  have  to  develop  this  representation 
from  scratch,  but  instead  was  able  to  exploit  an  existing  representation  language. 

Bondgraphs  also  make  the  right  design  features  explicit  and  suppress  irrelevant 
details.  At  the  level  of  semantic  content,  bondgraphs  express  only  the  constituent 


[ 


S.5:  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS 


65 


lumped-parameter  elements  and  their  topology.  The  bondgraph  does  not  express 

any  physical  information.  Since  the  problem  is  to  generate  a  schematic  description, 

a  representation  that  excludes  all  physical  information  allows  the  synthesis  technique 

to  focus  on  relevant  information.  There  are  several  possible  purely  schematic  repre-  | 

sentations  in  the  SISO  dynamic  systems  domain.  Other  choices  are  circuit  diagrams 

or  block  diagrams.  The  key  advantage  of  the  bondgraph  is  that  it  converts  graphs 

with  loops  in  them  to  simple  sequences  of  elements.  This  is  possible  because  of  . 

the  zero-junction,  corresponding  to  an  explicit  identification  of  the  generalized  Kir- 

choff  voltage  junction;  and  because  of  the  one-junction,  corresponding  to  an  explicit 

identification  of  the  generalized  KirchofF  current  junction. 

f 

Power  spine 

One  source  of  power  in  the  schematic  synthesis  procedure  is  the  ability  to  generate 

I 

the  set  of  candidate  designs  from  which  all  possible  solutions  (containing  fewer  than 

three  inter-medium  transformations)  must  be  derivable.  Because  the  power  spine  is 

the  minimal  connection  possible  between  the  input  and  output  graph  chunks  (for  a 

particular  set  of  media)  and  because  any  graph  that  produces  a  relationship  between  1 

two  n-ports  must  have  a  connection  between  those  n-ports,  all  possible  graphs  that 

have  the  right  behavior  must  be  derivable  through  augmentations  to  the  power  spine. 

This  domain  property  allows  the  system  to  generate  designs  that  are  close  to  a  final 
solution —  all  that  remains  is  to  find  appropriate  modifications. 

Ability  to  abstractly  characterize  necessary  properties 

Because  of  the  ability  to  perform  a  compacting  transformation  that  preserves  the 
properties  of  a  graph  that  contribute  to  its  nominal  behavior,  an  infinite  set  of  graph 
instances  can  be  compressed  into  a  single  minimal  description.  This  compacting 
allows  the  design  system  to  reason  about  any  particular  design  by  reasoning  about 


66 


Chapter  S:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


a  minimal  description  of  that  design.  Without  the  ability  to  abstractly  characterize 
a  particular  design,  the  system  would  have  to  reason  about  millions  of  special  cases; 
with  the  ability  to  abstract,  the  entire  domain  knowledge  can  be  expressed  by  a  few 
brief  statements. 

3.5.4  Extensibility 

The  ideas  in  this  chapter  have  been  directed  at  a  very  specific  synthesis  problem. 
This  subsection  deals  with  the  problem  of  extending  the  ideas  within  the  dynamic 
systems  domain  and  to  other  domains. 

Extension  within  dynamic  systems  domain 

The  devices  that  can  be  synthesized  with  the  technique  described  in  this  chapter 
are  limited  in  several  ways:  they  are  single-input,  single-output;  there  is  no  feedback 
or  amplification;  and  they  can  not  be  specified  to  have  specific  dynamic  response 
characteristics.  Extension  of  the  solution  technique  to  erase  these  limitations  requires 
either  an  extension  of  the  representation  language,  an  extension  of  the  synthesis 
procedures  or  both. 

The  concepts  of  feedback  and  amplification  are  necessary  to  describe  many  devices 
like  controllers,  power  supplies  or  servo  systems.  In  order  to  describe  these  systems 
the  representation  language  must  be  extended  to  include  active  bonds  [Rosenberg83]. 
In  this  extended  bondgraph  language,  signal  flows  (having  negligible  power  flow) 
can  control  a  gain  on  an  active  bond.  This  extension  allows  for  the  description  of 
amplification  and  feedback.  The  language  remains  formal,  and  behavior  can  still 
be  derived  from  the  graphs.  The  complexity  of  the  problem  is  however  increased 
because  of  additional  primitive  elements. 

Using  this  extended  bondgraph  representation  would  also  require  extensions  to 
the  synthesis  procedures.  Specifically,  the  connection  property  of  the  domain  that 


S.5:  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS 


67 


leads  to  the  concept  of  a  power  spine  is  still  valid,  although  the  kinds  of  connections 
that  are  allowed  are  increased  to  include  signjJ-only  connections.  Under  these  con¬ 
ditions  the  synthesis  procedure  may  require  the  consideration  as  special  cases  each 
of  several  classes  of  devices —  those  with  feedback,  those  with  hidden  sources,  those 
without  any  signal  flows. 

If  the  problem  were  extended  to  address  multiple-input  multiple-output  systems, 
the  synthesis  procedure  would  become  more  complex.  The  power  spine  concept  no 
longer  is  as  strong  as  in  the  SISO  case.  There  are  now  many  possible  ways  for  the 
multiple  inputs  and  outputs  to  be  connected  together  other  than  a  single  sequence 
of  idealized  transforming  and  gyrating  elements.  Prabhu  [Prabhu88]  hais  explored 
some  of  the  issues  in  the  multiple  input  and  output  problem. 

The  problem  addressed  in  this  chapter  deals  only  with  the  nominal  behavior  of 
a  dynamic  system —  I  have  not  considered  dynamic  issues  like  bandwidth.  To  some 
extent  these  issues  can  be  addressed  by  optimizing  parameter  values  numerically.  In 
other  cases,  filtering  elements  or  damping  must  be  added  to  the  designs  to  achieve 
the  specific  numerical  specifications  desired.  The  synthesis  procedure  in  this  chapter 
is  however  a  necessary  first  step  towards  meeting  more  detailed  numerical  design 
specifications.  Any  design  that  meets  a  detailed  numerical  specification  must  also 
meet  the  specification  of  the  nominal  behavior  of  the  device.  So,  in  this  case  the 
work  in  this  chapter  is  directly  applicable  to  a  more  specific  synthesis  problem. 

Extension  to  other  domains 

The  three  major  segments  of  the  solution  to  the  dynamic  systems  synthesis  prob¬ 
lem  are:  development/selection  of  a  schematic  language,  a  procedure  for  generating 
candidate  designs,  and  a  procedure  for  categorizing  and  altering  designs  falling  into 
different  classes  of  behavior. 

The  particular  schematic  language  I  use  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  can  not 


68 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


be  extended  to  any  other  domain,  although  the  properties  of  bondgraphs  that  make 
them  a  good  choice  for  the  dynamic  systems  problem  can  be  used  as  guidelines  for 
selecting  schematic  languages  in  other  domains. 

The  power  spine  idea  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  has  incarnations  in  other 
domains  as  well.  In  the  domain  of  material  handling  systems  (ie.  design  of  conveyers) 
there  must  be  a  connection  between  input  and  output.  In  the  domain  of  engineering 
structures  (beams,  brackets,  supports,  struts)  there  must  be  a  connection  between 
input  and  output.  In  fact  in  the  structures  case,  perhaps  the  candidate  designs 
could  be  maximal  connections —  a  structure  that  occupies  all  of  the  possible  space 
between  the  input  and  output  points  of  the  structure.  Then,  any  valid  design  might 
be  derivable  from  material  removal  operations  on  this  candidate  design. 

The  classification  and  modification  procedures  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain 
are  problem  specific;  however,  the  general  idea  is  applicable  in  many  other  domains. 
Imagine  for  example,  a  synthesis  problem  in  the  shaft  and  bearing  system  domain.  A 
minimal  characterization  of  the  system  in  terms  of  adjacent  surfaces  could  be  derived 
in  order  to  compute  the  degrees  of  freedom  of  the  device,  or  to  determine  whether 
or  not  the  device  could  be  assembled. 

3.5.5  Lessons  from  the  Dynamic  Systems  Example 

I  picked  the  dynamic  systems  problem  as  a  tractable  first  step  towards  developing 
principles  for  computational  tools  for  conceptual  design.  I  hold  this  problem  and 
solution  up  as  an  instance  of  a  solution  to  a  schematic  synthesis  problem  that  has 
desirable  properties  and  that  can  lead  to  better  solutions  to  problems  in  other  do¬ 
mains.  The  following  items  explain  the  lessons  that  I  think  can  be  derived  from  this 
example. 

•  The  dynamic  systems  domain  is  carefully  bounded.  The  devices  are  single-input 
single-output,  there  are  no  hidden  sources  or  signal  flows,  and  specifications  are 


S.5:  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS 


69 


made  in  terms  of  nominal  behavior  not  numerical  properties  of  the  frequency 
response.  Careful  bounding  of  the  scope  of  a  problem  allows  for  meaningful 
analysis  of  the  solution  technique  and  provides  hope  of  tractability.  Bounding 
the  problem  is  an  important  first  step  in  any  domain. 

•  The  hondgraph  representation  is  a  formalism.  This  means  that  it  is  approach¬ 
able  with  known  analytical  tools  and  its  properties  can  be  well-understood. 
Such  representations  are  limited  in  their  expressiveness  but  also  have  well- 
defined  properties.  Finding  formalisms  for  problems  is  a  subgoal  of  developing 
powerful  solution  techniques. 

•  A  key  issue  in  any  design  problem  is  controlling  the  complexity  of  the  solution 
space.  In  the  dynamic  systems  domain,  the  primary  tool  for  controlling  com¬ 
plexity  is  to  compress  many  instances  of  schematic  descriptions  into  a  single 
abstract  characterization.  This  approach  is  valid  in  many  other  domains.  Com¬ 
pression  and  abstraction  should  be  one  of  the  primary  goals  in  the  development 
of  any  design  problem  solving  technique. 

3.5.6  Implementation 

I  have  written  a  computer  program  that  implements  a  solution  to  the  schematic 
synthesis  problem  described  in  this  chapter.  The  program  was  written  to  clarify 
the  thinking  involved  in  devising  a  solution  technique,  and  to  that  extent  was  quite 
useful.  This  subsection  explains  two  issues  associated  with  the  program:  its  deviation 
from  the  theory  presented  in  this  chapter,  and  an  explanation  of  one  of  the  program 
modules —  a  Macsyma-based  bondgraph  equation  derivation  program. 


70 


Chapter  3:  A  Schematic  Synthesis  Problem  and  Solution 


Deviation  from  theory 

Because  the  program  was  written  primarily  as  a  way  to  solidify  my  conceptual  think¬ 
ing  about  this  schematic  synthesis  problem,  it  evolved  over  several  iterations.  The 
final  version  of  the  program  does  not  exactly  match  the  solution  technique  presented 
in  this  chapter.  The  actual  program  deviates  from  the  theory  presented  in  this  chap¬ 
ter  in  one  major  way:  it  relies  on  a  set  of  debugging  rules  to  modify  the  candidate 
designs  rather  than  performing  the  compacting  transformation  and  looking  for  the 
appropriate  number  of  isolated  1 — C’s  or  O-'I’s.  An  example  debugging  operator  is: 
If  the  output  is  a  flow  variable,  the  input  is  a  flow  variable,  and  differentiation  is 
desired,  add  a  series  resistance  and  capacitance  to  ground  (a  0 — R  followed  by  a  1 — 
C).  These  rules  were  derived  by  analyzing  my  own  design  reasoning  while  debugging 
deficient  designs,  and  in  fact  correspond  to  the  same  operations  as  are  derived  by  the 
technique  presented  in  this  chapter.  The  debugging  rules  are  however  much  more 
complicated  than  the  procedure  using  the  concept  of  a  compact  representation  and 
isolated  inertances  and  capacitances.  It  was  not  until  I  began  exploring  the  com¬ 
pleteness  of  the  debugging  procedure  that  I  realized  that  there  was  a  more  compact 
way  of  characterizing  the  designs  and  that  the  domain  knowledge  could  be  expressed 
more  concisely. 

Equations  from  bondgraphs 

One  very  useful  byproduct  of  the  implementation  is  a  program  for  deriving  equa¬ 
tions  from  bondgraphs.  This  is  a  tedious  process  when  performed  manually.  Pre¬ 
viously,  two  programs  had  been  written  (Enport  and  Dart)  [Rosenberg83,  IIoodST] 
for  deriving  equations  from  bondgraphs,  but  in  each  case  the  numerical  values  for 
the  uondgraph  parameters  had  to  be  specified  and  the  equation  solving  was  per¬ 
formed  numerically.  1  was  able  to  exphiit  the  symbolic  mathematics  capabilities 
of  .MAC'SVS-MA  [,\Iacsyma86j  in  order  to  write  a  program  to  derive  the  equation.-^ 


71 


S.5:  DISCUSSION  AND  ANALYSIS _ 

symbolically.  This  process  has  not  been  previously  automated. 


Function  Sharing  to  Generate 
Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


Chapter  4 


Overview 

The  result  of  the  synthesis  techniques  in  Chapter  3  is  a  schematic  description  of  a 
design.  The  next  step  is  to  generate  an  efficient  physical  implementation.  A  modular 
physical  description  corresponding  to  the  schematic  description  can  be  generated 
by  plugging  in  a  structural  element  from  a  library  of  possibilities  for  each  idealized 
functional  element.  The  resulting  physical  description  is  overly  complex  and  contains 
too  many  elements.  The  function  sharing  procedure  described  in  this  chapter  is  one 
way  to  transform  this  modular  and  complex  physical  description  into  an  efficient 
physical  description. 

Function  sharing  in  mechanical  design  is  the  simultaneous  implementation  in  an 
artifact  of  several  functions  by  a  single  structural  element.  Consider  for  example  the 
difference  between  the  devices  shown  in  figure  4.1.  Although  the  two  are  functionally 
similar,  the  upper  device  is  much  more  efficient  because  each  structural  element  im¬ 
plements  several  functions.  This  chapter  describes  how  function  sharing  can  be  used 
in  a  computational  design  procedure  that  produces  efficient  designs  from  modular 


73 


74 


Chapter  4-‘  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


designs. 


4.1  INTRODUCTION  TO  FUNCTION 
SHARING 

4.1.1  The  Concept  Of  Function  Sharing 

In  synthesizing  a  design,  engineers  represent  an  artifact  in  terms  of  its  constituent 
functional  elements,  its  schematic  description.  Designers  must  also  represent  an  ar¬ 
tifact  in  terms  of  its  constituent  structural  elements,  its  physical  description.  In  the 
case  of  computational  design  systems,  these  representations  will  often  be  explicit  and 
distinct,  while  in  human  design  systems  the  representations  are  often  informal  and 
interleaved.  Given  a  physical  and  schematic  description  of  a  device,  there  will  be  a 
correspondence  between  elements  in  each.  Function  sharing  is  viewed  as  a  mapping 
from  more  than  one  element  in  a  schematic  description  to  a  single  element  in  a  phys¬ 
ical  description.  In  the  case  of  the  devices  shown  in  figure  4.1,  some  of  the  functional 
elements  in  a  possible  schematic  language  might  be  cutter,  actuator,  finger  interface, 
hearing,  and  key  ring  interface.  The  structural  elements  in  a  physical  language  might 
be  the  geometrical  descriptions  and  material  properties  of  each  separate  part. 

4.1.2  Function  Sharing  is  Important 

Function  sharing  is  important  for  three  reasons.  First,  designs  that  exhibit  function 
sharing  are  in  most  respects  better  designs  than  the  non-function-sharing  counter¬ 
part.  Second,  a  design  simplification  procedure  that  results  in  function  sharing  allows 
the  designer  to  think  in  a  modular,  decomposed  fashion,  with  the  option  of  subse¬ 
quently  processing  a  design  to  make  it  more  efficient.  Third,  function  sharing  is  one  of 
the  sources  of  novelty  or  interestingness  in  mechanical  design.  So,  an  understanding 


4.1:  INTRODUCTION  TO  FUNCTION  SHARING 


Figure  4.1:  Example  of  function  sharing 


76  Chapter  4:  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 

of  function  sharing  is  in  part  an  understanding  of  novelty. 

Function  sharing  as  a  desirable  design  attribute 

If  automobiles  were  designed  without  function  sharing  they  would  be  relatively  large, 
heavy,  expensive  and  unreliable.  But  because  elements  like  the  sheet-metal  body 
perform  many  functions  (electrical  ground,  structural  support,  aerodynamic  faring, 
weather  protection,  and  aesthetics  among  others)  automobiles  can  be  manufactured 
relatively  inexpensively  and  can  perform  relatively  well.  In  fact,  most  mass-produced 
devices  exhibit  function  sharing.  The  leads  on  integrated  circuit  packages  are  elec¬ 
trical  conductors,  thermal  conductors  and  attachment  points  for  the  circuit  board. 
The  structure  of  a  styrofoam  coffee  cup  holds  liquid,  insulates,  provides  a  graspable 
surface,  and  rests  stably  on  a  table. 

As  a  general  rule,  mass-produced  designs  that  exhibit  function  sharing  are  better 
than  those  that  do  not  exhibit  function  sharing.  Function  sharing  contributes  to 
design  quality  in  two  major  ways.  First,  designs  exhibiting  function  sharing  will  gen¬ 
erally  be  less  expensive  to  produce  than  designs  that  do  not  exhibit  function  sharing, 
as  a  result  of  fewer  parts,  easier  assembly  and  less  required  adjustment  and  main¬ 
tenance.  Second,  designs  that  share  function  generally  perform  better  than  those 
that  do  not,  resulting  from  decreased  size  and  weight.  On  the  other  hand,  function 
sharing  is  generally  a  poor  design  strategy  for  research  devices  and  prototypes  where 
debugging,  adjustment  and  diagnosis  are  very  important,  because  function  sharing 
often  causes  device  performance  parameters  to  be  coupled  in  complicated  ways  to 
device  physical  parameters.  This  coupling  makes  adjustments  and  diagnosis  difficult. 
While  fur.ction  sharing  may  be  an  important  design  strategy  for  a  ballpoint  pen  or 
an  electric  drill,  it  is  a  potentially  disadvantageous  strategy  for  a  steel  rolling  mill  or 
a  laboratory  instrument.  For  the  purposes  of  this  document,  I  assume  that  a  system 
that  can  generate  design  descriptions  that  exhibit  function  sharing  is  a  valuable  tool. 


4.1:  INTRODUCTION  TO  FUNCTION  SHARING 


77 


From  modular  designs  to  efficient  designs 

Designing  devices  at  the  schematic  description  level  is  easier  than  designing  at  the 
physical  level.  This  is  because  schematic  representation  languages  are  generally 
more  restrictive  than  physical  representation  languages.  This  restriction  focuses  the 
designer  on  a  small  set  of  functional  primitives,  without  clouding  the  preliminary 
design  problem  with  how  the  functional  elements  may  eventually  be  implemented. 
Since  the  vocabulary  of  functional  elements  in  most  domains  will  be  much  smaller 
than  that  of  the  structural  elements,  the  schematic  design  space  is  also  much  smaller 
than  the  physical  design  space. 

One  approach  to  generating  a  physical  description  from  a  schematic  description 
is  through  a  one-to-one  mapping  from  each  functional  element  to  an  element  in  the 
physical  description.  This  mapping  can  be  accomplished  by  selecting  a  structural 
element  from  a  library  of  possibilities  that  has  the  nominal  function  of  its  corre¬ 
sponding  functional  element  in  the  schematic  description.  This  procedure  can  be 
thought  of  as  generating  a  starting  point  for  the  function  sharing  procedure.  Once 
this  modular  physical  description  is  generated,  a  function  sharing  procedure  can 
convolve  the  description  into  an  efficient  and  highly  integrated  design.  The  function 
sharing  procedure  described  in  this  chapter  is  one  approach  to  generating  highly  inte¬ 
grated  designs.  In  tandem  with  a  procedure  for  generating  schematic  descriptions  of 
designs  (chapter  3),  and  from  them  modular  physical  descriptions,  the  procedure  al¬ 
lows  a  design  system  to  transform  a  behavioral  specification  into  an  efficient  physical 
description. 

Novelty  in  mechanical  design 

I  am  interested  in  innovative  design.  Function  sharing  is  part  of  the  perception 
of  novelty,  simplicity,  or  interestingness  in  a  device.  To  the  extent  that  function 
sharing  can  be  understood,  one  of  the  components  of  novel  mechanical  design  can 


78 


Chapter  4-  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


be  understood.  (Appendix  D  describes  some  of  my  observations  of  design  attributes 
that  contribute  to  interestingness). 

4.1.3  Why  Function  Sharing  is  Possible 

Of  the  infinite  physical  properties  of  a  structural  element,  only  a  small  set  are  relevant 
to  the  behavior  the  designer  intends  for  that  element.  In  addition  to  the  primary 
properties  of  a  structural  element  that  provide  that  element’s  intended  function, 
there  are  many  secondary  properties  that  are  incidental  to  those  that  implement  the 
intended  function.  The  key  idea  that  allows  function  sharing  to  be  achieved  by  a 
design  procedure  is  that  these  secondary  properties  of  structural  elements  can  be  ex¬ 
ploited  to  eliminate  redundancy.  By  recognizing  and  exploiting  secondary  properties 
of  one  element,  neighboring  elements  can  be  eliminated  from  the  design. 

For  example,  a  modular  design  of  an  automobile  would  include  a  ground  wire 
running  from  the  tail  light  to  the  battery.  By  recognizing  that  there  is  already  an 
element  (the  automobile  body)  that  travels  from  the  tail  light  to  the  battery,  and 
that  this  element  has  the  secondary  property  that  it  conducts  electricity,  the  ground 
wire  can  be  eliminated.  In  this  example,  this  simplification  is  possible  because  steel 
sheet  metal  has  many  properties  other  than  high  stiffness,  high  strength,  ductility, 
and  low  cost  (ostensibly  the  reasons  for  using  steel  for  car  bodies).  Performing  this 
reasoning  requires  a  physical  representation  of  the  design,  and  an  ability  to  recognize 
secondary  properties  of  regions  of  the  physical  description. 


4.1.4  Summary  of  Function  Sharing  Procedure 

The  procedure  for  achieving  function  sharing  consists  of  three  steps: 
1.  A  structural  element  is  deleted  from  the  physical  description. 


DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION  AND  REPRESENTA TION 


79 


2.  Alternative  features  in  the  physical  description  that  can  potentially  implement 
the  function  of  the  deleted  element  are  identified. 

3.  The  identified  features  are  modified  to  accentuate  their  desirable  secondary 
properties. 

This  procedure  is  illustrated  in  figure  4.2.  The  initial  design  is  a  lamp  fixture 
hung  by  a  piece  of  link  chain,  through  which  the  electrical  cord  is  woven.  In  order  to 
simplify  the  lamp  design,  an  element  (the  chain)  is  deleted  from  the  design.  Next, 
the  tensile  properties  of  the  electrical  cord  are  recognized.  Finally,  these  properties 
are  exploited  by  making  the  cord  thicker.  Through  this  three  step  process,  the  design 
is  simplified. 

4.2  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION  AND 
REPRESENTATION 

4.2.1  Dynamic  Systems 

As  a  domain  for  exploring  function  sharing,  I  have  chosen  mechanical  devices  whose 
primary  behavior  can  be  described  by  a  differential  equation  relating  an  input  and 
output  quantity  and  whose  schematic  description  can  be  expressed  as  a  network  of 
lumped-parameter  idealized  elements.  The  computer  program  (discussed  later  in  this 
chapter)  that  implements  the  function  sharing  procedure  is  further  limited  to  devices 
that  can  be  described  with  fluid-mechanical  elements  and  mechanical-translational 
elements.  Such  devices  include  pressure  gages,  accelerometers,  force  transducers, 
and  pneumatic  cylinders.  Examples  of  diverse  designs  that  are  not  in  this  class  are 
conveyer  systems,  peach  pitters,  ball  bearings  and  computer  displays  (although  these 
systems  can  be  described  with  differential  equations  and  networks,  such  descriptions 
do  not  characterize  their  primary  behavior).  I  call  this  domain  dynamic  systems. 


Chapter  4-'  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efp,cient  Physical  Descriptions 


Figure  4.2:  Illustration  of  function  sharing  procedure. 


4.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION  AND  REPRESENTATION 


81 


4.2.2  Physical  Representation 

I  have  chosen  a  two  and  one-half  dimensional  geometry  to  describe  devices  physically. 
In  this  representation,  physical  descriptions  of  designs  consist  of  a  collection  of  struc¬ 
tural  elements  (these  can  be  thought  of  as  design  components  like  piston-cylinders  or 
springs),  which  are  in  turn  built  from  orthogonally  connected  rectangular-prismatic 
sections  of  material  (these  rectangular-prismatic  sections  are  the  primitive  physical 
building  blocks  of  the  system).  Figure  4.3  shows  the  physical  description  of  a  piston- 
cylinder  structural  element.  Figure  4.4  shows  the  top  view  of  the  physical  description 
of  a  rate-of-pressure  indicator  containing  the  piston-cylinder  structural  element. 

The  two  and  one-half  dimensional  representation  is  required  rather  than  a  two- 
dimensional  representation  to  allow  fluid  to  flow  past  obstacles  in  the  design.  For 
example  if  the  piston-cylinder  in  figure  4.3  were  only  two-dimensional,  the  two  cav¬ 
ities  above  and  below  the  piston  rod  would  not  be  in  fluid  communication  and  the 
piston  would  not  function  as  expected.  By  adding  an  additional  half  dimension 
(thickness)  to  the  design  description,  the  upper  and  lower  cavities  can  be  connected 
as  long  as  the  piston  rod  is  only  half  as  thick  as  the  cylinder. 

In  this  two  and  one-half  dimensional  geometry,  Newtonian  physics  applies  as  if 
the  device  were  fully  three  dimensional  if  one  imagines  the  device  to  be  sandwiched 
between  two  infinitely  stiff  and  strong,  frictionless  plates.  This  particular  physical 
representation  was  chosen  to  simphfy  the  computational  geometry  problems  while 
still  maintaining  the  applicability  of  Newtonian  physics. 

In  addition  to  specifying  the  x  and  y  locations  and  dimensions  of  each  rectangular- 

prismatic  section  of  the  design,  a  limited  set  of  material  properties  are  also  specified. 

I 

The  material  of  each  section  is  specified  to  be  either  stiff  or  flexible,  and  of  high 
or  low  density.  Each  section  is  also  specified  as  either  attached  to  or  free  from  the 
imaginary  plates  that  sandwich  the  design.  Designs  consisting  of  fluid-mechanical 
^  elements  also  include  a  working  fluid  specification  (either  gas  or  liquid).  All  design 

I 


TOP 


FRONT  RIGHT  SIDE 


Figure  4.3:  Example  of  structural  element  represented  as  a  collection  of  orthogonally 
configured  rectangular-prismatic  sections. 

descriptions  contain  a  specification  of  an  external  environment  for  the  design  (also 
either  gas  or  liquid). 

4.2.3  Nominal  Functional  Specification 

In  the  dynamic  systems  domain,  the  schematic  description  of  a  device  can  be  ex¬ 
pressed  as  a  network  of  idealized  lumped-parameter  functional  elements.  The  schematic 
description  can  be  thought  of  as  a  generalized  circuit  diagram,  so  the  behavior  of  the 
entire  device  can  be  derived  from  the  behavior  of  the  individual  idealized  elements 
and  the  network  laws.  In  addition  to  specifying  the  strictly  physical  properties  of  a 
design,  the  function  sharing  procedure  requires  a  specification  of  the  intended  func¬ 
tion  of  each  structural  element.  This  specification  is  an  explicit  linking  of  functional 
elements  from  the  schematic  description  to  regions  of  the  physical  design  description. 

A  function  specification  includes  the  name  of  the  function  and  one  or  tw’o  reference 


4.2:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION  AND  REPRESENTATION 


83 


P(t) 


piston-cylinder 


TT 

XL 


resistance 


connector 


capacitance 


connector 


Figure  4.4:  Example  of  physical  description  of  a  design. 

points  in  the  design.  For  example,  the  specification  of  a.  fluid  resistance  would  indi¬ 
cate  first,  that  the  function  is  fluid  resistance;  second,  that  the  resistance  is  from  x=5 
y=0  to  x=10  y=0.  The  nominal  functions  of  all  structural  elements  in  a  physical 
description  are  specified  similarly. 

In  addition  to  the  lumped-parameter  functions,  two  special  functional  elements 
are  also  necessary:  connection  and  ground.  These  are  used  to  specify  how  regions  of 
the  physical  description  connect  the  other  functional  elements  together. 


4.2.4  Example  Physical  Design  Description 

This  subsection  gives  an  example  of  a  complete  physical  description  for  a  simple 
pressure  gage.  Figure  4.5  shows  the  graphical  version  of  the  description,  followed  by 
the  LISP  structure  that  the  computer  implementation  of  function  sharing  operates 
on.  Notice  that  the  description  is  hierarchical:  the  design  contains  components  and 
components  contain  sections.  Notice  also  that  the  function  of  each  structural  element 


I 


84 


Chapter  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


PISTON 


Figure  4.5:  Complete  physical  description  of  pressure  gage 
(called  a  component  in  the  LISP  structure)  is  specified. 


(DESIGN 

:NAME  PRESSURE-GAGE 
: FLUID  GAS 
:X-DIMENSION  173 
:Y- DIMENS ION  50 
: COMPONENTS 
( (COMPONENT 
:NAME  PISTON 
:X-DIMENSION  70 
:Y-DIMENSION  20 
:X- LOCATION  44 
:Y- LOCATION  30 
: WORKING-FLUID  LIQUID 
: SECTIONS 
(SECTION 

.•NAME  SECTION-A 
:X-DIMENSION  2 
:Y- DIMENS ION  20 
:X-LOCATION  0 
:Y-LOCATION  0 
: FLEXIBILITY  STIFF 
.•DENSITY  HIGH 
: THICKNESS  FULL 
: ATTACHED?  T) 


4.S:  DOMAIN  DESCRIPTION  AND  REPRESENTATION 


(SECTIOH 

:NAME  SECTIQH-H 
tX-DINENSIOH  44 
:Y-DIMEHSZOH  4 
:X-LQCATIQN  26 
:Y-LQCATIQN  8 
: FLEXIBILITY  STIFF 
:DEHSITY  HIGH 
:THICKHESS  TOP 
: ATTACHED?  VIL)) 

:CONirECTiaHS 

((SECTIOH-C  SECTIOH-D)  (SECTIQJi-D  SECTION-E) 
(SECTION-E  SECTIOM-F)  (SECTION-F  SECTION-A) 
(SECTIOM-G  SECTION-H)) 

:FUHCTIOVS 

((FH 

.•TYPE  FLUID-PORT 
sPOIMT-A-X  B 
;POIIT-A-Y  20 
:POIFr-B-X  47 
:POIHT-B-Y  20) 

(FH 

:TYPE  TRAHS-PORT 
sPOIHT-A-X  70 
;POIHT-A-Y  10 
:POINT-B-X  0 
;POIKT-B-Y  10))) 

(COMPONENT 
:NAME  SPRING 
:X-DIHENSION  25 
:Y-DIMENSION  10 
:X-LOCATION  114 
:Y-LOCATION  35 
: WORKING-FLUID  NIL 
: SECTIONS 
((SECTION 

:NAME  SECTION-A 


86 


Chapter  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


)) 

:  CONNECTIONS 

((SECTION-A  SECTION-B) 
(SECTION-C  SECTION-D) 
(SECTION-E  SECTION-F) 
(SECTION-G  SECTION-H) 
(SECTION-I  SECTION-J) 
(SECTION-K  SECTION-L) 
••FUNCTIONS 
((FN 


(SECTION-B  SECTION-C) 
(SECTION-D  SECTION-E) 
(SECTION-F  SECTION-G) 
(SECTION-H  SECTION-I) 
(SECTION-J  SECTION-K) 
(SECTION-L  SECTION-M)) 


:TYPE  TRANS-CAPACITANCE 
;POINT-A-X  0 
: POINT- A- Y  5 
:POINT-B-X  25 
:POINT-B-Y  5))) 
(COMPONENT 

:NAME  CONNECTOR 


) 

(COMPONENT 

:NAME  SOURCE-PLUG 


( 


) 

(COMPONENT 

:NAME  PISTON-PLUG 


) 

(COMPONENT 
:NAME  GROUND 


) 

;  CONNECTIONS 

( (SOURCE- PLUG  CONNECTOR)  (CONNECTOR  PISTON)  (PISTON  PISTON-PLUG) 
(PISTON  SPRING)  (SPRING  GROUND))) 


^.5:  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE 


87 


4.2.5  Function  Sharing  Problem  Definition  in  the  Dynamic 
Systems  Domain 

The  input  to  the  function  sharing  procedure  is  a  physical  description  of  a  device 
augmented  with  a  specification  of  the  intended  function  of  each  element;  the  output 
is  also  a  physical  description.  The  objective  of  the  procedure  is  a  simplification  of 
the  initial  physical  description  that  reduces  the  number  of  structural  elements. 

4.3  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE 

The  function  sharing  procedure  consists  of  three  steps;  1)  a  structural  element  is 
deleted  from  the  design.  2)  geometrical  features  that  can  potentially  implement  the 
function  of  the  deleted  element  are  found.  3)  modifications  are  made  to  the  design 
to  exploit  the  secondary  properties  of  the  features  found  in  step  2.  After  illustrating 
these  steps  with  an  example,  I  explain  the  details  of  each  step  for  the  dynamic 
systems  domain. 

4.3.1  Example  of  Function  Sharing  Procedure 

Figures  4.6  and  4.7  display  an  example  of  the  function  sharing  procedure  in  the 
dynamic  systems  domain.  Each  description  in  the  figure  corresponds  to  a  different 
state  during  the  simplification.  First,  the  fluid  resistance  is  deleted  from  the  design. 
Next,  a  potentially  resistive  feature  is  found  with  respect  to  points  A  and  B.  In 
this  case  the  feature  is  a  path  between  A  and  B  passing  between  adjacent  edges. 
This  feature  is  modified  to  create  a  clearance  between  the  adjacent  edges,  such  that 
resistance  is  established  between  A  and  B. 

Second,  the  fluid  capacitance  is  deleted  from  the  design  and  a  feature  that  can 


88 


Chapter  4-'  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


provide  fluid  capacitance  is  found  with  respect  to  point  A.  In  this  case,  it  is  simply  a 
cavity  adjacent  to  point  A.  Finally  this  feature  is  modified  by  extending  the  cylinder 
length,  thereby  providing  the  capacitance  of  the  deleted  element. 

4.3.2  Deleting  a  Structural  Element 

The  physical  description  of  the  design  is  represented  as  a  collection  of  structural 
elements.  The  first  step  in  the  function  sharing  procedure  is  to  remove  one  of  these 
structural  elements.  Removal  of  a  structural  element  from  a  design  may  cause  some 
side  effects.  For  example,  removing  a  fluid  element  from  a  design  may  cause  leak¬ 
age.  Removing  a  mechanical  translation2d  element  may  cause  parts  of  the  design  to 
become  disconnected.  Because  of  these  side  effects,  the  design  must  also  be  repaired 
after  the  deletion  step.  In  addition  to  removing  the  element  and  repairing  the  design, 
the  deletion  step  must  establish  reference  points  in  the  design  with  respect  to  which 
alternative  features  should  be  found. 

Device  repair 

Deleting  fluid  elements  includes  severaJ  possible  cases:  a  dangling  element  (only 
connected  to  the  design  at  one  point),  a  sandwiched  element  (one  that  constitutes 
the  only  connection  between  two  regions  of  the  design),  and  a  bridging  element  (one 
that  constitutes  one  of  several  connections  between  two  regions  of  the  design). 

An  essential  part  of  repairing  a  design  after  a  fluid  element  is  deleted  is  the 
modification  of  connectors.  Connectors  are  special  elements  whose  only  purpose  is 
to  provide  a  fluid  connection  between  other  elements.  When  one  of  the  elements 
attached  to  a  T-type  connector  is  removed,  then  the  connector  must  be  modified  to 
be  a  straight  or  L-type  connector.  When  an  element  is  removed  from  a  straight  or 
L-type  connector,  then  a  plug  is  substituted  for  the  connector. 


4.S:  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE 


Figure  4.6:  Eliminating  the  fluid  resistance. 


90 


Chapter  4'  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


Figure  4.7:  Eliminating  the  fluid  capacitance. 


4.S:  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE 


91 


Dangling  dements  aie  deleted  by  removing  the  element  from  the  design  and 
replacing  the  element  with  a  plug.  Sandwiched  elements  are  deleted  by  removing 
the  dement  and  connecting  the  two  disconnected  regions  of  the  design  to  each  other. 
Bridging  dements  are  deleted  by  removing  the  element  and  modifying  the  connectors 
to  which  the  dement  was  attached,  or  establishing  plugs  in  the  cases  where  the 
element  was  attached  directly  to  other  elements. 

Deleting  mechanical  elements  also  involves  several  special  cases  similar  to  the  fluid 
cases  except  that  leaks  are  not  a  problem.  There  are  dangling  elements,  sandwiched 
elements,  and  bridging  dements. 

Dangling  dements  are  deleted  by  removing  the  element.  Sandwiched  elements 
are  deleted  by  removing  the  dement  and  connecting  the  disconnected  regions  of  the 
design  at  the  points  at  which  they  were  attached  to  the  deleted  element.  Bridging 
elements  are  ddeted  by  removing  the  element.  In  the  special  case  where  sandwiched 
elements  are  connected  to  a  ground  dement,  then  in  addition  to  connecting  the 
orphaned  ground  element  to  the  rest  of  the  design,  a  design  is  also  created  in  which 
the  both  the  sandwiched  element  and  the  ground  element  are  removed. 

In  the  case  of  both  fluid-mechanical  and  translational-mechanical  elements,  con¬ 
necting  disconnected  regions  of  the  design  may  require  a  rotation  and  translation  of 
one  of  the  regions.  It  is  also  possible  that  reconnection  is  not  possible  without  caus¬ 
ing  geometrical  interference  between  the  regions.  In  this  case,  component  deletion 
fails  and  the  system  can  not  simplify  the  design. 

New  reference  points 

The  deleted  structural  element  corresponds  to  a  functional  element  in  the  schematic 
description.  This  functional  element  can  be  thought  of  as  being  approximated  in  the 
physical  description  with  respect  to  some  reference  point(s).  For  example,  a  fluid 


S 


92 


Chapter  4-'  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


resistance  is  defined  with  respect  to  two  points  in  the  fluid  flow.  A  translational 
mass  is  defined  with  respect  to  a  single  point.  So,  for  every  deleted  element  there 
will  be  one  or  two  corresponding  reference  points  in  the  physical  design  description. 
These  reference  points  are  those  specified  in  the  descriptions  of  the  deleted  structural 
element. 

When  an  element  is  deleted  its  associated  reference  points  may  have  to  be  moved. 
For  example,  the  reference  points  associated  with  a  bridging  fluid  resistance  will  be 
moved  to  the  center  of  the  connectors  to  which  the  resistance  was  attached.  When 
regions  of  the  design  are  translated  and  rotated  with  respect  to  each  other,  the 
reference  points  must  also  be  translated  and  rotated. 

4.3.3  Recognizing  Alternative  Features 

After  deleting  the  structural  element  to  be  eliminated,  the  next  step  is  to  find  alterna¬ 
tive  features  in  the  physical  description  that  can  potentially  implement  the  function 
of  the  deleted  structural  element. 

Organization  of  function  sharing  knowledge 

I  have  approached  the  feature  finding  task  as  a  physical  property  recognition  problem — 
identifying  one  of  a  set  of  known  configurations  of  structural  primitives  that  can  be 
modified  such  that  they  approximate  the  relevant  function.  For  example,  fluid  re¬ 
sistance  can  be  derived  from  a  narrow  passage  between  two  edges,  a  long  narrow 
channel  through  a  solid  region,  or  an  orifice  in  a  plate.  For  each  of  these  ways  of 
implementing  resistance  there  is  a  physical  feature  that  could  be  potentially  mod¬ 
ified  to  achieve  the  resistive  function.  For  example  a  path  between  two  reference 
points  that  passes  between  two  adjacent  but  detached  edges  could  be  resistive  if  a 
clearance  were  established  between  the  edges.  A  path  between  two  reference  points 


IS:  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE 


93 


FUNCTION 


FEATURE 


MODIFICATION 


Figure  4.8:  Organization  of  function  sharing  recognition  and  modification  proce¬ 
dures. 

that  is  obstructed  by  a  solid  wall  could  be  resistive  if  a  hole  were  punched  in  the 
wall.  These  relations  constitute  the  function  sharing  knowledge  base.  The  relations 
for  fluid  resistance  are  shown  in  figure  4.8.  The  relations  for  the  other  functions  in 
the  domain  are  shown  in  figures  4.9  and  4.10. 

I 


Recognition  procedures 

The  procedures  for  recognizing  any  particular  physical  feature  are  ad  hoc  and  specific 
to  my  two  and  one-half  dimensional  geometrical  representation.  For  example  finding 
a  path  between  two  points  obstructed  by  a  wall  involves  first  finding  all  internal  walls 
in  the  design,  and  then  performing  a  search  along  section  faces  from  each  reference 
point  to  each  side  of  the  internal  wall.  For  the  most  part  these  procedures  are 
straightforward,  if  somewhat  tedious,  computational  geometry  problems. 


04 


Chapter  4:  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


Figure  4.9:  Knowledge  for  other  functions  in  dynamic  systems  domain. 


IS:  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE 


05 


Figure  4.10:  Knowledge  for  other  functions  in  dynamic  systems  domain  (continued). 


96 


Chapter  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


4.3.4  Modifying  Alternative  Features 

Once  the  potentially  useful  features  are  found,  the  final  step  is  to  execute  the  modi¬ 
fication  operators  associated  with  each  feature.  In  the  case  of  the  fluid  resistance  for 
example,  if  the  feature  found  by  the  recognition  procedure  were  a  path  obstructed 
by  a  wall,  the  modification  would  be  to  punch  a  hole  in  the  wall.  Modifications  are 
executed  only  if  the  modification  would  not  cause  geometrical  interference  between 
different  regions  of  the  design.  Geometrical  interference  is  defined  as  the  situation  in 
which  two  sections  of  material  share  some  of  the  same  two  and  one-half  dimensional 
space. 

The  modification  procedures,  like  the  recognition  procedures,  are  ad  hoc.  As  an 
example,  punching  a  hole  in  a  section  involves  removing  the  existing  section,  replacing 
it  with  two  new  shorter  sections  with  a  gap  between  their  ends,  and  updating  the 
component  connection  list.  Punching  a  hole  in  my  geometrical  representation  is 
actually  equivalent  to  creating  a  gap. 

4.3.5  Multi-Function  Elements 

The  discussion  of  the  function  sharing  procedure  in  the  previous  three  subsections 
assumed  for  clarity  that  the  structural  element  to  be  replaced  had  only  one  nominal 
function.  In  cases  where  a  structural  element  corresponds  to  more  than  one  functional 
element,  some  modifications  to  the  recognition  procedures  must  be  made.  These 
differences  can  be  understood  by  considering  two  special  cases:  two  parallel  functions 
and  two  series  functions. 

In  the  parallel  function  case  a  structural  element  implements  two  functional  ele¬ 
ments  with  respect  to  the  same  reference  point  or  points.  Under  these  circumstances, 
the  recognition  procedure  must  find  a  set  of  alternative  features  for  each  of  the  two 


4.S:  FUNCTION-SHARING  PROCEDURE 


97 


functions.  This  recognition  step  involves  doing  the  recognition  process  twice,  once  for 
each  function.  For  example,  if  a  structural  element  implements  resistance  between 
point  A  and  point  B,  and  implements  capacitance  between  point  A  and  point  B,  then 
eliminating  this  element  requires  that  both  an  alternative  resistance  and  capacitance 
be  found  with  respect  to  points  A  and  B. 

In  the  series  function  case  a  structural  element  implements  two  functional  el¬ 
ements  with  respect  to  sequential  reference  points  in  the  design.  An  example  of 
this  situation  would  be  a  resistance  with  respect  to  point  A  and  point  B,  and  a 
capacitance  with  respect  to  point  B  and  point  C.  Under  these  circumstances,  the 
recognition  procedure  must  also  find  a  set  of  features  for  each  of  the  two  functions. 
However,  the  recognition  must  be  with  respect  to  an  intermediate  reference  point 
(B-prime)  within  the  remaining  design.  Each  possible  B-prime  (  selected  from  all  of 
the  reference  points  that  are  associated  with  the  functions  provided  by  the  remaining 
design)  is  tried  as  an  intermediate  reference  point. 

4.3.6  Control 

My  implementation  of  the  function  sharing  procedure  leaves  the  control  to  the  user. 
Specifically,  the  user  selects  an  element  to  eliminate  and  chooses  from  among  several 
modified  designs. 

The  control  could  also  be  automatic.  In  this  case,  the  program  would  identify 
each  structural  element  in  the  design  that  corresponds  to  a  single  functional  element. 
A  new  copy  of  the  design  would  be  made  for  each  such  element  found.  The  structural 
element  associated  with  each  copy  would  then  be  deleted.  Next,  an  attempt  would  be 
made  to  find  alternative  features  that  could  potentially  replace  the  deleted  element 
in  each  design.  Another  copy  of  each  design  would  be  made  for  each  alternative 
feature  that  can  implement  the  function  of  the  deleted  element.  The  modification 


I 


98 


Chapter  4:  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


associated  with  each  feature  would  be  executed  in  the  corresponding  design.  For  each 
modified  design,  the  procedure  would  be  repeated.  Because  there  will  in  general  be 
several  alternative  features  for  each  deleted  element,  the  worst-case  number  of  designs 
generated  by  this  procedure  is  exponential  in  the  number  of  structural  elements. 

4.4  IMPLEMENTATION  AND  RESULTS 

This  section  discusses  the  computer  program  that  implements  some  of  the  function 
sharing  concepts. 

4.4.1  Scope  and  Goals  of  the  Implementation 

There  were  three  factors  that  motivated  a  computer  program  implementation  of  the 
function  sharing  ideas  I  have  presented. 

1.  Unearthing  conceptual  bugs.  Writing  programs  is  a  good  way  to  eliminate  fuzzy 
conceptual  thinking.  While  an  idea  that  has  not  been  made  precise  is  difficult 
to  implement  as  a  program,  writing  the  program  helps  to  make  the  idea  precise. 
In  fact  the  major  motivation  for  writing  a  computer  program  in  this  project 
was  to  solidify  my  conceptual  thinking. 

2.  A  tool  mock-up.  The  particular  computer  program  that  1  wrote  can  also  be 
thought  of  as  a  mock-up  of  a  future  conceptual  design  tool.  The  representation 
I  use  in  the  implementation  is  too  impoverished  to  allow  this  particular  program 
to  be  of  much  practical  use,  but  hopefully  the  program  does  suggest  ways  in 
which  a  future  tool  might  be  employed. 

3.  Exploring  novel  design.  One  of  the  hypotheses  for  this  project  is  that  the  unbi¬ 
ased  application  of  physical-feature- based  design  operators  in  function  sharing 


IMPLEMENTATION  AND  RESULTS 


99 


leads  to  novel  design.  This  hypothesis  is  not  tremendously  strong  since  novelty 
is  very  much  a  function  of  a  human  observer.  However  in  one  case,  the  pro¬ 
gram  did  surprise  me  in  an  interesting  way,  supporting  the  spirit  of  the  novelty 
hypothesis.  I 

4.4.2  Three  Example  Runs 

This  subsection  shows  the  screen  output  of  the  program  running  three  examples. 

Each  figure  shows  the  progression  of  the  design  simplification  as  the  user  instructs 
the  program  to  eliminate  structural  elements.  In  each  of  the  examples  only  one  or 
two  of  the  outcomes  of  the  program  are  shown,  although  there  in  general  will  be 
many  designs  generated.  The  particular  examples  shown  in  this  section  illustrate 
the  range  of  simplification  operations  that  the  program  can  perform.  There  is  a  brief 
textual  explanation  for  each  figure. 

Accelerometer  1 

Figure  4.11  shows  the  program  trace  as  it  simplifies  an  accelerometer.  An  accelerom¬ 
eter  is  a  device  that  produces  a  displacement  (or  other  output  quantity)  proportional 
to  the  acceleration  of  the  device  reference  frame.  In  most  cases  accelerometers  will 
consist  of  some  sort  of  mass  and  spring.  The  initial  design  in  figure  4.11  consists  of  a 
mass  attached  to  a  loop-like  spring  which  is  in  turn  attached  to  ground.  The  spring 
is  the  orthogonally-connected  rectangular  prismatic  version  of  an  oval  spring.  The 
program  is  directed  to  eliminate  the  mass  element.  First  the  mass  is  deleted  from  the 
design.  Next  the  system  searches  for  alternative  potentially  massive  features  with 
respect  to  the  top  center  portion  of  the  spring.  The  system  finds  that  the  uppermost 
section  of  the  spring  has  massive  properties,  and  accentuates  these  properties  by 
increasing  the  section  thickness. 


Figure  4.11:  Accelerometer  example  1. 


Jk.Jt:  IMPLEMENTATION  AND  RESULTS 


101 


Accelerometer  2 

Figure  4.12  shows  the  program  operating  on  another  accelerometer  design.  In  this 
case,  the  initial  design  consists  of  a  cantilever  beam  attached  to  a  mass  and  damper. 
The  beam  and  damper  are  attached  to  ground.  The  program  is  instructed  to  elim¬ 
inate  the  mass.  It  first  deletes  the  mass,  and  then  looks  for  massive  features  with 
respect  to  the  end  of  the  cantilever  beam.  It  finds  that  the  beam  itself  is  massive, 
and  accentuates  this  property  by  increasing  the  beam  thickness.  Next,  the  program 
is  instructed  to  eliminate  the  damper  from  the  design.  First  it  deletes  the  damper 
and  then  looks  for  alternative  damping  features  with  respect  to  the  end  of  the  can¬ 
tilever  beam.  It  finds  that  the  beam  has  some  damping  because  it  moves  in  a  gas 
environment  causing  drag.  The  program  accentuates  this  property  by  changing  the 
design  environment  to  a  viscous  fluid  (indicated  by  the  dots).  In  another  branch  of 
the  simplification,  the  program  extends  the  piston  thickness  in  order  to  replace  the 
mass. 

Rate-of-cHmb 

Figure  4.13  shows  the  program’s  simplification  of  a  rate-of-climb  indicator.  This 
instrument  consists  of  a  diaphram  with  housing,  a  parallel  capillary  tube,  and  a 
capacitance  at  the  housing  side  of  the  diaphram.  The  program  is  instructed  to 
eliminate  the  capillary  tube.  In  response,  it  deletes  the  tube  and  looks  for  alternative 
resistive  features.  The  program  finds  that  there  is  a  path  with  an  obstructing  wall 
that  can  implement  resistance  if  a  hole  is  punched  in  the  wall.  The  program  makes 
a  hole  in  the  wall  (one  side  of  the  diaphram).  Next,  the  program  is  instructed  to 
eliminate  the  capacitive  chamber.  It  deletes  the  chamber  and  searches  for  alternative 
capacitive  features.  It  finds  that  there  is  a  cavity  associated  with  the  diaphram 


_  J 


Chapter  4:  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


attached 


viscous  environment 


Figure  4.12:  Accelerometer  example  2. 


It4:  IMPLEMENTATION  AND  RESULTS 


103 


housing  and  accentuates  its  capacitive  properties  by  1)  detaching  the  housing  walls 
(from  the  invisible  plates  that  sandwich  the  design)  and  2)  making  them  of  a  flexible 
material  (indicated  by  shading  of  sections). 

4.4.3  Some  Program  Details 

Programming  bottlenecks 

The  total  size  of  the  function  sharing  program  is  5500  lines  of  LISP  code.  The  pri¬ 
mary  programming  bottleneck  in  this  implementation  was  the  development  of  the 
component  deletion  procedures.  Deleting  a  structural  element  from  a  design  requires 
identifying  which  special  case  the  deletion  belongs  to,  removing  the  element,  finding 
new  reference  points  for  the  function  of  the  element,  and  repairing  and/or  reconnect¬ 
ing  the  design.  These  processes  are  highly  geometrical  in  nature,  and  require  tedious 
programming.  I  expect  that  this  same  bottleneck  will  occur  when  these  ideas  are 
extended  to  fully  three-dimensional  geometry. 

The  feature  recognition  problem  associated  with  each  function  in  the  dynamic 
systems  domain  was  not  difficult  in  the  two  and  one  half  dimensional  geometrical  rep¬ 
resentation  I  used.  I  expect  that  feature  recognition  will  be  elevated  to  the  primary 
programming  bottleneck  in  the  three  dimensional  case. 

Scope  of  Implementation 

The  implementation  includes  the  feature  finding  and  recognition  procedures  for  fluid 
resistance,  fluid  capacitance,  translational  mechanical  inertia,  and  translational  me¬ 
chanical  resistance.  I  did  not  implement  the  procedures  for  translational  mechanical 
compliance  or  for  fluid  inertance. 


II 


104 


Chapter  4:  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


Figure  4.13:  Rate-of-climb  example  1. 


4.5:  ANALYSIS  OF  FUNCTION  SHARINGPROCEDVRE 


105 


4.5  ANALYSIS  OF  FUNCTION  SHARING 
PROCEDURE 

The  preceding  sections  have  not  dealt  with  many  of  the  subtleties  involved  in  function 
sharing  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  and  in  general.  This  section  analyzes  the 
procedure  from  several  perspectives  and  discusses  some  of  the  issues  associated  with 
adapting  the  procedure  to  other  domains. 

4.5.1  Meaning  of  Physical  Descriptions 

The  physical  descriptions  produced  by  the  function  sharing  procedure  can  be  thought 
of  as  parameterizations  of  a  design  description.  In  the  case  of  a  piston-cylinder,  there 
are  many  possible  parameters  in  the  physical  description  that  may  be  relevant  to  the 
design.  The  function  sharing  procedure  is  a  way  of  identifying  those  parameters 
that  should  be  considered  in  a  particular  design.  For  example,  a  piston-cylinder 
is  normally  parameterized  by  the  piston  area  and  the  stroke  length.  There  are, 
however,  many  other  parameters  that  relate  to  the  element-  among  them  the  thermal 
conductivity  of  the  cylinder  wall,  the  size  of  the  input  and  output  ports,  or  the 
mass  of  the  piston.  After  the  function  sharing  procedure  operated  on  the  rate-of- 
climb  indicator  example,  two  of  these  extra  parameters  were  identified  as  important- 
the  clearance  between  the  piston  and  cylinder  and  the  volume  of  one  end  of  the 
cylinder.  This  identification  resulted  from  the  function  sharing  feature  recognition 
and  modification  procedures.  The  procedure  has  identified  a  different  and  important 
set  oi  parameters  and  the  designer  is  alerted  that  the  original  design  can  be  simplified 
if  these  parameters  are  considered  when  performing  the  detailed  design  and  selecting 
dimensions. 


I 


106 


Chapter  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


4.5.2  Clobbering  Existing  Functions 

Executing  a  modification  to  exploit  a  secondary  property  of  some  structural  element 
may  invalidate  the  primary  function  of  that  element.  For  example,  consider  the  result 
of  eliminating  the  fluid  capacitance  in  figure  4.14.  The  expansion  of  the  diameter  of 
the  resistance  would  impair  its  resistive  function. 

In  my  implementation  of  function  sharing,  all  modifications  that  do  not  lead  to 
geometrical  interference  are  carried  out.  I  leave  the  judgement  as  to  whether  or 
not  existing  functions  have  been  impaired  to  the  designer.  To  do  otherwise  would 
require  explicit  knowledge  of  why  a  particular  element  functions  the  way  it  does, 
or  very  sophisticated  analysis  tools  that  can  determine  that  a  component  no  longer 
performs  as  specified.  If  the  representation  of  each  structural  element  also  contained 
a  set  of  constraints  on  allowable  modifications  to  its  structure,  then  some  clobbering 
modifications  could  also  be  avoided. 

4.5.3  Design  Knowledge  Level 

There  are  many  alternative  approaches  to  expressing  function  sharing  design  knowl¬ 
edge.  I  chose  the  physical  feature  level.  This  represents  a  trade  off  between  efficiency 
and  expressiveness.  For  example,  figure  4.15  illustrates  the  variety  of  ways  one  might 
represent  the  concept  of  fluid  resistance  in  a  design  system. 

The  simplest  approach  is  to  identify  particular  structural  elements  with  partic¬ 
ular  functional  elements.  I  call  this  the  component  level.  This  approach  constrains 
the  design  system  to  using  a  particular  component  every  time  resistance  is  needed. 
Alternatively  the  system  could  represent  resistance  as  being  implemented  by  a  va¬ 
riety  of  generic  physical  features  like  holes,  channels,  or  porous  materials.  I  call 
this  the  feature  level.  This  approach  gives  the  system  more  freedom  to  construct 


J,.5:  ANALYSIS  OF  FUNCTION  SHARINGPROCEDURE 


107 


Figure  4.15:  Knowledge  level  for  fluid  resistance. 


^.5;  ANALYSIS  OF  FUNCTION  SHARINGPROCEDURE 


109 


a  resistive  configuration.  Alternatively,  the  system  could  represent  resistance  as  a 
mathematical  concept  with  a  generali2ed,  parameterized  model  of  geometry.  I  call 
this  the  physics  level.  Given  this  scheme,  a  system  has  a  great  deal  of  flexibility  in 
synthesizing  resistive  configurations. 

However,  with  the  flexibility  and  expressiveness  come  computational  complexity. 
The  reasoning  required  to  derive  a  resistive  configuration  from  equations  at  the 
physics  level  is  severe;  but  finding  resistance  at  the  component  level  is  trivial.  I 
chose  a  middle  ground.  Representing  resistance  as  a  set  of  physical  features  gives 
flexibility  and  expressiveness,  without  swamping  the  system  with  complexity. 

4.5.4  Novelty  in  Mechanical  Design 

A  novel  mechanical  design  can  be  defined  as  one  that  no  one  (or  at  least  not  the  design 
community  in  question)  has  generated  before.  One  hypothesis  of  this  work  is  that 
the  unbiased  application  of  the  physical  feature  based  design  operations  in  function 
sharing  would  yield  some  novel  designs.  One  design  the  computer  implementation 
generated  truly  surprised  me.  Figure  4.16  shows  one  branch  of  the  function  sharing 
procedure  on  the  rate-of-climb  example.  In  this  case  eliminating  the  fluid  capacitance 
led  to  a  novel  use  of  the  cavity  associated  with  the  space  between  the  resistance  and 
the  piston.  The  recognition  procedure  identified  the  cavity  between  the  resistance 
and  the  cylinder  wall  as  potentially  resistive  and  the  modification  procedure  exploited 
the  situation  by  punching  an  access  hole  into  the  cavity. 

As  long  as  the  feature  recognition  procedures  are  sound,  designs  will  be  generated 
that  are  viable  candidates.  Some  of  these  designs  will  be  unanticipated’  because  the 
recognition  procedures  are  more  thorough  and  faster  than  human  designers,  and 
because  they  do  not  encode  any  designer  intention  or  functional  information  about 
the  physical  description. 


4.5:  ANALYSIS  OF  FUNCTION  SHARINGPROCEDURE 


111 


4.5.5  Extensibility 

The  function  sharing  ideas  presented  in  this  document  can  be  applied  to  other  do¬ 
mains.  There  are  several  requirements  on  these  domains,  and  on  the  way  in  which 
knowledge  about  the  domains  is  organized.  Certain  properties  of  a  domain  also 
determine  the  success  or  failure  of  the  function  sharing  procedure. 

•  There  must  be  a  definable  language  for  describing  the  function  of  the  con¬ 
stituent  elements  of  a  design.  Designs  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  can 
be  described  schematically  with  a  concise  functional  language.  Global  device 
behavior  can  be  specified  by  a  differential  equation  relating  an  input  quantity 
to  an  output  quantity.  More  important,  a  network  of  lumped-parameter  ele¬ 
ments  (fluid  resistances,  fluid  capacitances,  etc.)  can  accurately  describe  the 
functional  architecture  of  the  device.  The  existence  of  a  formal  and  concise 
language  for  the  schematic  description  of  the  device  makes  the  function  shar¬ 
ing  procedure  possible;  the  function  of  any  particular  region  of  the  physical 
description  can  be  precisely  and  completely  specified,  and  there  is  a  framework 
upon  which  the  function  sharing  knowledge  base  can  be  built. 

•  There  must  be  a  definable  mapping  from  function  to  structure.  In  the  dynamic 
systems  domain,  each  functional  element  corresponds  to  a  set  of  physical  fea¬ 
tures  with  which  it  can  be  implemented.  Fluid  resistance  for  example  is  a  func¬ 
tional  element  that  can  be  implemented  with  a  hole  in  a  plate,  a  gap  between 
adjacent  edges,  or  a  channel  cut  through  a  solid.  This  mapping  is  accurate  and 
concise.  The  corresponding  mapping  for  aesthetically  pleasing  or  even  aerody¬ 
namic  would  be  much  more  difficult  to  define.  This  is  as  much  a  requirement 
on  the  domain,  as  a  requirement  on  the  granularity  of  the  functional  language. 
In  general  the  more  fine-grained  the  functional  language,  the  simpler  the  task 


112 


Chapter  Function  Sharing  to  Generate  Efficient  Physical  Descriptions 


of  generating  a  function-feature  mapping.  An  additional  requirement  in  this 
vein  is  that  the  physical  feature  recognition  problem  must  be  computationally 
tractable. 

•  There  must  be  locality  of  function  in  the  physical  design  description.  If  the 
physical  features  associated  with  a  particular  functional  element  are  highly 
distributed,  then  these  features  can  not  be  easily  deleted  from  the  design. 
In  the  dynamic  systems  domain  this  property  is  present,  as  indicated  by  the 
existence  of  definable  reference  points  for  a  particular  functional  element. 

Some  domains  that  appear  to  meet  these  criteria  are  architectural  floor  plans, 
mechanical  support  and  constraint  (ie.  brackets,  bearings,  and  struts),  chemical 
processes,  and  assembly  machines. 

4.5.6  Miscellaneous  Issues 

This  section  is  a  catch-all  for  isolated  comments  and  responses  to  commonly-asked 
questions  about  the  function  sharing  procedure. 

Why  start  with  a  modular  design? 

My  presentation  of  the  function  sharing  procedure  assumes  that  the  initial  design  is 
highly  modular  and  that  it  is  subsequently  processed  to  become  highly  integrated. 
This  approach  is  motivated  by  two  factors: 

1.  Modular  designs  are  easier  to  generate,  understand,  model,  debug  and  analyze 
than  integrated  designs.  For  these  reasons,  I  believe  that  future  design  systems 
will  generate  modular  designs.  An  important  problem  will  then  be  how  to  make 
these  designs  more  efficient.  Function  sharing  is  one  answer  to  this  problem. 


^.5;  ANALYSIS  OF  FUNCTION  SHARINGPROCBDURE 


113 


In  fact,  Chapter  3  of  this  document  describes  a  procedure  for  generating  a 
schematic  description  of  a  design,  which  is  one  step  from  being  a  modular 
physical  description. 

2.  My  observation  of  actual  engineering  design  practice  is  that  prototypes  are 
modular.  This  is  partially  because  modular  designs  have  all  of  the  properties 
stated  above,  but  also  because  modular  designs  are  easy  to  fabricate  and  modify 
with  standard  shop  equipment.  The  design  prototype  is  a  natural  starting  point 
for  the  function  sharing  procedure. 

Does  order  matter? 

The  design  shown  in  figure  4.16  would  not  have  been  generated  if  the  resistance  had 
been  eliminated  before  the  capacitance.  In  general  the  order  in  which  structural 
elements  are  eliminated  from  a  design  will  determine  different  design  states  during 
the  function  sharing  process. 

Relation  to  general  function-from-structure  problem 

The  function  sharing  procedure  has  as  a  subproblem  a  special  case  of  the  function- 
from-structure  problem.  This  problem,  determining  the  function  of  a  device  from  its 
physical  description,  is  difRcult  and  underconstrained.  In  the  function  sharing  case, 
instead  of  determining  what  a  certain  region  of  the  physical  device  description  does, 
the  program  only  has  to  determine  what  it  could  do. 


Chapter  5 


5.1  CONTRIBUTIONS 

This  project  has  yielded  at  least  Hve  important  results: 

•  Mechanical  design  concepts  can  be  generated  computationally. 

•  The  separation  of  schematic  and  physical  synthesis  reduces  problem  solving 
complexity  and  clarifies  design  reasoning. 

•  The  concept  of  type  number  and  isolated  capacitance  and  inertance  can  be 
used  to  synthesize  a  schematic  description  of  a  SISO  dynamic  system. 

•  Function  sharing  can  be  explained  and  automated. 

•  Novel  design  concepts  can  result  from  the  unbiased  application  of  design  oper¬ 


ators. 


116 


Chapter  5:  Discussion 


5.1.1  Mechanical  Design  Concepts  Can  Be  Generated 
Computationally 

Some  work  has  been  done  on  generating  descriptions  of  structural  shapes  [CaganSS, 
Murthy87]  and  on  generating  electrical  circuits  [Roylance83,  Ressler84,  Williams88]. 
To  my  knowledge,  no  other  research  results  have  shown  how  it  is  possible  for  a 
computational  system  to  generate  a  physical  description  of  a  multi-part  mechanical 
design  from  a  description  of  its  behavior. 

This  project  has  resulted  in  techniques  for  generating  an  efficient  physical  descrip¬ 
tion  of  a  device  from  a  specification  of  its  input-output  behavior.  These  techniques  in¬ 
volve  reasoning  at  the  functional-schematic  level  as  well  as  at  the  structural-physical 
level.  The  techniques  represent  at  least  an  upper  bound  on  the  kinds  of  reasoning 
and  representations  necessary  for  this  synthesis  process. 

The  results  of  this  project  are  both  humbling  and  encouraging.  They  are  humbling 
in  that  the  domain  is  simple  and  the  representations  impoverished.  Extending  the 
results  to  the  kinds  of  problems  that  engineers  routinely  solve  remains  a  difficult 
step.  The  results  are  encouraging  in  that  some  of  the  mystery  has  been  taken  away 
from  design.  If  appropriate  representations  for  schematic  and  physical  descriptions 
can  be  developed,  synthesis  procedures  will  follow;  and  the  resulting  systems  will 
probably  generate  more  complete  sets  of  design  alternatives  than  is  current  human 
practice. 


5.1.2  Separation  of  Schematic  and  Physical  Descriptions 

One  of  the  central  theses  of  this  project  is  that  design  problems  should  be  explicitly 
separated  into  schematic  synthesis  problems  and  physical  synthesis  problems.  The 
reasons  for  this  separation  are  a  reduction  in  problem  solving  complexity  and  an 


5.1:  CONTRIBUTIONS 


117 


enforcement  of  clarity  of  the  synthesis  issues. 

My  estimate  of  the  size  of  the  design  space  (in  the  SISO  domain)  at  the  physical 
description  level  is  about  10^^.  This  number  is  derived  from  considering  possible 
configurations  of  5  or  fewer  structural  elements  &om  a  library  of  20  possible  ele¬ 
ments,  and  then  considering  the  number  of  ways  in  which  this  collection  could  be 
modified  by  3  of  the  roughly  20  available  modification  operators  in  the  function  shar¬ 
ing  procedure.  These  parameters  are  chosen  to  reflect  the  typical  values  from  the 
function  sharing  procedure  operating  on  a  typical  modular  physical  description.  My 
estimate  of  the  size  of  the  design  space  at  the  schematic  level  is  about  10^.  This 
number  is  based  on  the  number  of  possible  bondgraph  sequences  containing  fewer 
than  5  elements.  Working  in  the  bondgraph  space  is  potentially  a  much  less  diffi¬ 
cult  problem  than  working  in  the  unconstrained  physical  description  space.  Once  a 
schematic  description  has  been  synthesized  then  the  space  of  possible  physical  de¬ 
scriptions  is  constrained  to  about  10*  possible  designs  (since  the  configuration  and 
type  of  structural  elements  is  specified  by  the  bondgraph).  These  rough  figures  in¬ 
dicate  the  reduction  in  complexity  that  results  from  working  first  in  the  abstract 
schematic  description  space  before  venturing  into  the  physical  description  space. 

The  other  major  argument  for  separating  schematic  and  physical  reasoning  is 
that  it  focuses  the  problem  solving  activity.  In  the  dynamic  systems  domain,  any 
design  whose  bondgraph  does  not  exhibit  the  specified  behavior  will  not  meet  the 
design  specifications.  This  suggests  that  getting  the  idealized  behavior  right  at  the 
bondgraph  level  is  a  good  first  design  step.  This  choice  of  strategy  in  no  way  limits 
the  range  of  designs  at  the  physical  level,  since  any  design  that  meets  the  specs  must 
have  the  correct  schematic  description.  By  explicitly  separating  the  schematic  and 
physical  reasoning  in  solving  the  design  problem,  the  procedures  that  solve  the  two 
steps  can  be  narrowly  focused.  For  example,  the  schematic  synthesis  procedures  do 


118 


Chapter  5:  Discussion 


not  have  to  use  any  geometrical  reasoning. 


5.1.3  Synthesizing  SISO  Dynamic  Systems 

Engineers  have  typically  solved  the  dynamic  systems  synthesis  problem  in  heuristic 
ways.  Chapter  3  of  the  thesis  presented  a  complete  technique  for  synthesizing  SISO 
dynamic  systems  in  the  translational,  rotational,  fluid,  and  mechanical  media.  The 
technique  is  based  on:  1)  using  the  power  spine  concept  to  generate  a  bondgraph  from 
which  all  valid  designs  (smaller  than  a  certain  size)  must  be  derivable  through  the 
addition  of  elements  only;  2)  using  rewrite  rules  to  reduce  a  bondgraph  to  its  essential 
skeleton;  3)  and  defining  the  concept  of  an  isolated  capacitance  and  inertance  in  order 
to  modify  the  type  number  of  a  system.  This  is  not  only  a  complete  explication  of 
the  domain  knowledge  for  this  class  of  schematic  synthesis  problems,  but  is  also  an 
instance  of  a  solution  to  a  schematic  synthesis  problem  that  meets  the  desiderata 
presented  in  the  thesis  introduction. 

5.1.4  Function  Sharing  Can  Be  Explained  and  Automated 

Although  the  idea  of  function  sharing  as  a  property  of  designs  is  not  new,  to  my 
knowledge  this  project  is  the  first  to  propose  the  idea  of  function  sharing  as  a  design 
procedure.  This  research  identifies  and  defines  the  phenomenon  as  a  mapping  from 
more  than  one  element  in  the  device  schematic  description  to  a  single  element  in 
the  device  physical  description.  In  addition  to  elucidating  the  phenomenon,  I  have 
described  and  implemented  one  procedure  for  achieving  function  sharing  in  the  dy¬ 
namic  systems  domain.  The  result  is  a  program  that  simplifies  designs.  It  is  likely 
that  other  specific  procedures  and  techniques  for  achieving  function  sharing  will  be 
developed,  but  they  will  probably  be  based  on  the  idea  of  using  relations  between 


5.2:  FUTURE  WORK 


119 


functional  attributes  and  structural  features  to  exploit  useful  secondary  properties 
of  regions  of  the  physical  design  description. 

5.1.5  Novel  Designs  can  be  Generated  by  Unbiased 
Application  of  Design  Operators 

This  project  was  initially  motivated  by  an  interest  in  novel  conceptual  design.  One  of 
the  important  results  of  this  research  is  that  novel  design  can  be  partially  achieved 
by  the  unbiased  application  of  design  operators.  If  the  knowledge  encoded  in  the 
operators  is  valid  then  the  results  will  be  valid.  If  the  operators  act  in  every  case 
in  which  they  are  appropriate,  they  will  perform  operations  that  people  have  not 
thought  of.  The  novelty  results  in  part  because  the  design  operators  are  faster  than 
the  human  equivalent  and  therefore  generate  many  more  concepts  than  the  human 
designer;  and  in  part  because  the  design  operators  are  systematic —  having  no  bias 
with  respect  to  how  a  design  feature  should  be  used. 

The  design  procedures  in  this  project  generated  unanticipated  or  novel  design 
concepts  several  times.  At  the  schematic  synthesis  level,  the  novel  designs  were 
simply  valid  configurations  that  I  had  not  been  able  to  generate  without  applying 
the  systematic  design  procedures.  At  the  function  sharing  level,  the  novel  designs 
resulted  from  the  fact  that  the  program  can  find  and  recognize  structural  features 
quickly  and  without  bias  of  intended  function. 

5.2  FUTURE  WORK 


This  section  presents  some  of  the  lessons  that  can  be  derived  from  this  project  and 
applied  to  future  work,  and  then  presents  several  ideas  for  projects  that  follow  directly 
or  indirectly  from  this  research. 


120 


Chapter  5:  Discussion 


5.2.1  Lessons  for  the  Future 

Although  many  of  the  ideas  in  this  document  apply  only  to  the  dynamic  systems 
domain,  the  intent  of  the  research  was  to  develop  some  insights  into  the  problem  of 
computational  approaches  to  pre-parametric  design. 

CAD  tools  will  require  functional  reasoning 

Commercial  computer-aided  design  (CAD)  tools  are  designed  to  store  geometrical 
information  about  a  part  (as  well  as  occasional  fabrication  instructions  in  the  form 
of  text  strings).  As  CAD  tools  become  more  useful  they  will  perform  tasks  like: 
identification  of  undesirable  secondary  behavior  of  a  part;  derivation  of  part  models; 
recognition  of  commonality  between  several  parts;  and  simplification  of  complicated 
parts.  Geometrical  information  is  not  enough  to  perform  these  tasks.  In  fact,  the 
ability  to  derive  possible  behaviors  from  geometry  is  not  enough.  These  CAD  tools 
must  also  represent  and  manipulate  the  function  of  a  part  that  the  designer  intends. 
This  was  a  requirement  of  the  function  sharing  segment  of  this  research —  in  order 
to  be  able  to  eliminate  some  structural  element,  the  program  had  to  have  access  to 
its  intended  function. 

Geometrical  reasoning  is  essential 

I  initially  believed  that  computation  could  be  used  to  generate  novel  mechanical 
designs  without  having  to  represent  the  geometry  of  the  design  explicitly.  In  fact, 
as  I  discuss  in  Appendix  D,  almost  all  of  the  interesting  properties  of  mechanical 
devices  are  derived  from  the  device  geometry.  The  schematic  description  is  often  the 
easy  part  of  mechanical  design,  and  the  potentially  innovative  and  interesting  aspects 
of  a  design  are  derived  through  geometrical  reasoning.  This  observation  suggests  a 


5.2:  FUTURE  WORK 


121 


need  for  better  techniques  for  manipulating,  modif3ring  and  recognizing  geometrical 
features  in  a  design. 

Formal  schematic  languages  are  needed 

Progress  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  was  possible  because  of  the  existence  of  a 
formal  language  for  representing  device  schematic  descriptions.  The  bondgraph  lan¬ 
guage  captures  most  of  the  functional  information  important  in  designing  a  dynamic 
system.  Because  the  language  is  formal,  a  program  can  decide  if  a  description  is 
well-formed,  and  the  bondgraph  modification  operators  are  well-defined.  An  addi¬ 
tional  property  of  the  bondgraphs  is  that  the  equations  of  motion  of  the  system  can 
be  derived  from  the  schematic  description.  These  properties  of  the  language  make 
the  schematic  synthesis  problem  tractable.  Languages  with  similar  properties  will 
be  necessary  in  other  domains  in  order  for  schematic  synthesis  to  be  performed. 

5.2.2  Future  Projects 

Several  projects  are  direct  extensions  of  the  work  that  I  have  described,  and  several 
projects  have  come  up  as  ideas  that  are  peripheral  to  the  ideas  in  this  document. 

Other  schematic  languages 

As  I  wrote  in  the  lessons  section,  formal  schematic  languages  are  essential  to  per¬ 
forming  pre-parametric  design  computationally.  These  languages  exist  is  several 
domains:  kinematics,  analog  circuits,  digital  circuits,  chemical  process  plant  design, 
hydraulic  circuit  design,  and  dynamic  systems.  An  important  project  is  to  identify 
other  domains  in  which  these  languages  can  be  developed.  In  most  mechanical  design 
domains,  the  schematic  language  is  implicit  in  the  designers  reasoning.  This  may 


122 


Chapter  5:  Discussion 


be  because  the  schematic  synthesis  problems  are  simple  compared  to  the  physical 
description  synthesis  problems  (as  in  the  case  of  designing  a  bracket),  or  it  may  be 
because  no  one  has  invested  the  effort  in  developing  such  a  language.  This  future  re¬ 
search  effort  should  be  problem  driven —  that  is  the  schematic  synthesis  task  should 
be  one  that  would  either  benefit  &om  automation  because  it  is  tedious  or  because 
it  is  very  difficult.  Some  possible  domains  are:  bowl  feeder  design,  shaft  and  bear¬ 
ing  system  design,  and  the  design  of  zero-degree-of-freedom  parts  like  brackets  and 
supports. 

Automatic  device  modeling 

The  function  sharing  procedure  in  some  ways  is  aimed  at  deriving  useful  secondary 
properties  of  devices.  This  reasoning  is  accomplished  through  the  use  of  an  explicit 
representation  of  the  relationship  between  certain  physical  features  of  a  design  and 
certain  functions.  These  same  relationships  could  be  used  to  construct  a  primary 
functional  model  of  a  design  from  the  physical  model.  Once  a  functional  model  is 
built  it  could  be  used  to  predict  the  performance  of  the  device.  The  performance 
results  could  then  be  examined  for  unanticipated  and  possibly  detrimental  attributes. 
Engineers  spend  a  great  deal  of  time  constructing  functional  models  of  devices  in 
order  to  gain  insights  into  the  relationships  between  the  design  parameters  and  the 
device  behavior.  A  useful  tool  would  be  one  that  could  derive  a  specified  type  of 
model  from  a  physical  design  description. 

Manufacturing  compiler 

One  of  the  results  of  the  function  sharing  procedure  is  the  simplification  of  the  design 
through  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  structural  elements.  The  function  sharing 
ideas  along  with  several  others  could  be  used  to  develop  a  sort  of  manufacturing 


5.2:  FUTURE  WORK 


123 


compiler.  The  idea  would  be  to  describe  a  prototype  design  physically  to  the  system 
and  to  generate  a  highly  simplified  version  of  the  design  that  would  be  ready  for 
inexpensive  manufacturing.  In  addition  to  the  function  sharing  ideas,  this  kind  of 
procedure  would  require  the  ability  to  reason  about  the  costs  of  various  kinds  of 
design  alternatives. 

Other  classes  of  design  reasoning 

Appendix  D  discusses  some  other  kinds  of  design  reasoning  that  lead  to  innovative 
design  concepts.  Finding  shape-optimal  structures,  novel  combination  of  existing 
device  features,  and  exploiting  unusual  physical  laws  and  effects  are  all  potentially 
useful  classes  of  design  reasoning  that  may  be  suited  to  computational  approaches. 


Appendix  A 


parametric  mechanical  design  computationally.  Because  of  the  infant  state  of  this 
held,  there  are  few  papers  from  which  my  research  has  followed  directly.  Many 
papers  have  however  been  instrumental  in  shaping  my  thinking  about  research  in 
computation  and  design,  and  indeed  about  the  activity  of  design  itself.  I  divide 
these  papers  into  two  categories,  and  have  accordingly  divided  this  chapter  into  two 
sections.  In  the  first  section,  I  present  one  paragraph  summaries  of  the  papers  that 
deal  directly  with  issues  that  are  addressed  by  this  thesis.  In  the  second  section,  I 
present  one  or  two  sentence  summaries  of  papers  that  have  been  indirectly  influential 
on  my  results.  In  each  section,  the  papers  are  ordered  alphabetically.  The  primary 
purpose  of  this  review  is  to  allow  future  researchers  ready  access  to  a  large  number 
of  relevant  research  papers  that  are  widely  scattered  in  the  literature. 

The  actual  references  for  the  cited  literature  are  at  the  very  end  of  this  document 
mixed  with  other  references  that  have  been  used  in  the  main  text. 


125 


126 


Appendix  A:  Literature  Review 


A.l  DIRECTLY  RELEVANT  PAPERS 

[Doyle88]  describes  work  aimed  at  generating  explanations  of  device  behavior.  In 
particular  the  input  to  the  explanation  problem  is  a  time  history  of  events  or  device 
states.  The  output  is  a  network  of  causal  connections  between  the  events  in  the 
observation.  Each  connection  corresponds  to  a  physical  phenomenon  or  mechanism. 
This  causal  network  can  be  thought  of  as  a  sort  of  schematic  description  of  the 
device.  Doyle  works  with  a  very  broad  class  of  devices,  including  toasters,  bicycle 
coaster  brakes  and  tire  gages.  To  deal  with  this  wide  variety  of  devices,  he  has 
developed  a  very  rich  representation  for  physical  phenomena,  including  many  kinds 
of  transduction  and  transport.  The  key  contribution  of  this  work  is  the  exploration  of 
the  power  of  various  types  of  constraints  in  controlling  the  combinatorial  complexity 
of  the  explanation  problem. 

[FreemanTl]  is  important  primarily  because  it  is  one  of  the  first  papers  to  discuss 
using  connections  between  functional  and  structural  descriptions  as  a  knowledge  base 
for  performing  design  operations  computationally. 

[Hirschtick85]  is  a  thesis  dealing  with  the  problem  of  providing  design  advice  with 
respect  to  a  cross-section  of  an  aluminum  extrusion.  The  basic  approach  is  to  use 
a  hierarchical  structure  of  features  (for  example  lines  are  bottom  level  features  and 
knife-edges  are  top  level  features)  in  order  to  recognize  important  design  attributes 
in  the  two-dimensional  cross-section.  The  recognized  features  serve  as  the  input 
to  a  rule-based  system  that  encodes  design  knowledge  from  an  aluminum  extrusion 
handbook. 

[Ishida84]  deals  with  the  problem  of  deriving  function  from  structure.  The  general 
function  from  structure  problem  is  underconstrained,  but  this  work  focuses  on  a 
limited  class  of  problematic  functions  (device  leakage  for  example).  The  objective  of 


A.l:  DIRECTLY  RELEVANT  PAPERS 


127 


the  research  is  to  develop  a  statement  of  the  problematic  function  or  unanticipated 
behavior  in  terms  of  a  predicate  operating  on  the  geometrical  representation  of  the 
problem.  So  device  leakage,  for  example,  is  described  as  a  property  of  the  geometry 
of  the  device,  expressible  as  a  condition  on  the  connectivity  of  a  graph  of  part  faces. 

[Jakiela87]  integrates  computational  feature  recognition  with  rules  associated 
with  design  for  assembly.  In  particular  Jakiela  has  encoded  the  Boothroyd-Dewhurst 
design-for-assembly  guidelines  as  procedures  operating  on  a  solid  model  description 
of  a  part.  The  system  is  interactive  and  suggests  to  the  designer  modifications  that 
will  make  the  designed  part  easier  to  feed.  If  the  designer  accepts  the  suggestions, 
the  modifications  are  made  automatically  to  the  solid  model  of  the  part. 

[Murthy87]  is  an  extension  of  Penberthy’s  work  on  the  graph  of  models  [Pen- 
berthy87].  The  program  described  in  Murthy’s  paper  is  based  on  the  idea  of  at¬ 
tempting  to  find  a  solution  to  a  design  problem  in  the  parameter  space  associated 
with  a  given  design  configuration.  If  a  solution  can  not  be  found  using  several  dif¬ 
ferent  design  models  in  the  analysis,  then  modification  operators  change  the  design 
configuration.  This  procedure  was  applied  to  the  problem  of  designing  beams  for 
torsion  and  bending.  In  one  case,  the  system  generated  a  description  of  a  tube  by 
modifying  a  solid  bar. 

[Prabhu88]  derives  some  mathematical  properties  of  multi-input,  multi-output 
devices  characterized  by  power  flows  between  inputs  and  outputs.  Prabhu  uses  a 
bondgtaph  representation  for  these  devices,  and  concentrates  on  synthesizing  the 
’’junction-structure”  or  network  of  transducing  elements  that  can  link  the  inputs  with 
the  outputs  while  dividing  the  power  flows  according  to  specification.  Because  the 
bondgraph  is  a  formal  mathematical  representation,  certain  results  such  as  soundness 
and  completeness  are  proven. 

[Ressler84]  is  a  thesis  describing  a  computational  procedure  for  designing  op- 


128 


Appendix  A:  Literature  Review 


erational  amplifiers.  The  procedure  is  based  upon  a  hierarchical  circuit  grammar. 
Amplifiers  are  viewed  as  consisting  of  three  stages.  Stage  one  may  be  implemented 
as  a  differential  pair,  a  current  cancellation  configuration  or  a  super  beta  circuit.  A 
differential  pair  may  be  viewed  as  a  load  and  emitter  coupler  pair.  A  load  can  be 
resistive,  a  current  mirror  ,  a  simple  pair,  or  a  Darlington  pair.  There  are  similar 
expansions  for  the  other  amplifier  stages.  The  design  procedure  is  to  implement  the 
amplifier  with  the  simplest  possible  pieces,  then  analyze  the  resulting  circuit  at  each 
stage  in  the  instantiation  process.  If  the  circuit  will  not  meet  the  specifications,  then 
a  more  complex  option  is  chosen. 

[Rieger77]  is  one  of  the  first  papers  attempting  to  describe  the  causal  structure 
of  a  mechanical  device.  This  paper  presents  a  language  for  describing  devices,  and 
develops  a  model  in  this  language  for  a  thermostat.  The  functional  elements  of  the 
model  are  terms  like:  continuous  and  one-shot  enablement,  state  coupling,  state 
equivalence,  state  antagonism,  threshold,  and  rate  confluence.  This  language  was 
designed  to  allow  descriptions  of  complex,  highly  non-linear  device  behavior,  that 
can  not  be  described  with  differential  equations.  Rieger  uses  these  descriptions  to 
simulate  the  behavior  of  the  devices  by  assigning  a  computational  behavior  to  each 
functional  element  in  the  device  description. 

[Rinderle87]  discusses  the  relationship  between  form  and  function  in  design.  He 
points  out  that  in  mechanical  design  there  is  often  no  clear  hierarchical  decomposition 
from  function  to  form,  as  there  is  in  VLSI  design.  He  suggests  that  there  are  some 
fundamental  relationships  between  form  and  function  in  mechanical  design  and  that 
these  relationships  can  be  described.  Rinderle  postulates  that  the  codification  of 
some  of  these  relationships  could  help  novice  designers  make  preliminary  design 
decisions. 


[Roylance83]  is  probably  the  first  effort  at  synthesizing  analog  circuit  configura- 


A.l:  DIRECTLY  RELEVANT  PAPERS 


120 


tions  computationally.  In  this  master’s  thesis,  Roylance  describes  a  design-rule-based 
system  that  designs  simple  RLC  circuits.  The  design  rules  allow  the  system  to  back¬ 
ward  chain  from  an  equation  specifying  the  desired  circuit  behavior. 

[Suh78]  introduces  the  idea  of  design  axioms.  The  paper  presents  the  following 
hypothesis:  ’’There  exists  a  small  set  of  global  principles,  or  axioms,  which  can 
be  applied  to  decisions  made  throughout  the  synthesis  of  a  manufacturing  system. 
These  axioms  constitute  guidelines  or  decision  rules  which  lead  to  ’correct’  decisions, 
i.e.  those  which  maximize  the  productivity  of  the  total  manufacturing  system,  in  all 
cases.”  The  work  described  in  this  paper  attempts  to  generate  such  a  set  of  axioms. 
Two  example  axioms  are:  1.  Minimize  the  number  of  functional  requirements  and 
constraints,  2.  Satisfy  the  primary  functional  requirement  first.  Satisfy  the  others  in 
order  of  importance. 

[SussmanSO]  is  an  article  containing  several  interesting  ideas.  First,  he  introduces 
the  idea  of  constraint  nets  as  a  computational  structure.  Rather  than  express  math¬ 
ematical  relations  as  a  unilateral  procedure  for  computing  certain  values  in  terms  of 
others,  constraints  express  only  the  relationship  between  quantities.  The  constraint 
net  can  be  used  to  compute  a  selected  quantity  from  the  remaining  quantities.  The 
other  major  idea  in  this  paper  is  that  of  almost-hierarchical  descriptions.  This  term 
is  used  to  denote  the  fact  that  engineered  devices  have  roughly  hierarchical  relations 
between  functional  descriptions  and  their  structural  implementations,  but  that  this 
relation  is  sometimes  muddled  by  function  sharing  in  the  design.  Sussman  introduces 
a  concept  called  slices  to  deal  with  these  almost-hierarchical  descriptions. 

[Williams88]  is  one  of  the  very  few  pieces  of  work  that  deals  with  the  synthesis 
of  a  design  configuration.  Williams  explores  the  domain  of  digital  circuit  design  at 
the  FET  level.  His  program  is  based  upon  using  qualitative  analysis  of  the  behavior 
of  a  preliminary  circuit  design  to  guide  design  modifications.  Williams  develops  a 


130 


Appendix  A:  Literature  Review 


time- based  dependency  scheme  for  tracking  the  influence  of  one  event  in  time  on 
another  event. 


A.2  INDIRECTLY  RELEVANT  PAPERS 

[Antonsson87]  is  a  position  paper  describing  some  desiderata  for  research  in  engi¬ 
neering  design  research.  Antonsson  proposes  that  research  in  engineering  design  has 
suffered  in  most  individual  cases  because  a  hypothesis  was  not  articulated  and  tested. 
He  gives  several  examples  of  research  problenss  that  follow  the  hypothesis  generation 
and  testing  paradigm. 

[Cagan87]  is  a  paper  describing  a  system  to  derive  novel  structural  modifications 
to  a  design  based  on  equations  describing  the  design.  The  key  insight  is  that  math¬ 
ematical  integrals  are  indications  that  the  structure  of  the  design  can  be  usefully 
decomposed  into  subregions.  For  example,  since  strength  of  a  bar  is  expressed  in 
terms  of  an  integral  along  the  bar  radius,  it  may  make  sense  to  consider  the  bar 
as  consisting  of  concentric  annuli.  Within  this  formulation,  an  optimization  of  the 
design  may  specify  zero  density  for  the  inner  annuli,  thus  generating  a  tube. 

[Davis84}  is  a  paper  about  diagnosing  problems  in  digital  circuits.  The  really 
interesting  idea  in  this  paper  is  that  potential  problems  may  only  be  obvious  in  a 
particular  representation  of  the  device.  For  example,  finding  a  problem  due  to  a 
solder  glob  is  difficult  using  the  schematic  description  of  the  circuit,  but  relatively 
easy  using  the  wiring  diagram  of  the  circuit. 

[de  Kleer85]  is  relevant  to  my  work  primarily  because  it  introduces  the  no¬ 
function-in-structure  principle.  This  principle  states  that  systems  that  are  to  derive 
behavior  or  function  from  a  structural  description  of  a  device  must  represent  the 
device  with  a  description  that  is  devoid  of  any  functional  information. 


131 


A.S:  INDIRECTLY  RELEVANT  PAPERS 


[Frieling77]  is  an  early  attempt  at  creating  a  representation  language  for  describ¬ 
ing  the  function  of  mechanicsd  devices. 

[Gero87]  is  an  survey  article  describing  some  of  the  major  prior  work  in  knowledge- 
based  systems  for  design.  Gero  proposes  that  future  work  be  done  in  three  areas: 
design  analysis /formulation,  design  synthesis,  and  preliminary  design  evaluation. 

[Glegg73]  and  [Glegg69]  are  books  based  on  the  introspection  of  Gordon  Glegg, 
a  British  designer  and  design  educator.  He  presents  a  set  of  heuristics  gleaned  from 
his  own  experience. 

[Jan8son87]  discusses  teaching  engineering  synthesis  and  analysis.  Much  of  my 
work  was  inspired  by  the  scenario  documented  in  this  paper  of  the  design  by  Y.T. 
Li  of  a  novel  tiltmeter.  The  design  was  based  on  an  abstraction  of  the  problem  and 
clever  use  of  analogy. 

[Maher87]  proposes  that  certain  design  synthesis  tasks  can  be  thought  of  as  a 
search  problem  within  a  design  space  derived  from  an  or-tree  representing  a  strict 
hierarchical  expansion  of  high  level  goals.  Maher  implemented  a  system  that  imposes 
constraints  on  the  combinations  of  design  options  that  are  allowed.  These  constraints 
help  to  prune  the  design  space. 

[Penberthy87]  presents  a  concept  called  the  graph  of  models.  The  idea  is  to  con¬ 
struct  a  graph  in  which  nodes  are  models  of  a  particular  domain,  and  links  correspond 
to  the  invocation  or  relaxation  of  specified  assumptions.  This  graph  allows  a  design 
analysis  system  to  move  between  different  levels  of  model  sophistication. 

[Rinderle87a]  discusses  the  automatic  generation  of  critical  design  relations.  Such 
relations  might  be  ratios  of  design  variables  that  compress  the  number  of  equations 
required  to  describe  a  design. 

[Rodenberger83]  is  useful  in  justifying  computer  tools  for  design.  The  argument 
is  that  design  engineers  at  General  Dynamics,  Inc.  make  design  decisions  costing 


I 


132 


Appendix  A:  Literature  Review 


about  $100,000,000  for  each  project  they  work  on.  So,  even  small  improvements  in 
designer  productivity  can  have  large  payoffs. 

[Serrano87]  presents  techniques  for  computing  design  values  from  specified  param¬ 
eters  and  a  constraint  network.  These  techniques  are  useful  for  a  sort  of  spreadsheet¬ 
like  design  tool. 

[SimonSl]  contains  a  chapter  called  The  Science  of  Design,  in  which  he  proposes 
that  design  should  become  a  science.  This  chapter  introduces  the  concept  of  satis¬ 
ficing  versus  optimal  solutions. 

[Kannapan87]  develops  an  instance  of  a  schematic  language  for  mechanical  design. 
The  language  includes  primitives  shafts,  bearings,  handles,  supports,  etc.  Pieces  of 
devices  described  with  this  language  are  combined  together  to  form  new  designs. 

[Ward88]  describes  a  mechanical  design  compiler  for  selecting  specific  machine 
elements  from  catalogs  from  a  description  of  the  topology  of  a  power  train.  The 
technique  for  performing  this  compilation  requires  the  development  of  a  special  in¬ 
terval  mathematics  for  representing  the  properties  of  components  and  specifications. 

[Winston83]  describes  a  set  of  ideas  for  constructing  definitions  of  objects  in  terms 
of  relations  between  their  functional  and  structural  attributes.  These  definitions 
allow  a  system  to  recognize  a  new  artifact  based  on  its  structural  description  and  a 
definition  extracted  from  a  set  of  precedents.  A  novel  object  could  be  recognized  as 
a  cup  by  inferring  that  because  it  has  a  handle  it  is  liftable,  and  because  it  has  a 
flat  bottom  it  rests  stably,  and  because  it  has  an  upward-pointing  concavity  it  can 
contain  liquid.  These  ideas  can  be  inverted  in  order  to  design  new  artifacts  based  on 
existing  precedents. 


Invention  as  Novel  Combination 


of  Existing  Device  Features 

Appendix  B 


p 


NOTE; 

This  appendix  chapter  is  a  version  of: 

Ulrich,  K.T.  and  W.P.  Seering,  “Computation  and  Conceptual  Design,”  Robotics 
&  Computer-Integrated  Manufacturing^  Vol.  4,  No.  3/4,  pp.  309-315,  1988. 

B.l  Summary 

Design  is  the  transformation  between  a  functional  and  a  structural  description  of  a 
device.  Conceptual  design  is  the  initial  stage  of  this  transformation.  We  hypothesize 
that  most  new  designs  are  derived  from  knowledge  of  existing  designs.  We  identify 
a  special  case  of  this  process  and  call  it  novel  combination.  By  describing  a  fully 
implemented  program  which  designs  novel  mechanical  fasteners,  we  explain  how 
knowledge  of  existing  devices  can  be  represented  and  used.  We  highlight  the  issues 
arising  from  this  implementation  and  propose  four  areas  of  future  research.  This  work 


133 


134 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


is  important  for  establishing  a  fundamental  understanding  of  conceptual  design. 

B.2  INTRODUCTION 

Computation  has  influenced  design  in  drafting,  databasing,  and  analysis,  but  there 
has  been  a  dearth  of  computational  attention  to  conceptual  design.  This  is  because 
of  the  perceived  difficulty  in  understanding  how  new  ideas  can  be  generated.  Con¬ 
ceptual  design  is  a  segment  of  the  design  process  which  receives  perhaps  the  least 
attention  in  terms  of  resource  allocation  and  yet  involves  decisions  which  have  per¬ 
haps  the  greatest  influence  on  eventual  project  success.  The  objective  of  this  work 
is  to  use  a  computational  approach  to  obtain  a  better  understanding  of  engineering 
idea  generation. 

B.2.1  Function,  Structure  and  Conceptual  Design 

The  function  of  a  device  is  its  purpose  or  intended  use.  A  functional  description 
consists  of  a  set  of  functional  attributes  which  might  be  characterized  by  a  truth 
table,  a  performance  curve  or  a  set  of  verbal  phrases.  The  structure  of  a  device  is  its 
physical  form.  A  structural  description  consists  of  a  set  of  structural  attributes,  which 
might  be  communicated  through  a  drawing,  a  model,  or  a  physical  implementation 
of  the  device  itself.  While  structure  and  function  are  related,  they  do  not  uniquely 
determine  each  other-  a  single  structural  attribute  can  contribute  to  more  than  one 
functional  attribute,  and  a  single  functional  attribute  can  be  implemented  in  several 
ways  by  different  combinations  of  structural  attributes.  Design  is  the  transformation 
between  a  functional  and  a  structural  description  of  a  device.  The  structure  of  a 
device  can  be  specified  at  many  different  levels  of  detail  ranging  from  a  sketch  on 
a  napkin  to  a  scale  model.  We  are  primarily  interested  in  conceptual  design,  the 


B.S:  CENTRAL  CONCEPTS 


135 


first  stage  of  the  design  transformation,  which  ends  with  a  structural  description  at 
a  level  of  detail  more  typical  of  the  napkin  sketch  than  the  scale  model. 

B.2.2  Scope,  Objectives  and  Approach 

Although  most  of  the  ideas  we  present  transcend  the  boundaries  of  traditional  en¬ 
gineering  disciplines,  our  research  focuses  on  the  mechanical  design  domain.  Our 
primary  objective  is  to  better  understand  how  new  ideas  for  mechanical  devices  can 
be  generated.  This  goal  is  motivated  by  the  long-term  desire  to  establish  a  rigorous 
theoretical  foundation  for  enhanced  design  teaching,  to  develop  better  design  tools, 
and  to  eventually  design  autonomous  inventive  machines.  Our  research  approach  has 
been  to  develop  well-defined  procedures  which  operate  on  a  well-defined  represen¬ 
tation  of  a  particular  domain  of  objects  to  solve  specific  idea  generation  tasks.  We 
then  use  computation  to  test  these  procedures  and  representations.  This  approach  is 
very  useful  for  eliminating  fuzzy  conceptual  thinking.  Notice  that  while  our  intuition 
as  designers  is  usefiil,  our  central  aim  is  to  develop  effective  design  procedures  and 
not  to  understand  the  particular  procedures  human  designers  use  when  performing 
conceptual  design  tasks. 

B.3  CENTRAL  CONCEPTS 

The  key  hypothesis  of  our  work  is  that  most  new  designs  come  from  knowledge  of  old 
designs.  The  novelty  of  a  design  concept  is  a  reflection  of  the  intellectual  distance  (or 
the  complexity  of  the  information  processing)  between  what  is  already  known  and 
what  is  proposed  as  a  new  solution  to  a  problem.  As  a  starting  point  of  our  research 
we  have  analyzed  a  limited  but  important  class  of  conceptual  design  we  call  novel 
combination.  Novel  combination  is  the  process  of  extracting  individual  structural 


136 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


attributes  from  each  of  several  known  devices  and  combining  these  attributes  in 
novel  ways  to  create  structural  descriptions  of  new  devices.  This  form  of  invention 
is  ubiquitous.  It  pervades  human  activities  from  cooking  to  computer  design.  As  an 
example,  the  threading  tap  could  have  been  invented  by  combining  the  gradually- 
increasing-cutter-size  feature  of  a  keyway  broach  with  the  helical-path  feature  of  a 
screw.  In  order  to  understand  how  this  sort  of  conceptual  design  can  be  performed,  we 
explain  how  knowledge  of  existing  devices  can  be  represented  and  how  this  knowledge 
can  be  used  procedurally  to  fulfill  a  functional  specification  of  a  design. 


B.3.1  Knowledge  Representation 

Since  we  have  defined  design  as  the  transformation  between  a  functional  and  a  struc¬ 
tural  description  of  a  device,  a  system  which  performs  design  must  have  knowledge 
which  includes  functional  and  structural  descriptions  and  the  relationships  between 
function  and  structure.  Our  representation  for  a  device  is  a  network  of  functional  and 
structural  attributes  linked  by  causal  relations.  For  example,  figure  B.3.1  shows  the 
knowledge  representation  of  a  shaft  coupling.  Some  of  the  functional  attributes  of 
this  device  are  transmits  torque,  compliant  in  tension,  compliant  in  bending,  strong 
in  torsion  and  corrosion  resistant.  Some  of  the  structural  attributes  are  bellows  con¬ 
struction,  strong  material,  elastic  material,  polymeric  material,  and  polycarbonate 
material.  These  attributes  are  linked  causally  as  shown  in  the  figure.  For  example, 
the  device  is  compliant  in  tension  because  it  is  a  bellows  construction  and  because 
it  is  made  of  an  elastic  material.  The  material  is  elastic  because  it  is  polycarbonate. 
These  relations  can  be  viewed  as  propositions  of  the  form  structure  1  A  structure  2 


function  A. 


B.S:  CENTRAL  CONCEPTS 


137 


138 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


I 

B.3.2 


Design  Procedure 


Imagine  that  a  design  system  has  a  representation  of  many  devices  as  described 
above.  Now  this  knowledge  can  be  used  to  synthesize  new  devices.  As  described  in 
the  introduction,  the  system  must  transform  a  functional  specification  to  a  struc¬ 
tural  description.  The  input  functional  specification  can  be  thought  of  as  a  set  of 
requirements,  each  one  of  which  must  be  fulfilled  for  the  design  to  be  functional. 
For  example,  an  input  to  a  design  system  might  be  the  requirement  that  a  design 
have  both  function  A  and  function  B.  Now,  if  the  system  knowledge  base  contains  an 
existing  device  in  which  function  A  is  caused  by  structures  1  and  2,  then  the  system 
can  substitute  structures  1  and  2  for  function  A  in  the  new  device  specification,  such 
that  the  requirement  for  the  device  is  now  that  it  have  structure  1,  structure  2  and 
function  B.  This  new  set  of  requirements  can  be  thought  of  as  a  new  design  specifica¬ 
tion.  The  system  can  then  find  structi  ral  causes  for  function  B  in  its  knowledge  base. 
And,  the  system  might  find  more  detailed  structures  which  cause  structures  1  and 
2.  This  procedure  continues  until  no  further  refinement  can  be  performed.  Notice 
that  in  general  the  system  knowledge  base  will  contain  more  than  one  device  with 
a  particular  function,  and  therefore  in  general  more  than  one  structural  cause  for 
a  particular  function.  When  the  system  refines  the  input  specification  under  these 
conditions,  it  creates  a  new  specification  for  each  possible  structural  cause.  This 
procedure  results  in  many  possible  structural  specifications  for  a  particular  design 
description.  Because  many  of  the  refined  descriptions  are  not  physically  realizable 
designs,  there  must  be  a  filtering  mechanism  in  the  system  which  removes  or  resolves 
conflicting  designs.  If  this  filtering  is  accomplished  between  each  step  of  the  refine¬ 
ment  process,  the  combinatorial  explosion  of  potential  designs  can  be  harnessed. 


B.4:  AN  EXAMPLE 


139 


B.4  AN  EXAMPLE 

We  have  implemented  a  program  which  does  novel  combination  in  the  domain  of 
mechanical  fasteners.  There  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of  different  kinds  of  me- 
chanical  fasteners  ranging  from  velcro  to  railroad  spikes.  Since  novel  fasteners  are 
characteristically  formed  from  structures  extracted  from  known  fastener  designs,  the 
fastener  domain  is  especially  appropriate  for  implementing  novel  combination.  This 
section  describes  the  fastener  example  by  outlining  the  task,  the  knowledge  base,  the 
methods,  and  the  output  of  the  program. 

B.4.1  The  Task 

The  program  task  is  to  propose  a  fastener  design  which  will  meet  a  particular  set 
of  functional  requirements.  The  functional  specification  is  made  within  the  context 
of  the  situation  described  in  figure  B.2.  The  fastener  must  hold  plates  A  and  B 
together,  be  actuated  from  the  front,  and  be  inserted  in  the  hole.  In  addition,  we 
can  specify  that  the  function  of  the  fsistener  must  not  depend  on  a  second  device 
such  as  a  nut.  A  variety  of  actuators  are  assumed  to  be  available,  and  modifications 
to  the  hole  are  allowed.  Since  we  are  interested  in  conceptual  design,  issues  such  as 
the  actual  size  of  the  hole  or  fastener  are  not  of  primary  importance.  An  example 
solution  to  a  typical  problem  specification  might  be  a  machine  screw  or  a  cotter-pin. 

B.4. 2  System  Knowledge 

The  knowledge  base  of  the  program  consists  of  descriptions  of  seven  common  fas¬ 
teners:  a  cotter-pin,  a  roll-pin,  a  machine  screw,  a  hex  bolt,  a  socket-head  screw,  a 
dowel  pin,  and  a  “christmas  tree”  (barbed)  fastener.  Figure  B.3  is  an  illustration  of 
these  fasteners. 


Appendix  B:  Invention  aa  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


B.4:  AN  EXAMPLE 


141 


I  A  1  B  I 

I  I  I 

DRIVE  HEAD  •  BODY  •  TAIL  *  TIP 


Figure  B.4:  Structural  framework  for  a  fastener. 

The  structural  description  of  every  fastener  is  specified  in  terms  of  a  fixed  frame¬ 
work.  There  are  five  essential  structural  features  for  a  fastener  which  will  fit  the 
problem  situation.  The  fastener  must  have  a  drive,  which  is  the  structure  which 
forms  the  interface  to  the  fastener  actuator.  It  must  have  a  tip,  which  is  the  struc¬ 
ture  which  enters  the  hole  first  when  the  fastener  is  actuated.  It  must  have  a  body, 
which  is  the  structure  which  occupies  the  hole  in  plate  A.  And  it  must  have  both 
a  head  and  a  tail.  The  head  and  tail  are  the  structures  which  provide  the  tensile 
reaction  forces  to  plate  A  and  plate  B  when  the  plates  are  pulled  apart.  In  the  case  of 
the  hex  bolt  in  figure  B.4,  the  drive  is  the  hexagonal  shape  of  the  end  of  the  &stener, 
the  head  is  the  larger  diameter  shotilder  section,  the  body  is  a  section  of  threads 
which  fit  loosely  in  the  hole  through  plate  A,  the  tail  is  another  section  of  threads 
which  mate  with  threads  in  the  hole  through  plate  B  (threads  are  an  allowable  hole 
modification),  and  the  tip  is  the  chamfered  section  at  the  end  of  the  fastener. 

There  are  eight  high-level  functional  attribute  classes  which  are  commonly  used 
when  describing  the  function  of  a  fastener.  They  are  fastening  strength,  retractabil- 


142 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


ity,  required  modifications  to  the  hole,  degree  to  which  access  to  the  back  of  plate 
B  is  required,  ease  with  which  the  fastener  can  be  actuated,  whether  or  not  the 
fastener  protrudes  &om  plate  A,  whether  or  not  it  protrudes  from  plate  B,  and  the 
precision  with  which  it  laterally  locates  plate  A  with  respect  to  plate  B.  In  speci¬ 
fying  a  new  fastener  or  describing  an  existing  fastener,  these  attribute  classes  take 
on  discrete  values  of  low,  medium  and  high,  or  yes  and  no.  Several  intermediate 
functional  attribute  classes  are  also  introduced.  An  example  of  these  classes  is  head 
strength  or  tail  strength.  A  complete  description  of  an  existing  fastener  is  shown  in 
figure  B.5.  Note  that  the  names  for  the  functional  classes  have  been  abbreviated. 
Also  note  that  the  causal  network  structure  is  a  network  of  the  type  described  in 
the  section  on  knowledge  representation.  One  of  these  networks  exists  for  each  of 
the  seven  existing  fasteners.  As  an  example  of  the  causal  relationships  contained  in 
the  network,  consider  the  case  of  the  fastener  strength  of  the  hex  bolt.  Strength  is 
determined  by  head  strength  and  tail  strength,  which  in  turn  are  determined  by  the 
structure  of  the  head  and  the  tail. 

B.4.3  Methods 

Imagine  that  we  want  the  system  to  design  a  fastener  which  has  high  strength,  is 
retractable,  and  is  highly  precise.  Assume  we  don’t  care  about  the  other  device 
attributes  (notated  by  dc).  Then,  in  the  notation  of  the  knowledge  representation 
language,  we  want  (strength  hi)  and  (retractability  yes)  and  (precision  hi)  and  (back- 
access  dc)  and  (actuation-ease  dc)  .  .  .  (tail-out  dc).  The  program  first  looks 

for  known  fasteners  which  have  high  strength.  For  each  known  fastener  with  high 
strength,  the  causes  of  the  strength  node  are  retrieved.  For  each  unique  set  of 
causes  a  new  specification  is  created  with  the  set  of  causes  replacing  the  strength 
attribute  in  the  initial  fastener  specification.  For  example,  in  using  the  hex  bolt 


B.4:  AN  EXAMPLE 


Figure  B.5:  The  knowledge  base  description  of  a  fastener 


144 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Ftatures 


knowledge,  the  system  would  substitute  (head-strength  hi)  and  (tail-strength  hi)  for 
(strength  hi).  The  program  then  repeatedly  expands  these  new  fastener  specifications 
until  the  fastener  specification  is  a  structural  description  in  terms  of  the  five  lowest- 
level  structural  attribute  classes.  Between  each  step,  the  program  checks  to  see 
if  a  fastener  is  acceptable.  An  acceptable  fastener  is  one  in  which  there  are  no 
conflicting  structural  attribute  values.  The  structure  is  in  conflict  if  there  is  more 
than  one  different  value  for  a  single  structural  attribute  (ie.  (drive  slot)  and  (drive 
external-hex)). 

B.4.4  Output 

The  result  of  applying  the  above  design  procedure  to  an  input  specification  is  a  set 
of  potential  designs,  each  of  which  consists  of  a  set  of  five  structural  attributes  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  five  parts  of  the  fastener  structure.  Each  of  these  sets  of  structural 
attributes  can  be  graphically  represented  as  shown  in  figure  B.6.  Figure  B.6  shows 
the  fasteners  which  result  from  running  the  example  described  above.  Figure  B.7  is 
a  selection  of  fastener  designs  that  were  generated  fiom  several  different  input  spec¬ 
ifications.  (The  graphical  descriptions  are  generated  from  the  structural  description 
by  a  collection  of  ad  hoc  procedures.) 

B.5  DISCUSSION 

In  this  section  we  discuss  some  observations  of  the  performance  of  the  fasteners 
program  and  point  out  the  direction  of  our  future  work. 

•  The  program  does  design  novel  fasteners.  In  figure  B.6  notice  that  there  are 
several  novel  precision  screws.  One  of  these  resembles  the  commercially  avail- 


B.5:  DISCUSSION 


145 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


B.5:  DISCUSSION 


147 


able  shoulder  screv.  While  this  screw  is  common  in  engineering  practice,  it  is 
not  one  of  the  initial  fasteners  in  the  system  knowledge  base. 

•  Notice  that  there  is  a  fixed  framework  for  the  form  of  the  solution  in  the  fasten¬ 
ers  example.  For  example,  if  the  system  were  designing  pizzas,  the  framework 
would  require  a  crust,  sauce,  cheese  and  toppings.  The  existence  of  this  frame¬ 
work  makes  the  knowledge  and  solutions  easy  to  describe.  If  the  system  were 
to  design  sculpture,  there  would  be  very  little  constraint  on  the  framework 
of  the  solution.  The  fasteners  domain  as  we  have  constrained  it  is  more  like 
pizza  than  sculpture.  Most  design  problems  fall  somewhere  between  these  two 
extremes.  The  degree  to  which  a  rigid  framework  for  the  solution  to  a  problem 
exists  is  a  good  measure  of  the  difficulty  in  applying  novel  combination. 

•  The  issue  of  context  is  pervasive  in  artificial  intelligence  research  in  general 
and  in  our  research  in  particular.  Notice  that  the  propositions  made  in  our 
knowledge  base  are  not  only  made  within  the  context  of  the  task  situation  in 
figure  B.4,  but  also  imply  an  infinity  of  assumptions  like  standard  environ¬ 
mental  conditions,  moderately  elastic  materials  etc.  The  use  of  this  knowledge 
outside  of  the  rigid  confines  of  the  fasteners  domain  would  in  general  result  in 
faulty  designs. 

•  The  knowledge  base  for  the  fasteners  program  was  devised  and  coded  by  hand. 
This  is  a  tedious  process  for  all  but  the  smallest  of  knowledge  bases. 

•  The  fastener  system  as  currently  designed  will  not  increase  in  performance  over 
time.  This  is  because  there  is  no  feedback  mechanism  such  that  the  system 
can  learn  new  causal  relations  with  experience. 


148 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


•  Conflicting  fastener  specifications  which  arise  in  the  process  of  refining  the  in¬ 
put  specification  are  currently  eliminated.  There  are  cases  where  instead  of 
eliminating  conflicting  descriptions,  novel  designs  could  be  produced  by  resolv¬ 
ing  the  conflicts  with  a  novel  structure. 

Some  of  these  issues  point  to  rich  areas  for  future  work.  Four  of  these  areas  are 
feedback,  conflict  resolution,  context,  and  abstraction  and  analogy. 

B.5.1  Feedback 

The  conceptual  design  procedure  we  have  described  does  not  improve  in  performance 
over  time.  Improvement  is  not  possible  without  feedback,  or  evaluation  of  the  results 
of  a  design.  Since  in  general,  the  knowledge  base  is  only  heuristically  suggestive  of 
causal  design  relations,  it  can  be  improved  or  repaired  by  processing  the  results  of  a 
functional  performance  evaluation  of  a  design.  This  performance  evaluation  could  be 
provided  by  building  and  testing  each  potential  design,  but  this  would  be  expensive 
in  time  and  resources.  Alternatively,  a  simulator  could  evaluate  design  performance. 
This  approach  requires  that  the  simulation  be  at  a  fundamentally  more  refined  level 
of  detail  than  the  design  knowledge  (an  example  of  this  sort  of  simulation  is  finite 
element  analysis).  In  many  cases  this  simulation  could  be  provided  by  a  human 
designer,  since  people  have  a  very  powerful  ability  to  envision  device  performance  in 
many  domains. 

B.5.2  Conflict  Resolution 

As  noted,  the  current  system  eliminates  any  potential  designs  with  conflicting  speci¬ 
fications.  Novel  designs  are  often  bypassed  through  this  elimination  process.  Instead 
of  simply  eliminating  conflicting  designs,  we  would  like  to  resolve  the  specification 


B.5:  DISCUSSION 


149 


conflicts  with  new  structures.  In  order  to  resolve  conflicts,  a  designer  must  recog¬ 
nize  that  the  function  of  conflicting  structural  attributes  can  often  be  met  by  a  new 
structure  which  results  from  the  elimination  of  the  non-essential  characteristics  of 
each  of  the  conflicting  structural  attributes.  In  general  this  ability  requires  reasoning 
at  a  more  refined  level  of  representational  detail  than  is  expressed  in  the  conflict¬ 
ing  design  specification.  Future  research  will  address  the  issue  of  multiple  levels  of 
representational  detail  being  applied  when  appropriate  and  necessary. 


B.5.3  Context 

We  state  that  the  use  of  the  represented  design  knowledge  outside  of  the  fasteners 
domain  would  result  in  faulty  designs.  This  is  because  there  are  many  implied 
conditions  on  this  knowledge.  To  allow  the  fastener  knowledge  to  be  applied  in 
other  domains,  it  could  be  grouped  together  as  a  class  with  the  implied  conditions 
explicitly  represented  as  attributes  of  that  particular  class.  Then,  when  a  part  of  a 
description  is  applied  in  a  new  domain,  this  contextual  information  could  be  added 
as  an  explicit  condition  on  the  use  of  the  knowledge. 


B.5.4  Abstraction  and  Analogy 

The  design  procedure  we  have  described  uses  very  superficial  analogical  reasoning. 
Much  of  highly  novel  conceptual  design  relies  on  the  ability  of  the  designer  to  recog¬ 
nize  deep  similarities  between  the  current  design  specification  and  existing  designs. 
This  process  can  be  described  as  abstraction  and  analogy.  Devising  representations 
and  procedures  for  performing  abstraction  and  analogy  is  a  long  term  goal  of  our 
work,  which  will  be  essential  for  highly  novel  conceptual  design. 


150 


Appendix  B:  Invention  as  Novel  Combination  of  Existing  Device  Features 


B.6  RELATED  WORK 

Our  research  is  built  upon  the  ideas  of  several  researchers.  Some  of  the  fundamental 
ideas  on  conceptual  design  were  developed  with  insight  provided  by  Lenat  [1,2].  The 
idea  of  design  reasoning  from  structure  and  function  was  introduced  by  Freeman  and 
Newell  [3]  and  subsequently  used  for  diagnosis  by  Davis  et  al  [4,5].  Winston’s  work  on 
learning  device  descriptions  inspired  both  the  concept  of  using  device  descriptions 
to  do  design,  and  the  structure  of  our  knowledge  representation  [6,7].  Simon  has 
written  about  design  learning  through  simulation  [8].  Dyer  et  al  have  investigated 
an  alternative  approach  to  invention  using  qualitative  analysis  of  modified  known 
devices  [9]. 

B.7  REFERENCES 

1.  Lenat,  D.,  “The  Ubiquity  of  Discovery,”  Artificial  Intelligence^  9  (1978),  257- 
285. 

2.  Lenat,  D.,  “Why  AM  and  EURISKO  Appear  to  Work,”  Artificial  Intelligence, 
23  (1984)  269-294. 

3.  Freeman,  P.  and  Newell,  A.,  “A  Model  for  Functional  Reasoning  in  Design,” 
Proceedings  of  the  Second  IJCAI,  London  1971. 

4.  Davis,  R.,  et  al,  “Diagnosis  Based  on  Structure  and  Function,”  Proceedings  of 
AAAI-82,  August  1982. 

5.  Davis,  R.,  “Diagnostic  Reasoning  Based  on  Structure  and  Behavior,”  MIT  Al 


Lab  Memo  739,  June  1984. 


B.r.  REFERENCES 


151 


6.  Winston,  P.,  “Learning  New  Principles  from  Precedents  and  Exercises;  The 
Details,”  MIT  AI  Lab  Memo  632,  November  1981. 

7.  Winston,  P.  et  al,  “Learning  Physical  Descriptions  from  Functional  Definitions, 
Examples,  and  Precedents,”  MIT  AI  Lab  Memo  679,  January  1983. 

8.  Simon,  H.,  The  Sciences  of  the  Artificial^  Second  Edition,  The  MIT  Press, 
1981,  p.  17-22. 

9.  Dyer,  M.,  et  al,  “EDISON:  An  Engin^ring  Design  Invention  System  Operating 
Naively,”  UCLA  AI  Lab  Technical  Report  UCLA-AI-85-20. 


I 


Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in 
Conceptual  Design 


Appendix  C 


NOTE: 

This  appendix  chapter  is  a  version  of: 

Ulrich,  K.T.  and  W.P  Seering,  “Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  De¬ 
sign,”  in  Yoshikawa,  H.  and  D.  Gossard  (editors),  Intelligent  CAD,  North-Holland 
Publishing  Co.,  U.K.  1988. 

C.l  ABSTRACT 

We  are  interested  in  developing  ideas  that  will  lead  to  computational  tools  for  con¬ 
ceptual  design.  Most  conceptual  design  tasks  require  the  simultaneous  achievement 
of  several  goals.  We  propose  that  the  explicit  separation  of  design  reasoning  into 
computational  modules  we  call  perspectives  clarifies  the  operation  of  the  program 
and  makes  design  knowledge  easier  to  encode,  maintain  and  transport.  We  illustrate 
this  concept  with  an  explanation  of  a  program  that  solves  a  simple  design  problem. 


153 


154 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


We  analyze  this  program  and  discuss  the  criteria  for  application  of  the  perspectives 
scheme  to  other  problems. 

C.2  INTRODUCTION 

This  paper  describes  an  organizational  structure  for  computer  programs  that  solve 
iterative  design  problems  requiring  the  satisfaction  of  multiple  goals.  Our  objective 
is  to  develop  ideas  that  wiU  lead  to  computational  tools  for  conceptual  design.  Our 
approach  is  to  define  an  information  processing  task  relating  to  conceptual  design 
and  then  to  explain  how  the  task  can  be  accomplished  computationally. 

This  introductory  section  motivates  the  research  issue  and  explains  our  general 
problem  solving  strategy.  Section  2  defines  the  key  concept  of  design  using  perspec¬ 
tives.  We  illustrate  this  concept  in  section  3  with  an  implemented  program  that  solves 
a  simple  design  problem.  Section  4  is  an  analysis  of  the  results  of  this  implementation 
and  a  discussion  of  the  criteria  for  application  of  our  approach  to  other  problems. 
We  conclude  by  discussing  our  current  research  efforts  and  outlining  related  work  by 
others. 

C.2.1  Conceptual  Design  Problems  Have  Multiple  Goals 

One  pervasive  attribute  of  conceptual  design  problems  is  the  diversity  of  typical 
design  goals.  Consider  the  following  specification  for  an  automobile  speedometer. 

•  Produce  an  angular  deflection  of  a  needle  proportional  to  the  angular  velocity 
of  an  input  shaft. 

•  The  input  shaft  is  located  at  the  automobile  transmission  housing.  The  indi¬ 
cator  needle  is  located  at  the  dashboard. 


G.2:  INTRODUCTION 


155 


•  The  speedometer  should  have  a  low-pass  frequency  response  with  a  cut-off 
frequency  of  0.5  hz. 

•  The  speedometer  should  last  200,000  kilometers. 

•  The  speedometer  should  be  easy  to  assemble. 

•  The  total  cost  should  be  less  than  US$5.00. 

Each  of  these  six  goals  must  be  met  for  a  design  to  be  successful.  Note  that 
evaluating  these  different  goals  requires  the  ability  to  reason  about  highly  distinct 
attributes  of  a  design. 

C.2.2  Design  And  Debug  Is  One  Solution  Technique 

There  are  several  approaches  a  designer  (human  or  computer)  can  take  to  meet  de¬ 
sign  goals  like  those  for  the  speedometer.  If  the  problem  can  be  mathematically 
parameterized,  then  mathematical  programming  techniques  can  be  used  to  find  ac¬ 
ceptable  solutions.  Unfortunately,  most  conceptual  design  problems  are  not  easily 
parameterized,  and  most  likely  the  designer  will  have  to  use  some  sort  of  iterative 
approach.  In  one  scenario,  a  designer  might  first  devise  some  scheme  to  convert 
angular  velocity  to  angular  deflection  and  then  adjust  the  configuration  and  geomet¬ 
rical  properties  of  the  design  components  to  achieve  the  remaining  goals.  We  call 
this  general  approach  design  and  debug.  The  process  can  be  thought  of  as  consisting 
of  two  phases.  First  the  designer  generates  a  solution  that  is  In  some  respect  close 
to  a  final  solution.  Second,  that  solution  is  modified  to  meet  the  multiple  goals  of 
the  problem. 

There  are  many  ways  to  generate  a  solution  that  is  almost  satisfactory.  A  past 
solution  to  a  similar  problem  can  be  retrieved.  A  general  design  template  can  be 


156 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


filled  in  for  the  class  of  problem  specified.  Pieces  of  several  known  devices  can  be 
combined.  A  sequence  of  components  with  known  input-output  relations  can  be 
assembled  to  achieve  a  global  input-output  relation.  In  general  these  techniques  will 
yield  a  promising  but  faulty  design.  The  balance  of  this  paper  focuses  on  a  way  of 
organizing  the  modification  or  debugging  of  this  initial  design. 

C.3  KEY  CONCEPT 

Each  of  the  goals  in  the  speedometer  problem  requires  the  designer  to  reason  from 
a  different  point  of  view,  using  a  different  abstract  description  of  the  design.  We 
call  a  particular  abstraction  of  a  design,  used  to  reason  from  a  particular  point  of 
view,  a  perspective.  In  the  speedometer  example,  the  perspectives  a  designer  might 
incorporate  include  the  geometric,  dynamic,  manufacturing,  reliability,  and  cost  ab¬ 
stractions  of  the  design.  Each  of  these  perspectives  highlights  certain  properties  of 
the  design  components  and  suppresses  others.  We  propose  that  the  explicit  separa¬ 
tion  of  these  perspectives  in  computer  programs  that  perform  design  is  an  important 
organizational  strategy. 

C.3.1  Perspectives  Allow  Control  of  Debugging 

The  separation  of  perspectives  is  particularly  important  for  debugging  a  design. 
Imagine  that  a  designer  only  cares  about  two  different  design  goals  and  can  assess 
how  close  a  design  is  to  meeting  these  two  goals.  The  debugging  process  is  represented 
in  figure  C.l.  The  horizontal  axis  represents  the  difference  between  a  current  design 
and  goal  1.  The  vertical  axis  represents  the  difference  for  goal  2.  Each  step  in  the 
debrgging  process  is  represented  by  an  arrow.  There  are  at  least  two  fundamental 
approaches  to  reaching  the  design  goal.  The  designer  can  first  achieve  one  goal  and 


C.S:  KEY  CONCEPT 


157 


Figure  C.l:  Debugging  to  meet  two  goals 


then  make  changes  to  the  design  that  preserve  the  validity  of  the  design  with  respect 
to  that  goal  while  improving  the  design  with  respect  to  the  other  goal  (solid  line). 
Alternatively,  the  designer  can  make  changes  that  improve  the  design  with  respect 
to  both  goals  simultaneously  (dashed  line).  These  debugging  strategies  are  made 
possible  by  the  explicit  control  of  the  focus  of  debugging  effort.  This  control  is  made 
possible  by  the  separation  of  debugging  effort  into  perspectives. 


158 


Appendix  C:  A.ckieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


C.4  AN  EXAMPLE 

We  observed  that  the  speedometer  design  problem  is  specified  by  a  collection  of  goals 
each  requiring  the  ability  to  view  the  design  from  a  different  perspective.  In  this  sec¬ 
tion  we  explain  an  organizational  structure  for  computer  programs  that  perform  this 
sort  of  design  reasoning.  This  structure  contains  computational  modules  correspond¬ 
ing  to  each  separate  perspective  required  for  the  solution  of  the  design  problem.  We 
illustrate  this  idea  with  an  example  in  a  simple  design  domain.  As  a  base  case,  we 
consider  the  problem  of  meeting  two  design  goals  simultaneously. 

C.4.1  A  Domain  With  Two  Distinct  Design  Perspectives 

We  have  constructed  a  simple  domain  to  explore  the  idea  of  using  separate  perspec¬ 
tives  to  solve  design  problems.  The  domain  includes  two  distinct  perspectives  of 
designs.  The  design  problem  is  to  construct  a  sequence  of  blocks  chosen  from  among 
the  blocks  shown  in  figure  C.2.  The  problem  can  be  thought  of  as  an  abstraction  of 
the  problem  of  arranging  modular  material  handling  equipment  that  must  fit  in  a 
certain  location  and  cost  a  certain  amount.  The  following  rules  apply. 

•  Sequences  consist  of  six  blocks. 

•  The  pipe  segments  (thick  lines  within  blocks)  associated  with  adjacent  blocks 
must  match  at  the  block  interface. 

•  Blocks  may  be  translated  but  not  rotated. 

•  Any  number  of  blocks  from  any  of  the  twelve  types  may  be  used  in  a  sequence. 

•  Blocks  may  not  overlap. 


C.4:  AN  EXAMPLE 


150 


1 


r-x: 

L ' 

■r 

2 

^  . 

2 

IC 

3 

2  3 

3 

Figure  G.2:  Components  available  in  the  blocks  domain. 

Figure  C.3  is  an  example  of  a  valid  design.  Notice  that  each  block  has  associated 
with  it  an  integer  from  1  to  3  and  a  pipe  segment.  These  attributes  are  meant  to 
simulate  two  different  design  properties  of  a  design  component  (roughly  analogous 
to  geometrical  and  cost  properties  of  mechanical  components).  There  are  two  design 
goals  that  must  be  met  for  a  sequence  of  blocks  to  be  a  successful  design.  First, 
the  centroid  of  the  area  defined  by  the  block  sequence  (with  respect  to  the  lower 
left-hand  corner  of  the  first  block)  must  be  located  in  a  specified  region.  Second,  the 
integer  values  of  the  blocks  must  sum  to  a  specified  value.  So,  in  the  case  of  the 
block  sequence  in  figure  C.3,  the  sum  is  1-I-3-1-1  +  2-1-2-I-1  =  10,  and  the  centroid 
is  located  (within  .01)  at  x  =  1.83  and  y  =  —.67. 

C.4. 2  Using  Perspectives  in  Design  and  Debug 

We  solve  this  design  problem  by  separating  the  debugging  part  of  the  program  into 
two  design  perspectives-one  corresponding  to  the  geometrical  properties  of  the  se¬ 
quence  and  the  other  corresponding  to  the  numerical  properties  of  the  sequence. 
Figure  C.4  illustrates  our  program  architecture.  Each  of  the  rectangular  boxes  in 


160 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


Figure  C.3:  A  valid  design. 

the  diagram  represents  a  computational  module.  The  left  and  right  hand  sections 
of  the  figure  correspond  to  the  two  different  design  perspectives  used  to  solve  the 
problem.  The  following  description  is  an  overview  of  the  program  operation.  The 
five  paragraphs  after  the  overview  describe  each  part  of  the  program  in  detail. 


•  The  program  accepts  as  inputs  an  initial  design,  the  desired  x  and  y  location 
of  the  centroid,  and  the  desired  sum  of  the  block  numbers. 

•  Two  separate  abstractions  of  the  initial  device  are  made  corresponding  to  the 
two  separate  design  perspectives. 

•  The  abstract  descriptions  of  the  initial  designs  are  modified  by  debugging  pro¬ 
cedures  associated  with  each  separate  perspective. 

•  The  modified  abstract  descriptions  are  then  instantiated  into  completely  spec¬ 
ified  designs  by  instantiation  procedures  associated  with  each  perspective. 


C.4:  AN  EXAMPLE 


161 


•  The  instantiated  designs  fcom  each  perspective  are  collected  together  and  eval¬ 
uated  according  to  how  well  they  meet  the  two  design  goals. 

•  If  no  new  design  completely  meets  the  design  goals,  one  of  the  new  designs  is 
chosen  as  the  next  initial  design  and  the  process  is  repeated. 

In  this  scheme,  the  debugging  procedures  are  explicitly  separated  into  two  per¬ 
spectives.  These  perspectives  are  organized  such  that  the  debuggers  are  not  explicitly 
controlled-both  debuggers  are  invoked  on  every  iteration  cycle. 

C.4.3  Initial  Design  and  Abstractions 

The  program  accepts  as  input  an  initial  design,  a  shape  goal  (the  x-y  location  of  the 
centroid),  and  a  number  goal  (an  integer  value  between  6  and  18).  In  this  case  the 
initial  design  is  generated  randomly,  although  in  most  mechanical  design  problems, 
the  initial  design  would  be  generated  by  some  other  procedure.  The  first  program  op¬ 
eration  is  to  create  abstract  descriptions  of  the  initial  design  corresponding  to  the  two 
design  perspectives.  In  one  case  a  geometrical  abstraction  is  made  which  suppresses 
the  numerical  properties  of  the  blocks.  In  the  other  case,  a  numerical  abstraction  is 
made  which  suppresses  the  geometrical  properties  of  the  blocks.  These  abstractions 
correspond  (in  figure  C.4)  to  the  left  and  right  arrows  leaving  the  initial  design.  The 
geometrical  abstraction  consists  of  a  list  of  six  pairs  of  directions  corresponding  to 
the  input  and  output  directions  of  the  pipe  segments  associated  with  each  of  the  six 
blocks.  The  numerical  abstraction  consists  of  a  list  of  six  integers  corresponding  to 
the  integers  associated  with  each  of  the  six  blocks. 


162 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


Figure  C.4:  Program  architecture 


C.4:  AN  EXAMPLE 


163 


C.4.4  Debugging  Procedures 

The  debugging  operations  occur  within  separate  design  perspectives.  In  the  geomet¬ 
rical  perspective,  a  shape  debugger  takes  as  input  the  geometrical  abstraction  of  the  i 

initial  device  and  the  shape  specification  (given  as  a  program  input).  The  debugger 
computes  the  difference  between  the  desired  centroid  location  and  the  actual  cen¬ 
troid  location  and  produces  as  output  several  geometrical  abstractions  of  designs  that 
have  improved  shapes  (whose  centroids  are  located  closer  to  the  specification).  In 
the  numerical  perspective,  a  number  debugger  takes  as  input  the  numerical  abstrac¬ 
tion  of  the  initial  device  and  the  number  specification.  The  debugger  computes  the 
difference  between  the  desired  sum  and  actual  sum  and  produces  2is  output  several 
numerical  abstractions  of  devices  that  have  improved  numerical  properties.  In  each 
case,  the  debuggers  operate  on  abstract  descriptions  and  produce  abstract  descrip¬ 
tions.  The  abstract  descriptions  they  produce  may  or  may  not  actually  be  realizable 
and  may  represent  many  different  possible  instantiations. 

The  design  knowledge  associated  with  the  debuggers  will  vary  from  perspective 
to  perspective.  In  the  block  design  problem  the  shape  debugger  simply  tries  all  pos¬ 
sible  substitutions  of  two  adjacent  blocks  in  the  abstract  block  sequence  description 
and  keeps  those  descriptions  that  have  improved  centroid  locations.  The  debugger 
changes  two  adjacent  blocks  because  that  is  the  smallest  design  change  that  can 
influence  the  location  of  the  centroid.  The  shape  debugger  will  typically  produce 
about  20  abstract  descriptions. 

The  number  debugger  makes  changes  to  single  numbers  and  pairs  of  adjacent 
numbers  in  the  list  of  six  numbers.  The  debugger  makes  all  changes  of  these  two 
types  that  improve  the  design  sum.  These  changes  are  guided  by  the  error  between 
the  design  goal  and  the  actual  sum  of  the  current  abstract  description.  The  number 


164 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


debugger  will  typically  produce  about  10  abstract  descriptions. 

C.4.5  Instantiation  procedures 

The  next  step  in  each  of  the  perspectives  is  to  instantiate  the  abstract  design  descrip¬ 
tions  that  have  been  produced  by  the  debuggers.  Note  that  an  abstract  description 
could  be  instantiated  many  ways.  For  example  a  list  of  six  integers  corresponding 
to  the  numerical  design  perspective  can  represent  many  different  complete  designs 
(because  there  are  several  different  blocks  with  the  same  numerical  properties).  The 
key  idei.  behind  the  instantiation  procedures  is  to  only  consider  those  design  instan¬ 
tiations  that  could  be  the  result  of  small  changes  to  the  initial  device.  This  is  an 
important  step  in  reducing  the  space  of  possible  designs,  and  the  reason  that  the 
instantiation  procedures  accept  as  inputs  the  initial  device  descriptions  as  well  as 
the  abstract  descriptions  produced  by  the  debuggers.  The  instantiation  procedures 
simply  compare  the  initial  design  description  with  an  abstract  description  generated 
by  the  debugger.  The  design  components  that  differ  from  the  initial  design  are  iden¬ 
tified.  The  instantiater  then  finds  all  possible  components  (from  those  in  figure  3) 
that  have  the  same  abstract  description  as  the  differing  components  in  the  design 
generated  by  the  debugger.  All  of  these  components  that  are  compatible  (meet  the 
interface  constraints)  with  the  initial  device  are  substituted  for  the  differing  compo¬ 
nents  in  the  initial  device  description. 

C.4.6  Evaluation 

Next,  all  of  the  instantiated  designs  are  evaluated  and  ordered.  The  evaluation 
procedure  must  weigh  the  relative  importance  of  meeting  a  goal  in  each  of  the  design 
perspectives.  For  example,  if  the  numerical  goal  is  very  easy  to  meet  (if  every  different 


C.5:  ANALYSIS 


165 


shape  of  block  is  available  in  every  numerical  value)  then  closeness  to  the  numerical 
goal  should  not  be  as  important  as  closeness  to  the  geometrical  goal.  In  the  example 
we  describe,  we  use  as  the  evaluation  function,  the  sum  of  the  x  centroid  error,  the 
y  centroid  error,  and  the  sum  error. 


C.4.7  Choosing  the  Next  Design 

If  the  best  design  produced  in  a  debugging  iteration  does  not  meet  all  of  the  design 
goals  then  one  of  the  new  designs  is  chosen  as  a  new  initial  design  for  another 
iteration.  The  new  design  can  be  chosen  many  different  ways.  Two  procedures  we 
have  used  work  well.  In  one  case,  we  simply  choose  at  random  from  the  best  five  new 
designs.  In  the  other  case,  we  keep  the  best  five  designs  that  have  ever  been  produced 
since  the  first  debugging  iteration.  The  choice  procedure  picks  randomly  from  these 
five.  The  introduction  of  some  randomness  helps  to  prevent  program  looping.  The 
two  choice  strategies  we  describe  are  analogous  to  the  search  control  strategies  hill 
climbing  and  best  first 


C.5  ANALYSIS 

The  blocks  problem  is  a  constructed  domain.  We  have  designed  it  to  preserve  the 
properties  of  conceptual  design  that  are  relevant  to  debugging  to  meet  multiple  goals, 
and  to  suppress  some  of  the  difficult  implementation  issues  inherent  in  more  realistic 
design  problems.  In  this  section  we  discuss  the  results  of  our  implementation  and 
justify  our  focus  on  perspectives  as  an  organizational  paradigm.  Then,  we  analyze 
the  assumptions  both  explicit  and  implicit  in  the  blocks  problem  by  outlining  the 
criteria  for  application  of  the  perspectives  structure  to  other  domains. 


166 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


C.5.1  This  Approach  is  Successful  in  the  Blocks  Domain 

The  concept  of  perspectives  and  our  program  architecture  are  very  successful  in 
the  blocks  design  domain.  A  wide  range  of  specifications  for  the  centroid  location 
and  the  integer  sum  were  tried.  Also,  the  assortment  of  types  of  blocks  available 
as  design  components  was  varied.  These  changes  control  the  relative  difficulty  of 
meeting  the  two  design  goals  and  the  overall  difficulty  of  the  design  problem.  The 
problem  difficulty  can  be  adjusted  from  approximately  1  solution  in  200,000  random 
designs  to  1  solution  in  50  random  designs.  In  the  easy  case,  the  design  program 
finds  a  solution  96  percent  of  the  time,  in  an  average  of  about  3  iterations.  In  the 
hardest  case,  the  program  finds  a  solution  30  percent  of  the  time,  in  an  average  of 
about  25  iterations.  These  statistics  are  not  important  except  to  illustrate  that  if 
we  can  attack  real  design  problems  analogously,  our  programs  should  be  successful. 
An  important  point  is  that  the  success  of  this  particular  program  is  dependent  upon 
many  factors  including  the  power  of  the  debugging  procedures. 

C.5.2  Perspectives  Make  Sense  as  an  Organizational  Tool 
for  Enforcing  Debugging  Modularity 

The  concept  of  debugging  from  separate  perspectives  is  important  because  it  is  an 
organizational  tool  for  enforcing  modularity.  The  shape  debugger  and  number  debug¬ 
ger  are  designed  independently  of  the  rest  of  the  system.  The  only  design  knowledge 
located  in  the  shape  debugger  is  shape  knowledge.  The  only  design  knowledge  lo¬ 
cated  in  the  number  debugger  is  number  knowledge.  This  makes  the  debuggers  easy 
to  design.  If  the  debugger  had  to  consider  all  perspectives  at  once,  it  would  be 
nearly  impossible  to  develop  and  to  maintain.  This  organizational  strategy  makes 
design  knowledge  in  one  debugger  applicable  to  a  variety  of  problems.  For  example, 


C.5:  ANALYSIS 


167 


if  we  develop  a  geometry  debugger  that  takes  as  input  a  network  of  two  dimensional 
shapes  and  makes  changes  so  that  they  fit  in  a  specified  two  dimensional  envelope, 
we  can  use  it  for  office  layout,  circuit  board  layout,  and  simple  mechanical  design. 
To  use  this  generic  geometry  debugger  we  only  need  write  an  ad  hoc  instantiation 
program  that  takes  an  initial  design  description  and  a  debugged  abstract  description 
and  produces  possible  design  instantiations.  This  organizational  strategy  also  makes 
the  design  knowledge  explicit.  It  is  easy  to  understand  why  a  debugger  does  or  does 
not  work. 


C.5. 3  Criteria  For  Successful  Application  To  Other 

Domains 

In  this  section  we  describe  the  conditions  under  which  our  design  strategy  can  be 
applied  to  other  problems.  Design  problems  to  be  approached  with  design  and  debug 
using  perspectives  need  to  have  the  following  characteristics. 

•  There  must  be  a  multi-valued  measure  of  design  quality.  This  assumption 
corresponds  to  the  ability  to  measure  some  sort  of  distance  from  each  of  the 
design  goals.  This  is  a  requirement  for  any  design  technique  in  any  domain  that 
cannot  be  exhaustively  explored.  Most  designs  can  be  evaluated  with  more 
than  a  binary  acceptance-rejection  function,  but  formalizing  these  evaluation 
functions  is  often  difficult. 

•  Debugging  operations  must  correspond  to  small  changes  in  the  quality  of  the 
design.  This  is  a  requirement  for  any  iterative  approach.  This  property  of 
debuggers  and  evaluation  functions  ensures  that  designs  that  almost  meet  de¬ 
sign  goals  can  be  debugged  in  a  single  step.  Problem  formulations  without  this 


I 


168 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


property  are  difficult  to  solve  because  the  evaluation  function  does  not  accu¬ 
rately  reflect  the  degree  of  difficulty  involved  in  debugging  a  design-a  design 
with  a  poor  evaluation  may  be  one  debugging  step  from  success,  while  a  design 
with  a  good  evaluation  may  be  several  steps  from  success. 

•  There  must  be  a  formalizable  set  of  debugging  procedures  for  modifying  an 
abstract  description  of  a  design. 


•  There  must  be  a  correspondence  between  the  components  used  to  build  com¬ 
plete  design  descriptions  and  the  primitive  elements  used  to  make  abstract 
descriptions  of  designs.  This  is  important  since  the  debuggers  make  changes  to 
abstract  descriptions.  These  changes  must  correspond  to  changes  that  can  be 
made  to  the  complete  design  description. 


C.5.4  The  Cost  of  Using  a  Non-directed  Control  Strategy 

Although  the  concept  of  perspectives  is  important  in  conjunction  with  any  control 
structure,  there  is  a  constant-factor  cost  in  computation  time  for  the  program  ar¬ 
chitecture  we  have  described  in  comparison  to  a  debugging  approach  that  explicitly 
controls  the  order  in  which  designs  are  modified  to  meet  goals.  In  our  scheme,  at 
each  design  iteration,  each  of  the  debuggers  is  invoked  and  all  of  the  resulting  de¬ 
signs  are  evaluated.  This  takes  more  computation  time  than  if  the  focus  of  debugging 
were  explicitly  controlled.  This  cost  in  computation  time  is  only  a  small  constant 
multiplier  (approximately  2  or  3)  and  results  in  a  simpler  program  control  structure. 


169 


C.6:  EXTENSION  TO  OTHER  DOMAINS 

C.6  EXAMPLE  EXTENSION  TO  ANOTHER 
DOMAIN 

The  blocks  design  problem  was  an  exercise  to  help  understand  debugging  using  per¬ 
spectives.  It  has  illuminated  the  requirements  for  the  successful  solution  of  other  de¬ 
sign  problems.  Our  current  efforts  focus  on  the  solution  of  single-input  single-output 
dynamic  systems  design  problems  that  require  the  satisfaction  of  multiple  goals.  We 
illustrate  how  such  problems  might  be  solved  with  a  solution  to  the  speedometer 
problem,  and  then  discuss  the  current  status  of  our  efforts. 


C.6.1  The  Speedometer  Revisited 

Imagine  that  we  have  simplified  the  speedometer  problem  to  consist  of  the  two  goals 
that  there  must  be  a  linear  relationship  between  the  angular  deflection  of  the  indi¬ 
cator  needle  and  the  angular  velocity  of  the  input  shaft,  and  that  the  needle  must 
be  located  at  the  dashboard  while  the  input  shaft  is  at  the  transmission.  First  imag¬ 
ine  that  the  system  is  given  an  initial  design  consisting  of  the  speedometer  needle 
connected  directly  to  the  input  shaft.  One  perspective  corresponds  to  the  dynamic 
behavior  of  the  device.  The  other  perspective  corresponds  to  the  geometry  of  the 
device.  The  behavior  debugger  uses  a  dynamic  system  abstraction  of  the  device  and 
observes  that  the  needle-shaft  relationship  is  linear  between  the  velocity  of  the  needle 
and  the  input  velocity.  The  debugger  invokes  a  dynamic  system  debugging  rule  that 
says  if  a  device  measures  the  derivative  of  the  desired  quantity,  then  add  compliance 
from  the  output  to  ground,  and  viscous  damping  between  the  input  and  the  out¬ 
put.  The  shape  debugger  observes  that  the  device  does  not  connect  the  geometrical 
location  of  the  input  to  the  geometrical  location  of  the  output,  and  proposes  that 


170 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


something  long  and  flexible  be  placed  between  input  and  output.  These  changes  to 
the  device  abstractions  are  instantiated,  and  evaluated.  (See  figure  C.5). 

The  design  with  a  spring  and  damper  added  is  chosen  for  the  next  iteration.  The 
behavior  debugger  is  satisfied  that  the  design  meets  the  behavior  spec.  The  geometry 
debugger  observes  that  the  design  does  not  geometrically  connect  input  to  output 
and  invokes  the  long  flexible  component  modification  again.  On  this  iteration,  one 
instantiation  of  this  modification  is  a  device  with  a  flexible  shaft  between  the  input 
shaft  and  the  damper.  This  design  meets  all  of  the  goals  and  the  design  is  completed. 
In  this  scenario  we  have  only  illustrated  one  of  the  many  possible  outcomes  of  the 
design  procedure.  In  practice  other  successful  designs  would  probably  be  generated. 

C.6.2  Status  of  Research 

All  of  the  work  relating  to  the  blocks  domain  has  been  implemented.  We  have  im¬ 
plemented  chunks  of  these  ideas  in  the  domain  of  single-input  single-output  dynamic 
systems.  In  particular,  we  have  developed  a  technique  for  generating  a  description 
of  a  system  with  correct  input-output  behavior  [1]. 

C.7  RELATED  RESEARCH 

This  section  is  presented  only  as  a  set  of  pointers  to  related  literature,  rather  than  a 
comprehensive  discussion  of  related  research  efforts. 

Sussman  introduced  the  concept  of  design  and  debug  in  his  doctoral  thesis  on 
planning  [2].  Davis  used  the  concept  of  multiple  device  representations  to  do  elec¬ 
tronic  troubleshooting  [3].  We  have  explored  the  idea  of  using  knowledge  of  existing 
devices  to  design  new  devices  in  the  domain  of  mechanical  fasteners.  This  aj'  -oach 
may  be  a  good  way  to  generate  an  initial  device  description  that  is  subsequently 


I 


172 


Appendix  C:  Achieving  Multiple  Goals  in  Conceptual  Design 


debugged  [4].  Williams  uses  qualitative  reasoning  about  causal  mechanisms  in  elec¬ 
tronic  devices  to  guide  debugging  [5]. 

C.8  REFERENCES 

1.  Ulrich,  K.T.,  Computation  and  Pre- Parametric  Design,  Massachusetts  Insti¬ 
tute  of  Technology  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Technical  Report  1043, 
August  1988. 

2.  Sussman,  G.J.,  A  Computer  Model  of  Skill  Acquisition,  Elsevier,  Inc.,  1975. 

3.  Davis,  Randall,  “Diagnostic  Reasoning  Based  on  Structure  and  Behavior,”  in 
Qualitative  Reasoning  About  Physical  Systems,  D.G.  Bobrow  ed.,  The  MIT 
Press  1985. 

4.  Ulrich,  K.T.  and  W.P.  Seering,“A  Computational  Approach  to  Conceptual 
Design,”  Proceedings  of  the  International  Conference  on  Engineering  Design, 
August  1987,  Boston,  MA. 

5.  Williams,  B.C.,  “Principled  Design  Based  on  Topologies  of  Interaction,”  Mas¬ 
sachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering  and 
Computer  Science,  Ph.D.  Thesis,  1988. 


What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design 
Interesting? 


Appendix  D 


This  entire  research  project  was  initially  motivated  by  a  desire  to  computationally 
generate  interesting  designs  in  order  to  aid  engineers  in  the  early  stages  of  a  design 
project.  As  a  result  of  this  objective,  I  gave  a  moderate  amount  of  thought  to  what 
designers  mean  by  interesting  designs.  I  use  the  word  interesting  as  a  synonym  for 
creative  or  clever,  and  mean  it  to  also  include  the  concept  of  elegance  and  novelty. 

Generating  interesting  designs  is  desirable  not  only  because  these  designs  will 
often  be  better  designs  than  the  obvious  solution,  but  also  because  they  lead  to 
a  new  way  of  thinking  about  the  problem.  Too  many  alternatives  can  swamp  a 
designer’s  evaluation  capacity,  however  in  industrial  practice  this  problem  rarely 
materializes —  designers  typically  generate  less  than  5  alternative  concepts  for  a 
particular  problem.  A  designer  can  always  arbitrarily  truncate  a  set  of  possible 
design  concepts,  so  computationally  generating  additional  interesting  concepts  can 
never  hurt. 


This  appendix  chapter  is  the  result  of  my  preliminary  thinking  on  what  factors 


173 


174 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


contribute  to  making  a  design  interesting.  Hopefully  it  will  provide  some  seeds  from 
which  other  researchers  will  derive  useful  direction.  This  chapter  is  not  meant  as 
a  strong  claim  of  any  kind,  but  more  as  a  few  ideas  that  are  perhaps  worth  the 
reproduction  costs  required  to  preserve  them. 

D.l  ORIGIN  OF  THESE  CLASSIFICATIONS 

My  (admittedly  informal)  method  for  generating  a  classification  of  interesting  designs 
was  to  list  100  designs  that  I  thought  were  interesting  and  then  to  try  to  devise  a 
scheme  that  would  categorize  the  sources  of  interestingness  in  the  designs.  My  goal 
was  to  develop  a  classification  that  would  divide  the  designs  into  a  small  number  of 
groups.  These  categories  are  clearly  artifacts  of  my  own  perception  of  what  makes  a 
design  interesting,  since  the  100  initial  designs  were  the  result  of  my  own  thinking. 
Some  of  the  designs  that  I  think  are  interesting  are  very  common —  the  bicycle 
wheel  for  example.  My  criteria  for  interestingness  are  based  on  the  invention  or 
initial  appearance  of  the  design.  In  other  words,  I  would  have  considered  the  bicycle 
wheel  a  very  clever  design  when  it  was  first  developed. 


D.2  FOUR  CATEGORIES  OF  INTERESTING 
DESIGNS 

Four  categories  classify  my  100  interesting  designs.  In  this  section,  I  devote  a  sub¬ 
section  to  each  category.  Each  subsection  will  describe  the  category  and  give  several 
examples. 


D.2:  FOUR  CATEGORIES  OF  INTERESTING  DESIGNS 


175 


D.2.1  Novel  Combination 

Novel  combination  is  the  result  of  extracting  individual  structural  attributes  from 
each  of  several  known  devices  and  combining  these  attributes  in  novel  ways  to  create 
structural  descriptions  of  new  devices  (Appendix  B  is  devoted  to  this  idea).  The 
following  three  examples  illustrate  this  concept.  In  some  of  these  examples  I  invent 
a  historical  myth  that  could  account  for  the  development  of  the  design. 

Fastener 

Figure  D.l  is  a  drawing  of  a  plastic  fastener  used  in  high- volume  manufactured  parts. 
It  is  the  result  of  combining  the  ease-of-insertion  attributes  of  a  barbed  Christmas 
tree  fastener  and  the  removability  attributes  of  a  threaded  fastener.  Because  its 
threads  are  flexible  it  can  be  pressed  into  a  hole;  because  it  has  threads  it  can  be 
unscrewed.  (This  example  is  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Appendix  B). 

Bicycle  wheel 

The  bicycle  wheel  combines  several  attributes  from  other  designs  in  new  ways.  First, 
it  uses  the  cushioning  properties  of  inflated  flexible  chambers  (from  cushions,  pads, 
or  balls  perhaps).  Second,  the  concept  of  suspending  the  bicycle  hub  from  the  top 
of  the  upper  half  of  the  rim  with  flexible  tension  elements  (spokes)  is  borrowed  from 
suspension  bridge  design.  Combining  these  design  fragments  together  yields  the 
modern  bicycle  wheel. 

Threading  tap 

A  threading  tap  can  be  thought  of  as  a  cutter  along  a  helical  path.  The  concept  of 
a  helical  path  comes  from  the  screw  itself.  The  cutter  design  incorporates  gradually 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


Figure  D.l;  Easily  insertable  and  removable  fastener 


D.2:  FOUR  CATEGORIES  OF  INTERESTING  DESIGNS 


Figure  D.2:  Bicycle  wheel 


178 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


Figure  D.3:  A  threading  tap 

I 

increasing  tooth  sizes,  an  idea  that  could  come  from  the  keyway  broach.  This  design 
is  not  at  all  obvious  as  indicated  by  the  surprise  of  people  who  first  see  how  threaded 
holes  are  made. 


D.2.2  Geometrical  Exploitation 

Geometrical  exploitation  is  a  category  of  design  in  which  a  particular  structural 
configuration  is  found  that,  because  of  the  way  its  properties  change  with  geometry, 
is  able  to  meet  two  or  more  seemingly  conflicting  specifications.  These  designs  exhibit 
a  kind  of  shape  optimization. 


D.2:  FOUR  CATEGORIES  OF  INTERESTING  DESIGNS 


179 


Figure  D.4:  Novel  ski  boot  sole 
Cross-country  ski  boot  sole 

Figure  D.4  illustrates  the  design  of  a  novel  ski  boot  sole  (designed  by  Steven  D. 
Potter  while  a  graduate  student  at  MIT).  Cross-country  ski  boots  ideally  are  very 
flexible  in  straight  bending,  but  are  very  stiff  in  torsion.  This  sole  design  achieves 
those  seemingly  contradictory  objectives  by  making  many  narrow  parallel  slits  most 
of  the  way  through  the  top  side  of  the  sole  and  perpendicular  to  the  major  axis  of 
the  boot.  This  configuration  is  remarkably  stiff  in  torsion  (approaching  the  stiffness 
of  a  solid  sole  of  the  same  material),  while  extremely  flexible  in  bending. 

I-beam 

The  I-beam  is  designed  such  that  most  of  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  beam  is 
located  a  great  distance  from  the  neutral  bending  axis.  This  is  accomplished  by 
using  a  thin  web  to  separate  two  flanges.  This  configuration  achieves  high  bending 
'  strength  and  stiffness  with  minimum  weight.  See  figure  D.5. 

I 


D.2:  FOUR  CATEGORIES  OF  INTERESTING  DESIGNS 


181 


Figure  D.6:  Stranded  cable 

Stranded  cable 

The  stranded  cable  is  a  design  that  achieves  both  high  tensile  strength  and  great 
flexibility.  These  goals  are  met  by  maximizing  the  cross-sectional  area  of  the  cable, 
while  minimizing  the  bending  stiffness  of  any  particular  strand.  The  result  is  an 
almost  full  circular  cross  section  made  of  thin  flexible  strands. 

D.2. 3  Application  of  Natural  Phenomena 

Many  interesting  devices  exploit  some  natural  phenomenon.  These  phenomena  are 
often  material  properties.  Three  examples  are  strain  gages,  thermocouples,  and 
fluorescent  lights. 

Strain  gage 

The  strain  gage  is  a  device  for  measuring  the  strain  (or  fraction  of  change  in  length 
over  original  length)  of  a  surface.  Most  strain  gages  are  based  on  the  fact  that  wire 
changes  in  resistivity  as  it  is  stretched  and  that  this  change  is  proportional  to  the 
strain  in  the  wire.  Wire  strain  gages  consist  of  several  zigzags  of  fine  wire  bonded 


I 


182 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


.3 

c 

c 

c 

3 

Figure  D.7:  Strain  gage 


metal  A 


metal  B 


I 


Figure  D.8:  Thermocouple 


to  a  paper  backing.  They  are  glued  to  a  surface  and  integrated  into  a  circuit  that 
measures  changes  in  resistance. 


Thermocouple 

Thermocouples  produce  a  voltage  monotonically  related  to  a  temperature  difference. 
They  are  based  on  the  thermoelectric  effect —  junctions  of  dissimilar  metals  produce 
a  voltage  in  response  to  temperature  differences.  This  principle  is  exploited  in  order 
to  build  robust,  inexpensive  and  accurate  temperature  sensors.  The  principle  can 
also  be  used  in  the  opposite  direction  to  create  a  solid-state  heat  pump  that  creates 
a  temperature  difference  in  response  to  an  appbed  potential. 


D.2:  FOUR  CATEGORIES  OF  INTERESTING  DESIGNS 


183 


Figure  D.9:  Fluorescent  lights 

Fluorescent  Lights 

Fluorescent  lights  are  based  on  the  fact  that  some  gases  emit  photons  when  they 
occupy  the  space  between  an  anode  and  a  cathode.  This  property  is  exploited  to 
create  efficient,  uniform  lighting  in  a  variety  of  shapes. 


D.2. 4  Function  Sharing 

Function  sharing  is  a  design  attribute  that  involves  the  implementation  of  several 
functions  with  a  single  functional  element  (chapter  4).  Most  designs  exhibit  some 
function  sharing —  these  examples  illustrate  the  concept  especially  well. 

Resistive  heating  crucible 

Some  crucibles  used  in  metallurgy  are  formed  from  graphite  and  are  used  as  the 
resistive  element  in  a  resistive  heating  system.  Figure  D.IO  illustrates  this  idea.  In 
this  case,  the  crucible  is  serving  both  as  a  container  and  a  heating  element. 

Automobile  body 

The  sheet  metal  body  of  an  automobile  performs  many  functions  including  structural 
support  and  the  automobile  electrical  ground. 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


Figure  D.IO:  Resistive  heating  crucible 


D.S:  USING  THESE  IDEAS 


185 


Figure  D.ll:  Automobile  body  as  electrical  ground 

Chip  leads 

A  computer  chip  package  usually  has  several  leads  that  provide  an  interface  to  the 
rest  of  the  circuit.  These  leads  serve  as  electrical  connections,  mechanical  attachment 
points,  and  thermid  conduction  paths. 

D.3  USING  THESE  IDEAS 

These  ideas  have  been  useful  to  me  in  two  ways.  First,  they  have  yielded  insights 
into  how  to  teach  designers  to  generate  interesting  design  concepts.  Second,  they 
have  spawned  research  directions. 

D.3.1  Teaching  Design 

These  categories  of  design  interestingness  could  become  prescriptions  for  engineers 
performing  innovative  design.  These  prescriptions  can  be  much  more  vague  than 
those  required  to  implement  a  computer  program.  They  might  be  questions  or  sug¬ 
gestions  of  the  following  form: 


186 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


Figure  D.12:  Digital  circuit  chip  leads 

•  Can  a  part  be  eliminated  by  using  the  secondary  properties  of  a  neighboring 
part  to  perform  its  function? 

•  Look  for  ways  to  combine  two  parts  into  one. 

•  Can  you  think  of  another  way  to  solve  part  of  the  problem?  Is  there  an  existing 
product  or  machine  that  achieves  some  of  the  important  functions  of  the  desired 
device?  Can  attributes  of  these  existing  devices  be  combined  to  meet  the 
specifications  of  the  new  device? 

•  When  designing  an  instrument  or  sensor,  look  for  a  physical  effect  that  relates 
some  quantity  of  interest  to  something  that  you  can  measure. 

D.3.2  Research  Directions 

The  novel  combination  work  with  fasteners  (Appendix  B),  and  the  function  sharing 
work  in  the  dynamic  systems  domain  (chapter  4)  were  both  the  result  of  the  thinking 
that  led  to  this  chapter. 


D.S:  USING  THESE  IDEAS 


187 


Some  of  the  other  categories  of  interesting  design  provide  possible  future  research 
areas.  The  geometrical  exploitation  category  seems  like  a  tractable  and  potentially 
fruitful  problem;  since  most  of  the  reasoning  is  done  within  a  mathematical  represen¬ 
tation  of  the  properties  of  the  structure.  That  is,  given  a  mathematical  parameteri¬ 
zation  of  the  structure  of  a  device,  are  there  structural  modifications  that  optimize 
the  device  behavior. 

The  physical  phenomena  category  also  seems  to  be  amenable  to  some  sort  of 
automation.  Because  there  are  thousands  of  physical  effects  that  could  be  cataloged, 
many  useful  devices  could  perhaps  be  generated  simply  by  scanning  the  available 
effects  and  trying  to  match  them  to  the  problem  at  hand.  In  the  1950*s  Hix  wrote  a 
book  that  catalogs  hundreds  of  unusual  physical  phenomena  [Hix58]. 


REFERENCES 


Antonsson87  Antonsson,  E.K.,  “Development  and  Testing  of  Hypotheses  in  En¬ 
gineering  Design  Research,”  Journal  of  Mechanisms,  Transmissions,  and  Au¬ 
tomation  in  Design,  Vol.  109  (June  1987),  p.  153-154. 

CaganST  Cagan,  Jonathan  and  Alice  M.  Agogino,  “Innovative  Design  of  Mechanical 
Structures  from  First  Principles,”  Intelligent  Systems  Research  Group  Working 
Paper  87-0801-2,  Department  of  Mechanical  Engineering,  University  of  Cali¬ 
fornia  at  Berkeley. 

Davis84  Davis,  R.,  “Diagnostic  Reasoning  Based  on  Structure  and  Behavior,”  Mas¬ 
sachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Memo  739, 
1984. 

de  KleerSS  de  Kleer,  J.  and  J.S.  Brown,  “A  Qualitative  Physics  Based  on  Conflu¬ 
ence,”  in  Bobrow,  D.G.  (ed.).  Qualitative  Reasoning  About  Physical  Systems, 
MIT  Press  1985. 


DoyleSS  Doyle,  R.J.,  “Hypothesizing  Device  Mechanisms:  Opening  Up  the  Black 


190 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


Box,”  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
Technical  Report  1047,  1988. 

FreemanTl  Freeman,?,  and  A.  Newell,  “A  Model  for  Functional  Reasoning  in  De¬ 
sign,”  Proceedings  of  the  Second  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial 
Intelligence,  p.  621-633,  1971. 

Frieling77  Frieling,  M.J.,  “The  Use  of  a  Hierarchical  Representation  in  the  Un¬ 
derstanding  of  Mechanical  Systems,”  Ph.D.  Thesis,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology  Department  of  Mathematics  1977. 

Gero87  Gero,  J.S.  and  M.L.  Maher,  “Future  Roles  of  Knowledge-Based  Systems  in 
the  Design  Process,”  Carnegie  Mellon  University  Engineering  Design  Research 
Center  Report  EDRC-12-13-87,  Pittsburgh,  PA  1987. 

Glegg73  Glegg,  G.L.,  The  Science  of  Design,  Cambridge  University  Press,  1973. 

Glegg60  Glegg,  G.L.,  The  Design  of  Design,  Cambridge  University  Press,  1969. 

Hirschtick80  Hirschtick,  J.  “Geometric  Feature  Extraction  Using  Production  Rules,” 
S.M.  Thesis,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Department  of  Mechanical 
Engineering,  1986. 

Hix58  Hix,  C.F.  Jr.,  and  R.P.  Alley,  Physical  Laws  and  Effects,  John  Wiley  and 
Sons,  Inc.,  NY  1958. 

Hood87  Hood,  S.J.  and  E.R.  Palmer,  “The  Design  Analysis  for  Reliability  Tool,” 
IBM  Corporation,  T.J.  Watson  Research  Center  Technical  Report  RC  12647 
(#56882)  4/6/87,  1987. 


D.S:  USING  THESE  IDEAS 


101 


Ishida84  Ishida,  T.,  H.  Minowa,  and  N.  Nakajima,  “Detection  of  Unanticipated 
Functions  of  Machines,”  Proceedings  of  the  International  Symposium  on  Design 
and  Synthesis,  p.  21-26,  July  1984,  Tokyo,  Japan. 

JakielaST  Jakiela,  M.J.,  P.Y.  Papalambros,  “Design  and  Implementation  of  an  In¬ 
telligent  CAD  System,”  Proceedings  of  the  1987  ASME  Design  Automation 
Conference,  Vol.  1,  p.339-345. 

JanssonS?  Jansson,  D.G.,  “Creativity  in  Engineering  Design:  The  Partnership  of 
Analysis  and  Synthesis,”  Proceedings  of  the  1987  ASEE  conference. 

Kannapan87  Kannapan,  Srikanth  and  Kurt  M.  Marshek,  “Design  Synthetic  Rea¬ 
soning:  A  Program  For  Research,”  Mechanical  Systems  and  Design  Technical 
Report  202,  University  of  Texas  at  Austin,  Department  of  Mechanical  Engi¬ 
neering. 

Lenat78  Lenat,  D.B.,  “The  Ubiquity  of  Discovery,”  Artificial  Intelligence  9  (1978), 
257-285,  North-HoUand  Publishing  Company. 

Lenat84  Lenat,  D.B.  “Why  AM  and  EURISKO  Appear  to  Work,”  Artificial  Intel¬ 
ligence  23  (1984)  269-294,  North-Holland  Publishing  Company. 

Macsyma80  Macsyma  Reference  Manual,  Symbolics,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  MA  1986. 

Maher87  Maher,  M.L.,  “A  Knowledge-Based  Approach  to  Preliminary  Design  Syn¬ 
thesis,”  Carnegie  Mellon  University  Engineering  Design  Research  Center  Re¬ 
port  EDRC-12-14-87,  Pittsburgh,  PA,  1987. 

Murthy87  Murthy,  S.S.  and  S.  Addanki,  “PROMPT:  An  Innovative  Design  Tool,” 


.  f 


-  1 


Proceedings  of  the  Sixth  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Seattle, 
WA  1987. 


192  Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting^ 

OgataTO  Ogata, K.,  Modem  Control  Engineering,  Prentice-Hall,  1970.  p.  284. 

Paynter01  Paynter,  H.M.,  Analysis  and  Design  of  Engineering  Systems,  The  MIT 
Press,  Cambridge,  MA  1961. 

Penberthy87  Penberthy,  J.S.,  Incremental  Analysis  and  the  Graph  of  Models:  A 
First  Step  Towards  Analysis  in  the  Plumber’s  World,  S.M.  Thesis,  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer 
Science,  1987. 

Prabhu88  Prabhu,  D.  and  D.L.  Taylor,  “Some  Issues  in  the  Generation  of  Topol¬ 
ogy  of  Systems  with  Constant  Power-Flow  Input-Output  Requirements,”  Sub¬ 
mitted  to  1988  ASME  Design  Technologies  Conference,  Kissimmee,  Florida, 
September  1988. 

Ressler84  Ressler,  A.L.,  “A  Circuit  Grammar  for  Operational  Amplifier  Design,” 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Tech¬ 
nical  Report  807,  January  1984. 

Rieger77  Rieger,  C.  and  M.  Grinberg,  “The  Declarative  Representation  and  Pro¬ 
cedural  Simulation  of  Causality  in  Physical  Mechanisms,”  Proceedings  of  the 
Fifth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Vol.  1,  p.  250, 
1977. 

Rinderle87  Rinderle,  J.R.  and  J.D.  Watton,  “Automatic  Identification  of  Criti¬ 
cal  Design  Relationships,”  Carnegie  Mellon  University  Engineering  Design  Re¬ 
search  Center  Report  EDRC-24-03-87,  Pittsburgh,  PA  1987. 

Rinderle87  Rinderle,  J.R.,  “Function  and  Form  Relationships:  A  Basis  for  Prelimi¬ 
nary  Design,”  Carnegie  Mellon  University  Engineering  Design  Research  Center 


D.S:  USING  THESE  IDEAS 


103 


Report  EDRC-24-05-87,  Pittsburgh,  PA  1987- 

RodenbergerSS  Rodenberger,  C.A.,  C.F.  Herndon,  S.O.  Majors,  and  W.A.  Rogers, 
“The  Average  $100,000,000  Design  Engineer,”  Proceedings  of  the  1983  ASME 
Computers  in  Engineering  Conference,  Vol.  1,  p.  33-38. 

RosenbergSS  Rosenberg,  R.C.,  and  D.C.  Kamopp,  Introduction  to  Physical  System 
Dynamics,  McGraw-Hill  Book  Company,  1983. 

RoylanceSS  Roylance,  G.,  “A  Simple  Model  of  Circuit  Design,”  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Technical  Report  703, 
1983. 

Serrano87  Serrano,  D.  and  D.  Gossard,  “Constraint  Management  in  Conceptual 
Design,”  in  Sriram,  D.  and  R.A.  Addy  (Eds.),  Knowledge- Based  Expert  Systems 
in  Engineering:  Planning  and  Design.  Computational  Mechanics  Publications 
1987. 

SimonSl  Simon,  H.A.,  The  Sciences  of  the  Artificial,  MIT  Press,  Second  edition 
1981,  Cambridge,  MA. 

Suh78  Suh,  N.P.,  A.C.  Bell  and  D.C.  Gossard,  “On  an  Axiomatic  Approach  to  Man¬ 
ufacturing  and  Manufacturing  Systems,”  Journal  of  Engineering  for  Industry, 
May  1978,  Vol.  100,  p.127-130. 

Sussman80  Sussman,  G.J.  and  G.L.  Steele  Jr.,  “Constraints-  A  Language  for  Ex¬ 
pressing  Almost-Hierarchical  Descriptions,”  Artificial  Intelligence  14  (1980), 
1-39,  North-Holland  Publishing  Company. 

Ward88  Ward,  A.C.,  “Quantitative  Inference  in  a  Mechanicsd  Design  Compiler,” 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Memo 


194 


Appendix  D:  What  Makes  a  Mechanical  Design  Interesting? 


1062,  1988. 

WilliamsSS  Williams,  B,,  “Principled  Design  Based  on  Topologies  of  Interaction,” 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering 
and  Computer  Science,  Ph.D.  Thesis,  1988. 

WinstonSS  Winston,  P.H.  et  al,  “Learning  Physical  Descriptions  From  Functional 
Definitions,  Examples,  and  Precedents,”  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  Memo  679,  1983. 


1 


