KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION  IN  AUTOMATIC  PLANNING  SYSTEMS 


by 

Richard  E.  Fikes 
Artificial  Intelligence  Center 
Stanford  Research  Institute 
Menlo  Park,  California  94025 


Technical  Note  119 


The  research  reported  in  this  paper  was  sponsored  by  the  Advanced  Research 
Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  Defense  under  Contract  DAHC04-75-C-0005 
with  the  U.S .  Army  Research  Office  and  supported  by  the  National  Aeronautics 
and  Space  Administration  under  Contract  NASW-2086. 

\ 


ABSTRACT 

This  paper  is  a  tutorial  on  automatic  planning  systems  with 
particular  emphasis  given  to  knowledge  representation  issues.  The 
effectiveness  of  a  planner  depends,  to  a  large  extent,  on  its  ability 
to  make  use  of  descriptions  and  expertise  associated  with  particular 
task  domains.  Examples  of  such  domain  knowledge  include  action 
models,  state  description  models,  scenarios,  and  special  purpose  plan 
composition  methods.  Our  discussion  focuses  on  how  such  knowledge 
is  represented  in  planning  systems  and  on  how  various  planning 


strategies  make  use  of  it. 


I  INTRODUCTION 


A  planning  system  is  one  that  assists  in  the  accomplishment 
of  tasks  by  generating  plans  and  then  monitoring  their  execution.  The 
active  agent  that  actually  carries  out  the  plans  might  be  another  part 
of  the  system.  For  example,  a  mechanical  manipulator  or  a  human  to  which 
the  system  is  providing  instructions.  A  task  is  usually  specified  to 
such  a  system  by  describing  an  initial  situation  and  a  desired  (goal) 
situation.  The  system  is  aware  of  a  collection  of  actions  that  the  active 
agent  can  perform  and  the  plan  it  produces  is  a  sequence  of  these  actions 
that  are  expected  to  transform  the  initial  situation  into  the  desired 
situation.  Example  domains  for  which  automatic  planning  systems  have  been 
designed  include  the  directing  of  a  mobile  robot  to  do  tasks  that  involve 
pushing  boxes  around  in  several  rooms  (Fikes  and  Nilsson,  1971),*  a  robot 
arm  building  towers  of  multiple-shaped  blocks  (Fahlman,  1974),  and  humans 
who  are  repairing  electro  mechanical  equipment  (Sacerdoti,  1975). 

Taking  a  broader  view,  one  can  think  of  a  planner  as  being  a 
constructor  of  scenarios  for  whatever  reasons  they  are  needed.  For 
example,  Minsky  (1974),  Schank  (1975),  and  others  have  described  the 
use  of  stored  "action  frames"  or  "scripts"  as  guides  to  a  system 
attempting  to  understand  a  story  being  input  in  natural  language.  The 
stored  scenario  indicates  what  typically  happens  in  the  situation 
being  described  in  the  story  (such  as  dining  at  a  restaurant  or 
attending  a  child’s  birthday  party).  It  aids  the  system  by 

*References  are  appended. 


1 


providing  a  set  of  expectations  about  the  sequence  of  events  and  the 
relationships  among  the  characters  in  the  story.  To  make  effective 
use  of  stored  scenarios,  a  system  needs  the  capability  of  modifying 
and  combining  them  to  form  new  scenarios  that  are  appropriate  for 
understanding  any  particular  story;  that  is,  the  system  needs  a 
planning  capability. 

In  this  paper  I  will  examine  some  of  the  characteristics  of 
automatic  planning  systems  by  focusing  on  the  knowledge 
representation  issues  that  arise  in  their  design.  My  intention  is 
not  to  survey  the  entire  field  of  automatic  planning,  but  to 
provide  a  feeling  for  the  general  structure  of  such  systems  and  for 
some  of  the  techniques  that  have  been  and  are  being  used  in  their 
design. 

II  CTATE  DESCRIPTION  MODELS 

Typically,  a  planner  proceeds  by  hypothesizing  sequences  of 
actions  for  inclusion  in  a  plan  and  testing  each  hypothesis  by  simulating 
the  action  sequence.  The  simulation  produces  a 
description  of  the  situation  that  would  be  expected  from  the 
actions,  and  that  situation  is  examined  to  determine  if  it  satisfies 
the  subgoals  that  the  planner  is  trying  to  achieve.  This  process 
requires  facilities  for  creating,  updating,  and  querying  state 
description  models  of  the  task  domain  (Fikes,  1975). 


-2- 


Most  planning  systems  use  state  description  models  that  can 
be  characterized  as  collections  of  relational  expressions,  with  each 
expression  having  a  truth  value  associated  with  it.  The  expressions 
are  typically  represented  as  list  structures  with  the  first  element 
of  each  list  being  a  relation  name  —  or  example,  "(INROOM  ROBOT  Rl)" 
or  "(STATUS  (CONNECTION  PUMP  PLATFORM)  FASTENED)."  The  models 
provide  the  data  base  needed  to  determine  for  any  given  relationship 
in  any  given  state  whether  the  relationship  is  known  true,  known 
false,  or  unknown  in  that  state. 

Some  form  of  retrieval  mechanism  is  needed  for  this  data  base 
so  that  the  planner  can  obtain  information  about  these  models. 
Retrieval  functions  rely  on  a  basic  access  mechanism  that  in  most 
planning  systems  associatively  retrieves  all  relational  expressions 
from  the  data  base  that  match  a  given  pattern  (where  a  pattern  is  an 
expression  containing  unbound  variables)  and  then  examines  the  truth 
value  of  each  retrieved  expression  with  respect  to  the  given  state. 

For  example,  a  retrieval  using  the  pattern  "(INROOM  R030T  «-X)"  would 
be  used  to  determine  what  room  the  robot  is  in. 

Known  truth  values  are  usually  not  all  explicitly  stored  in  a 
model.  Hence,  a  planner  needs  deductive  machinery  for 
querying  state  description  models.  Most  planners  are  designed  so 
that  a  user  can  provide  derivation  functions  that  compute  implicit 
truth  values  when  they  are  needed .These  functions  may  embody  formal 
theorem-proving  strategies  or  may  simply  be  statements  of  implicational 


rules  derived  from  the  semantics  of  the  task  domain.  They  extend  each 
model  in  the  sense  that,  from  the  calling  program’s  point  of  view,  the 
derived  instances  of  a  pattern  can  be  made  to  be  indistinguishable 
from  instances  actually  found  in  the  model. 

Ill  ACTION  MODELS 

Typically,  a  planner  has  models  available  of  the  actions  that 
can  occur  as  steps  in  a  plan.  For  example,  the  actions  available  to 
a  mobile  robot  might  include  "Go  to  location  (x,y),M  "Turn  X  degrees 
right,  and  so  forth.  For  these  models  to  be  useful  to  a  planner, 
they  must  include  certain  descriptive  information  about  the  actions. 

In  particular,  the  planner  needs  to  know  under  what  conditions  an 
action  can  be  carried  out.  These  are  the  action's  "preconditions"  or 
applicability  conditions."  They  provide  a  source  of  subgoals  during 
the  planning  process  and  allow  the  planner  to  ensure  that  an  executable 
plan  is  being  produced.  In  addition,  the  planner  needs  a  description 
of  the  transformations  that  execution  of  an  action  is  expected  to  make. 

This  information  allows  the  planner  to  simulate  hypothetical  action  se¬ 
quences  and  thereby  investigate  their  results.  Finally,  the  planner  needs 
to  know  what  kinds  of  tasks  or  subgoals  each  action  is  useful  for  achieving. 
This  information  indicates  to  the  planner  which  actions  to  consider 
putting  into  the  plan  being  construe ted . : 


-4- 


The  action  models  that  are  available  to  a  planner  as 
potential  plan  steps  usually  represent  an  entire  class  oi'  actions  by 
containing  slots  that  must  be  filled  by  specific  values.  For 
example,  a  robot  action  for  moving  a  box  might  include  slots  for  the 
name  of  the  box,  the  starting  location  of  the  move,  and  the  final 
location  of  the  move;  hence,  the  action  can  he  used  to  move  any  box 
from  any  location  to  any  other  location.  An  action  model  will 
specify  constraints  on  the  values  that  can  fill  its  slots,  such  as 
type  requirements,  and  for  the  box  example,  perhaps  a  restriction 
that  the  two  locations  be  in  the  same  room.  A  significant  part  of  the 
planning  activity  is  to  determine  for  these  slots  the  values  that 
satisfy  the  model’s  constraints  and  that  produce  an  instance  of  the 
model  useful  in  the  new  plan.  Hence,  the  planning  process  entails  both 
selecting  and  "instantiating”  a  sequence  of  action  models  that  will 
achieve  the  desired  goal . 

A.  Assertional  Action  Models 


Action  models  are  often  represented  as  data  structures 
containing  lists  of  parameters,  preconditions,  and  effects.  The 
parameters  are  the  slots  that  the  planner  must  instantiate  when 
using  the  model,  and  they  serve  as  the  model’s  local  variables.  The 
preconditions  are  an  explicit  list  of  the  relationships  that  must  be 
true  in  a  state  before  the  action  can  be  executed .  The  effects  ^ 
indicate  the  state  changes  that  the  action  is  expected  to  make.  Each 


element  of  the  effects  list  indicates  a  relationship  and  the  truth 
value  that  the  relationship  is  to  have  in  the  state  produced  by  the 
action;  all  other  relationships  are  assumed  to  remain  unaffected  by 
the  action.  For  example,  the  model  for  a  "Go  to  location  (x,y)"  robot 
action  might  have  parameter  list  (x,y),  preconditions  that  require 
location  (x,y)  to  be  in  the  same  room  as  the  robot,  and  an  effects 
list  that  denies  the  old  location  of  the  robot,  deletes  (i.e.,  assigns 
truth  value  "unknown”  )  the  old  orientation  of  the  robot,  and  asserts 
(x,y)  as  the  new  location  of  the  robot. 

This  action  model  representation  lends  itself  to  a 
means-ends  analysis  method  for  composing  plans,  as  follows.  A  goal 
state  is  described  by  a  collection  of  relationships  that  must  be  true 
in  the  desired  state.  The  planner  proceeds  by  checking  to  see  which 
of  the  goal  relationships  are  not  yet  true  in  the  current  state.  When 
such  a  relationship  is  found,  a  scan  is  made  of  the  action  models  to 
find  one  whose  effects  list  indicates  that  some  instance  of  it  will 
assert  the  goal  relationship.  When  such  an  action  is  found,  it  is 
taken  to  be  "relevant"  to  achieving  the  goal,  and  the  planner  attempts 
to  include  it  in  the  plan.  An  action  can  be  included  in  a  plan  only 
if  a  state  exists  in  which  its  preconditions  are  true.  If  they  are 
true  in  the  current  state,  the  action  is  simulated  to  produce  a  new 
current  state,  and  the  goal  is  reconsidered  as  before.  If  the  action’s 
preconditions  are  not  true  in  the  current  state ,  the  achievement  of  those 
preconditions  becomes  for  the  planner  a  new  goal  to  which  the  same 
method  can  be  applied.  Hence,  the  basic  algorithm  entails  matching  a 


-6- 


goal  to  an  action  capable  of  achieving  some  portion  of  it  and  then 
attempting  to  make  that  action  applicable. 

When  more  than  one  relevant  action  is  found  for  any 
particular  goal,  or  when  a  goal  is  a  disjunction,  a  "choice  point" 
occurs  in  the  algorithm.  The  occurrence  of  such  choice  points  re¬ 
quires  the  planner  to  impose  a  search  executive  on  top  of  the  basic 
algorithm  to  decide  at  each  step  which  subgoal  to  consider  next. 

B.  Procedural  Action  Models 


The  planning  algorithm  described  above  is  essentially  the 
one  used  in  the  STRIPS  system  developed  in  1969.  One  of  the  major 
ways  in  which  the  effectiveness  of  planning  systems  has  been  improved 
since  then  is  by  augmenting  this  basic  algorithm  with  facilities  that 
accept  planning  expertise  specific  to  the  particular  domain  in  which 
tasks  are  to  be  given.  That  is,  in  any  given  domain  there  will  be 
planning  strategies  and  heuristics  that  a  planner  designed  specifically 
for  that  domain  would  employ  —  for  example,  route  finding  algorithms, 
or  tower  building  strategies.  To  a  large  extent,  the  effectiveness  of 
a  planning  system  can  be  measured  in  terms  of  its  ability  to  accept  and 
use  such  expertise .  . 

-  ,:';:;;  :'.;:'  \Onie‘'Way  in  which  this  capability  has  been  achieved  is  by 
representing  action  models  in  a  procedural  form  rather  than  as  a  data 
structure  (for  example,  see  Derksen,  Rulifson,  and  Waldinger ,  1972). 


Such  a  procedure  has  the  action’s  parameters  as  its  input  parameters 
and  begins  by  querying  the  current  state  description  model  to 
determine  if  the  action’s  preconditions  are  true  in  that  state;  if 
they  are  not,  it  calls  the  planner’s  executive  to  create  a  plan  to 
achieve  the  preconditions.  When  the  preconditions  have  been 
achieved ,  the  act ion  model  proceeds  to  simulate  the  execution  of  the 
action  by  creating  a  new  state  description  model  and  making  the 
appropriate  assertions,  deletions,  and  denials  in  it.  Finally,  the 
procedure  adds  the  action  that  it  represents  to  the  end  of  the  plan 
being  constructed. 

As  with  assertional  action  models,  a  planner  using  procedural 
action  models  must  be  able  to  deal  with  choice  points  that  occur  when 
multiple  actions  or  multiple  instantiations  of  actions  are  relevant. 

This  requirement  implies  the  need  for  some  form  of  co-routine  or 
backtracking  facilities  that  allow  alternative  program  control  paths  to 
be  considered  in  a  pseudo  parallel  manner  under  the  direction  of  the 
planner's  executive. 

A  procedural  language  provides  more  expressive  power  for  re¬ 
presenting  action  models  than  do  the  data  structures  we  described- 
above.  For  example,  a  procedure  can  describe  effects  of  an  action 
that  are  condi t iona 1  on  properties  of  the  state  in  which  the  action  is 
executed .  The  most  important  aspect  of  this  expressive  power  in  terms 
of  the  effectiveness  of  the  planning  system  is  that  procedural  action 
models  can  contain  strategy  and  heuristic  information  about  how  to 


achieve  the  action's  preconditions.  For  example,  if  an  actions 's  pre¬ 
conditions  are  a  set  of  relationships,  all  of  which  must  be  achieved 
(that  is,  a  conjunction),  the  action  model  can  indicate  the  order  in 
which  they  should  be  achieved  by  making  a  sequence  of  calls  to  the 
planning  executive  with  each  call  indicating  the  next  relationship  to 
be  achieved .  In  effect,  the  action  model  procedure  can  contain  a 
’’subplanner"  specifically  designed  to  guide  the  production  of  plans 
that  achieve  the  action's  preconditions. 

Procedural  action  models  suffer  from  the  standard  difficulty 
that  their  "knowledge"  is  hidden  from  the  system  in  the  code.  That  is, 
the  system  cannot  reason  about  the  preconditions  or  effects  of  an 
action  if  all  that  is  available  is  the  procedure.  One  can  deal  with 

this  problem  by  providing  declarative  information  about  the  action  in 
addition  to  the  procedural  action  model.  For  example,  the  planner  needs 
to  know  what  relationships  an  action  is  useful  for  achieving  so  that  it 
can  determine  when  to  consider  including  the  action  in  a  plan.  Hence, 
a  procedural  action  model  needs  essentially  to  have  a  list  of  "primary 
effects”  associated  with  it.  This  declarative  information  will  be  an 
abstraction  or  an  approximation  of  the  effects  that  the  procedure  will 
produce  in  any  given  situation,  and  can  be  thought  of  as  a  model  of 
the  procedure  that  itself  is  a  model  of  a  class  of  actions. 

IV  PROCEDURAL  SUBPLANNERS 

Once  a  planning  system  has  the  facilities  for  using 
procedural  action  models,  an  obvious  and  powerful  generalization  be- 


comes  possible.  A  procedural  action  model  can  be  considered  to  be  a 
"subplanner"  specifically  designed  to  produce  plans  for  achieving  the 

;  primary  effects  of  an  action.  We  can  generalize  this  concept  by  re- 
moving  the  restriction  that  such  subplanners  must  be  models  of  an 
action,  and  can  consider  writing  subplanners  for  any  specific  class  of 
tasks.  For  example,  in  a  robot  domain,  a  route  finding  algorithm  could 
be  written  that  would  determine  a  sequence  of  rooms  for  the  robot  to 
travel  through  to  get  from  one  room  into  another.  The  route  finder 
could  employ  any  appropriate  search  algorithm  for  determining  a  suit¬ 
able  route,  making  use  of  geometric  information,  previously  computed 
routes,  and  so  forth.  Such  an  algorithm  could  be  represented  as  a  sub¬ 
planner  designed  to  make  the  relationship  "(INROOM  ROBOT  *~X)  '  true. 

Often  the  primary  role  of  a  subplanner  is  to  decompose  a  task 
by  producing  a  sequence  of  subgoals  to  be  achieved.  The  subplanner 
produces  the  actual  plan  by  calling  the  planning  executive  with  each 
of  the  subgoals  in  turn.  For  example,  the  route  finder  may  determine 
only  a  sequence  of  rooms  through  which  the  robot  is  to  travel .  It 
would  call  the  planning  executive  to  determine  the  detailed  plan  for 
the  movements  from  room  to  adjacent  room  for  each  step  along  the  route. 

Writing  subplanners  is  an  easy  and  natural  way  of  including 
domain-specific  plan  generation  knowledge  in  a  general-purpose 
planning  system,  and  it  provides  the  system  with  the  power  that  is 
needed  to  make  such  a  system  effective  and  useful. 


V  HIERARCHICAL  PLANNING 


The  robot  route  finding  example  suggests  another  important 
theme  in  automatic  planning  systems—  namely,  "hierarchical  planning.” 
We  have  been  assuming  that  the  planner  is  given  a  single  set  of 
actions  and  that  all  plans  must  be  composed  of  elements  from  that  set. 
Hence,  if  the  actions  for  the  robot  domain  are  at  the  level  of  detail 
of  "Move  forward  X  meters"  and  "Turn  right  Y  degrees"  a  route  con¬ 
sisting  of  the  sequence  of  rooms  that  the  robot  is  to  go  through  is  not 
an  acceptable  plan.  It  is  a  "meta-plan"  that  can  be  made  into  a  plan 
by  determining  the  detailed  moves  and  turns  that  will  take  the  robot 
from  each  room  to  the  next.  The  question  arises  as  to  when  and  if 
the  planner  should  be  concerned  with  details  such  as  determining  the 
actual  moves  and  turns  for  the  route.  One  might  argue  that  it  is  just 
as  easy  to  include  a  "Go  to  adjacent  room  X"  action  in  the  action  set 
or,  for  that  matter,  a  "Go  to  room  x"  action  that  would  incorporate 
the  route  finding  algorithm. 

How  does  one  decide  what  level  of  detail  to  include  in  a 
plan?  We  can  gain  insight  into  that  question  by  considering  the 
purposes  for  creating  a  plan.  The  primary  purpose  of  planning  is  to 
determine  a  suitable  method  for  accomplishing  a  task  and  to  predict 
the  consequences  of  applying  that  method.  Finding  a  suitable  method 
typically  means  achieving  some  acceptable  degree  of  certainty  that 
the  method  can  be  applied,  that  it  will  succeed  in  accomplishing  the 
task,  and  that  it  is  less  expensive  than  other  feasible  methods  v/ith 
respect  to  some  resource  such  as  time  or  energy.  The  planner’s 
predictive  capability  allows  the  system  to  answer  questions  about 


-11 


applying  the  method  without  having  to  expend  the  resources  and  deal 
with  the  consequences  of  the  actual  execution.  Planning  is  necessary 
at.  a  particular  level  of  detail,  then,  only  to  the  extent  that  some 
question  exists  as  to  what  method  to  apply  at  that  level  or  that  in¬ 
formation  is  needed  about  the  execution  of  the  method  before  the 
execution  occurs. 

If  we  can  write  a  "Go  to  room  X"  action  program  that  can 
provide  the  necessary  degree  of  certainty  that  a  route  exists  and  can 
provide  a  sufficiently  accurate  estimate  of  the  cost  of  moving  the 
robot  through  the  route,  there  may  be  no  need  to  plan  the  route  and  the 
individual  moves  until  it  is  time  to  execute  the  plan.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  route,  such  as  whether  doors 
are  locked  or  whether  clear  pathways  exist  through  rooms,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  plan  the  details  of  the  route  to  remove  the  uncertainty. 

Even  if  a  "meta-action”  such  as  "Go  to  room  X"  cannot  answer 
all  the  questions  that  arise  before  plan  execution,  there  are  often 
advantages  to  delaying  the  planning  of  the  meta-action’s  details  until 
it  is  certain  that  such  details  will  be  included  in  the  final  plan. 

For  example,  there  is  no  need  to  plan  the  details  of  how  to  get  the  robot 
into  some  particular  room  until  it  is  clear  that  the  trip  to  that  room 
will  be  part  of  the  plan. 

When  plans  are  being  constructed  for  humans  to  carry  out,  such 
as  for  the  SRI  Computer  Based  Consultant  system  (CBC)  (Hart,  1975), 
which  assists  in  the  repair  of  equipment,  the  use  of  meta-actions  be¬ 
comes  even  more  valuable.  In  general,  the  people  receiving  instructions 


-12 


from  the  system  will  have  varying  levels  of  expertise  and  understanding 
of  the  steps  in  the  plan.  The  system  can  attempt  to  match  its  level 
:  bf  instruction  to  this  var i ability .  ^ For  example ,  the  CBC  might  tell  :ia' V\:  re¬ 
trained  mechanic  simply  to  "Replace  the  pump,"  whereas  it  might  tell  a 
novice  to  "Remove  the  4  mounting  bolts  at  the  base  of  the  pump  using  a  ; 
3/8-inch  open-end  wrench. "  If  the  person  does  not  understand  an 
instruction,  the  system  can  call  the  meta-action  ’ s  sub planner  and 
respond  by  providing  the  more  detailed  instructions  that  the  subplanner 
produces  . '  V-';- ,:y  -'V;'/-  j 

For  a  planner  to  include  meta-actions  in  plans,  it  must  be 
provided  with  "meta-action  models"  containing  the  same  information  and 
having  the  same  form  as  the  action  models.  That  is,  the  planner  must 
be  able  to  achieve  the  preconditions  of  the  meta-action,  simulate  its 
execution,  and  match  it  to  tasks  for  which  it  is  useful.  Given  such  a 
model,  a  planner  has  the  option  of  including  a  meta-action  in  a  plan  with¬ 
out  calling  its  subplanner  to  determine  the  detailed  plan  steps  that  it  re 
presents  „  • 

This  approach  to  planning  has  been  explored  by  Sacerdoti  in 
two  systems  (Sacerdoti,  1974,  1975)  and  found  to  provide  significant 
advantages  during  both  the  generation  and  the  execution  of  plans.  In 
these  systems,  plans  tend  to  grow  in  a  top-down  "breadth-f irst" 
manner,  in  that  typically  a  complete  plan  will  be  constructed  using 
high-level  meta-actions  before  the  detailed  steps  of  any  of  the  meta¬ 
actions  are  determined.  Since  a  meta-action’s  subplanner  may  itself 

-13- 


produce  a  plan  containing  meta-actions,  a  multiple-level  plan 
hierarchy  is  formed,  and  the  planner  can  make  independent  decisions 
for  each  meta-action  relative  to  whether  its  subplanner  should  be 
called . 

;.VX  ASSERT  ZONAL  DOMAIN  KNOWLEDGE 

Another  form  in  which  domain-specific  knowledge  can  be 
represented  in  a  planning  system  is  scenarios,  or  generalized  plans. 

That  is,  any  given  domain  will  typically  include  many  methods  for 
accomplishing  tasks  for  which  the  order  and  the  identity  of  the  steps 
do  not  vary  for  different  situations.  Such  methods  provide  a  planner 
with  the  skeleton  for  an  entire  subplan  and  the  task  of  composing  plans 
using  such  scenarios  is  largely  one  of  finding  the  appropriate  scenario 
and  then  producing  a  suitable  instantiation  of  it. 

A.  Scenarios 

We  have  found  explicit  scenarios  useful  in  a  management 
support  system  currently  being  developed  at  SRI  (Fikes  and  Pease,  1975). 
In  this  work,  we  wish  to  allow  a  manager  to  specify  to  the  system  various 
operational  procedures  that  he  uses  in  his  organization.  The  system 
can  then  act  as  an  administrative  assistant  by  planning  and  monitoring 
the  execution  of  these  procedures  at  the  manager’s  request.  The 
planning  activity  in  this  system  is  primarily  one  of  instantiation. 
However,  the  instantiation  process  in  this  case  is  nontrivial  because 
it  entails  scheduling  the  individual  steps  of  the  plan  and  ensuring  the 


-14- 


availability  of  resources  and  personnel  at  specific  times. 

The  example  domain  being  considered  Tor  this  system  is  that 
of  managing  the  logistics  of  operations  on  board  a  Navy  aircraft  carrier. 
One  operation  of  interest  in  that  domain  is  the  flying  of  training 

V 

missions.  Such  missions  entail  steps  such  as  preflight  and  postflight 
maintenance  of  the  aircraft,  fueling  the  aircraft,  briefing  and  de- 
briefing  the  pilot  and  launching  and  recovering  the  aircraft .  These 
steps  and  the  order  in  which  they  must  occur  do  not  vary  from  mission 
to  mission;  hence  they  can  be  included  in  a  scenario  that  is  part  of  the 
definition  of  a  mission. 

A  ;:scenario '  in  "this  system  has  many  "terminals"  with  un-  • 

assigned  values ,  and  the  planner's  basic  task  is  to  find  an  accept¬ 
able  set  of  values  for  them.  Most  of  these  slots  specify  the  start  and 
the  end  time  of  some  step  in  the  plan  or  the  quantity  and  identity  of 
some  resource  that  will  be  used  by  the  plan. 

We  include  at  each  terminal  of  a  scenario  a  set  of  constraints 
on  the  value  to  be  assigned  there.  The  most  common  constraints  are 
those  that  are  derived  from  the  temporal  partial  ordering  of  the  steps; 
(for  example,  fueling  of  the  aircraft  must  occur  after  the  preflight 
maintenance  and  before  the  launch).  Default  values  are  included  at  the 
terminals,  usually  expressed  as  functions  of  other  slot  values  in  the 
scenario.  For  example,  the  default  value  for  the  start  of  preflight 
maintenance  is  expressed  as  the  time  of  launch  minus  some  constant. 

These  default  values  allow  the  planner  to  make  feasibility  estimates 
and  to  make  scheduling  decisions  before  all  of  the  constraints  from 


15- 


the  other  schedulers  have  been  determined. 


Also  included  at  each  terminal  is  a  specification  of  what 
function  can  be  called  to  determine  a  value  for  the  terminal.  These 
are  typically  calls  on  planners  and  schedulers  that  are  responsible 
for  other  operational  functions  in  the  organization.  On  board  a 
carrier  these  would  be  aircraft  maintenance,  pilot  assignment,  aircraft 
assignment,  the  flight  deck,  and  so  forth.  Hence,  the  planner  that  is 
using  such  a  scenario  engages  in  a  negotiation  dialogue  with  the  other 
planners  in  an  attempt  to  reach  agreement  on  an  acceptable  schedule. 

B.  Generalized  Plans 

.  Another  source  of  assertional  domain  knowledge  is  from  pre-  ; // 
viously  produced  plans.  One  would  like  the  plans  produced  by  a 
planner  to  be  retained  as  new  scenarios  so  that  the  system  could  be 
considered  to  be  acquiring  new  expertise  in  the  task  domain. 

In  some  of  our  earlier  work  with  the  STRIPS  planning  system, 
we  attempted  to  develop  such  a  learning  mechanism  (Fikes,  Hart,  and 
Nilsson,  1972).  The  challenge  in  such  an  effort  is  to  have  the 
system  derive  and  store  with  the  new  scenario  the  information  required 
for  its  use  by  other  parts  of  the  system,  including  the  planner.  This 
information  includes  all  the  information  that  is  provided  by  action  models  - 
namely,  a  set  of  preconditions  for  the  plan,  a  description  of  the  effects 
of  the  plan  *  s  execution  and  indications  of  the  classes  of  tasks  the  plan 
is  relevant  to  achieving.  In  addition,  for  the  new  scenario  to  be  use¬ 
ful  in  situations  other  than  just  reoccurrences  of  the  one  for  which  it 


-16- 


was  originally  constructed,  it  must  somehow  be  generalized  so  that, 
like  the  other  scenarios,  there  are  slots  at  the  scenario’s  ’’terminals” 
that  can  be  filled  with  values  suited  to  any  of  a  class  of  situations  and 
goals . 

The  basic  goal  of  the  STRIPS  learning  work  was  to  generalize 
and  save  plans  so  that  they  could  be  used  as  single  steps  in  future  plans. 
Two  aspects  of  this  work  are  relevant  to  this  discussion:  the  use  of 
"kernels”  and  the  manner  in  which  plans  were  generalized . 

In  the  STRIPS  system,  a  stored  plan  was  called  a  MACROP  (for 
MACRO  OPerator) .  A  MACROP's  preconditions  were  directly  available  as 
a  side  effect  of  the  determination  of  kernels  preceding  each  step  of 
the  plan.  The  kernel  preceding  Step  i  of  a  plan  is  a  partial  descrip- :y 
tion  of  the  situation  that  the  planner  expects  to  exist  after  execu¬ 
tion  of  the  first  i-1  steps  of  the  plan.  In  particular,  it  specifies 
a  set  of  relationships  that  must  be  true  if  the  remainder  of  the  plan  is 
to  succeed.  Hence,  in  effect,  the  kernel  for  each  step  is  the  set  of 
preconditions  for  the  remainder  of  the  plan.  The  kernels  for  a  plan 
can  be  computed  in  a  direct  manner  by  considering  what  relationships 
were  made  true  by  each  step  in  the  plan  and  by  knowing  what  relation¬ 
ships  from  the  state  description  models  were  needed  to  ensure  the 
achievement  of  each  action's  preconditions  and  of  the  final  goal. 

A  plan’s  kernels  provide  valuable  information  for  many 
uses  of  the  plan  and  therefore  are  an  important  part  of  the  informa¬ 
tion  stored  with  the  plan.  First,  the  kernel  preceding  the  initial 


-17- 


step  of  the  plan  specifies  the  preconditions  for  the  plan.  Second, 
the  kernels  specify  the  tests  an  execution  monitor  should  make  after 
each  action  to  determine  whether  the  plan  is  proceeding  as  expected 
during  execution.  Third,  the  kernels  are  useful  for  modifying  or  ex¬ 
tending  the  plan  to  accommodate  a  new  situation  or  new  task  goals. 


That  is,  instead  of  forming  a  completely  new  plan  to 
accomplish  some  task  goal,  the  planner  can  be  given  the  option  of 
modifying  an  existing  scenario  by  adding  or  changing  some  of  its 
steps.  The  basic  information  that  is  needed  to  allow  such  modification 
is  contained  in  the  kernels,  since  each  kernel  indicates  what  must  re¬ 
main  true  between  any  two  adjacent  steps  in  a  plan .  Hence ,  the 
planner  can  add  any  number  of  steps  between  Step  i-1  and  Step  i  of  an 
existing  plan  as  long  as  the  kernel  between  those  two  steps  is  not 
violated. 

Providing  a  capability  for  modifying  an  existing  plan  is  an 
important  way  of  improving  the  power  of  a  planning  system.  It  allows 
the  planner  to  consider  adding  steps  anywhere  in  a  plan  (as  apposed  to 
only  at  the  end)  to  achieve  a  goal  (Waldinger ,  1975) .  For  example,  if 
a  plan  has  been  constructed  to  move  a  robot  from  Room  A  into  Room  B, 
and  then  the  planner  considers  a  goal  of  transporting  some  object 
from  Room  A  into  Room  B,  the  existing  plan  can  be  modified  so  that  the 
robot  transports  the  object  during  the  first  trip  rather  than  making  a 
second  trip. 

This  modification  capability  is  also  useful  when  combining 


two  scenarios  to  achieve  a  conjunctive  goal  (Sacerdot?. ,  1975).  For 
example,  in  the  equipment  repair  domain,  two  scenarios  may  be  con¬ 
joined  each  of  which  includes  removal  and  replacement  of  the  same 
subassembly.  The  planner  must  be  able  to  recognize  this  redundancy 
and  to  combine  the  scenarios  so  that  the  subassembly  is  removed  only 
once.  Finally,  a  plan  modification  capability  is  useful  for  "de¬ 
bugging"  a  plan  (Sussman,  1973).  Often,  stored  scenarios  and  the 
methods  found  in  subplanners  are  heuristic  in  nature  and  do  not 
always  produce  bug-free  plans.  Such  bugs  are  typically  discovered 
during  the  planner’s  simulation  of  the  plan.  When  such  a  discovery  is 
made,  the  planner  can  employ  its  plan  modification  facilities  to  re¬ 
move  the  bug. 

•  The  second  comment  about  the  STRIPS  learning  work  relates  to 
the  generalization  that  was  done  on  the  plans  before  they  were  /'• 
stored.  The  goal  was  to  "unbind"  the  slots  in  each  of  the  plan's  steps 
so  that,  whenever  possible,  they  became  unvalued  slots  in  the  scenario 
for  the  entire  plan.  The  logical  structure  of  the  plan  imposes 
restrictions  on  this  unbinding  process,  so  that  some  pairs  of  slots  are 
required  to  take  on  the  same  value  (they  become  a  jingle  ;  slbt  in  the  : : 
new  scenario)  and  others  must  retain  their  binding  (they  lose  their 
status  as  slots  in  the  new  scenario).  For  example,  if  one  step  of  the 
plan  causes  the  robot  to  go  to  a  door  and  the  next  step  causes  the 
robot  to  go  through  a  door,  the  door  in  those  two  steps  must  be  the  same 
door. 

This  generalization  process  essentially  parameterizes  the 


-19- 


plan  and  thereby  provides  it  with  enough  generality  to  make  it  worth¬ 
while  to  save.  For  example,  consider  a  plan  that  takes  a  robot  from 
•  Room  III  through  Door  1)1  into  Room  112  and  then  has  the  robot  bring 
Box  B1  from  Room  112  back  into  Room  III  through  Door  1)1.  That  plan 
would  be  generalized  so  that  it  would  take  the  robot  from  any  room  in¬ 
to  any  adjacent  room  through  any  connecting  door  and  then  take  any  box 
in  the  room  into  any  adjacent  room  through  any  connecting  door.  The 
generalization  removes  all  bindings  to  the  particular  rooms ,  doors , 
and  box  and  allows  the  room  into  which  the  box  is  taken  to  be  different 
from  the  one  in  which  the  robot  was  initially  located. 

, :  '  We  see ,  then ,  that  another  way  of  expanding  the  power  and  .  \ 

effectiveness  of  a  planning  system  is  to  provide  it  with  facilities  ' 
for  instantiating  and  modifying  plans  that  have  been  previously  produced, 
generalized  and  stored.  -Y  ;'"Vy 

vn  summary  .:'Vr: iV'* 

A  planner  is  needed  when  a  system  does  not  have  a  prestored 
method  for  accomplishing  a  particular  task.  The  planner’s  role  is  to 
combine  the  methods  that are  available  to  the system in 7order^.:1;b;-;;^-^v;7/ 
produce  a  new  "method"  that  will  accomplish  the  task.  The  methods 
being  composed  may  consist  of  single  actions  or  of  multi  action 
scenarios  and  the  composition  process  may  include  instantiating  and 
modifying  the  existing  methods  to  match  the  particular  situation.  In 
addition  to  basic  means-ends  analysis  and  simulation  facilities  for 


-20- 


.composing  prestored  actions  and  scenarios,  a  planner  typically  has 
available  a  collection  of  subplanners  that  embody  domain-dependent 
expertise  and  are  designed  to  be  applied  to  specialized  classes  of 
tasks . 


REFERENCES 


Derksen,  J.,  J.  F.  Rulifson,  and  R.  J.  Waldinger,  "The  QA4  Language 
Applied  to  Robot  Planning,"  Proc.  Fall  Joint  Computer  Conference, 
pp.  1181-1192  (1972). 

Fahlman ,  S.  E.  ,  "A  Planning  System  for  Robot  Construction  Tasks," 

Artificial  Intelligence,  Vol.  5,  No.  1,  pp.  1-49  (1974) 

Fikes ,  R.  E.,  "Deductive  Retrieval  Mechanisms  for  State  Description  Models," 

Proc.  Fourth  International  Joint  Conference  Artificial  Intelligence,  Tbilisi 
USSR  (1975)  :  ~  ' 

Fikes,  R.E.,  N.  J.  Nilsson,  "STRIPS:  A  New  Approach  to  the  Application  of 
Theorem  Proving  to  Problem  Solving,"  Artificial  Intelligence,  Vol.  2, 
pp.  189-208  (1971). 

Fikes,  R.E.jP.E*  Hart ,  and  N.  J.  Nilsson,  "Learning  and  •Executing' 

^Generalized  Robot  Plans,"  Artificial  Intelligence,  Vol.  3,  pp,  251-288 

>;-.V-:j<1972) j -j  ;V  -./vy-v;;  ~~  .y;';- 

Fikes y  R. ;  E . ,  M .  C .  Pease,  "An  Interactive  Management  Support  System  for ; 
Planning ,  Control ,  and  Analysis,"  Technical  Report  12,  Computer  Science •; 

■  -  Group,  SRI,  Menlo  Park ,  CA  ( 1975)  .  .-i  .'./'/V.: 

Hart,  P.E.y  "Progress  on  a  Computer-Based  Consultant,"  Proc.  Fourth 

International  Joint  Conference  Artificial  Intelligence,  Tbilisi,  USSR  (1975) 

Minsky,  M.,  "A  Framework  for  Representing  Knowledge,"  Memo  No.  306,  MIT 
Artificial  Intelligence,  Cambridge,  MA  (1974). 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D. ,  "Planning  in  a  Hierarchy  of  Abstraction  Spaces," 

Artificial  Intelligence,  Vol.  5,  No.  2,  pp.  115-135  (1974). 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.,  "A  Structure  for  Plans  and  Behavior,"  Technical  Report  109, 
Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI,  Menlo  Park,  CA  (1975) . 

Schank,  R.  C.,  "Using  Knowledge  to  Understand,”  Proc.  Theoretical  Issues 
in  Natural  Language  Processing  Workshop,  MIT,  Cambridge,  MA  (1975). 

Sussman,  G.  J. ,  "A  Computational  Model  of  Skill  Acquisition,"  Tech. 

Report  AI-TR-297,  MIT  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory,  Cambridge,  MA 
(1973) . 

Waldinger,  R.,  "Achieving  Several  Goals  Simultaneously,”  Tech.  Note  107, 
Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI,  Menlo  Park,  CA  (1975). 


