SEMANTICAL  CONSIDERATIONS  ON  NONMONOTONIC  LOGIC 


Technical  Note  284 
June  1983 


By:  Robert  C.  Moore,  Staff  Scientist 
Artificial  Intelligence  Center 
Computer  Science  and  Technology  Division 


SRI  Project  4488 


This  is  a  revised  and  expanded  version  of  a  paper  to 
appear  in  Proceedings  of  the  Eighth  International 
Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence, 
Karlsruhe,  West  Germany,  August  8-12,  1983. 


The  research  reported  herein  was  supported  by  the  Air 
Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research  under  Contract 
No.  F49620-82-K-0031 .  The  views  and  conclusions 
expressed  in  this  document  are  those  of  the  author  and 
should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily  representing 
the  official  policies  or  endorsements,  either 
expressed  of  implied,  of  the  Air  Force  Office  of 
Scientific  Research  or  the  U.S.  Government. 


333  Ravenswood  Ave.  •  Menlo  Park,  CA  94025 
(415i326-6200  •  TWX:  910-373-2046  •  Telex:  334-486 


ABSTRACT 


Commonsense  reasoning  is  "nonmonotonic"  in  the  sense  that  we  often 
draw,  on  the  basis  of  partial  information,  conclusions  that  we  later 
retract  when  we  are  given  more  complete  information.  Some  of  the  most 
interesting  products  of  recent  attempts  to  formalize  nonmonotonic 
reasoning  are  the  nonmonotonic  logics  of  McDermott  and  Doyle  [McDermott 
and  Doyle,  1980;  McDermott,  1982],  These  logics,  however,  all  have 
peculiarities  that  suggest  they  do  not  quite  succeed  in  capturing  the 
intuitions  that  prompted  their  development.  In  this  paper  we 
reconstruct  nonmonotonic  logic  as  a  model  of  an  ideally  rational  agent's 
reasoning  about  his  own  beliefs.  For  the  resulting  system,  called 
autoepistemic  logic ,  we  define  an  intuitively  based  semantics  for  which 
we  can  show  autoepistemic  logic  to  be  both  sound  and  complete.  We  then 
compare  autoepistemic  logic  with  the  approach  of  McDermott  and  Doyle, 
showing  how  it  avoids  the  peculiarities  of  their  nonmonotonic  logic. 


ii 


I  INTRODUCTION 


It  has  been  generally  acknowledged  in  recent  years  that  one 
important  feature  of  ordinary  commonsense  reasoning  that  standard  logics 
fail  to  capture  is  its  nonmono tonicity .  An  example  frequently  given  to 
illustrate  the  point  is  the  following.  If  we  know  that  Tweety  is  a 
bird,  we  will  normally  assume,  in  the  absence  of  evidence  to  the 
contrary,  that  Tweety  can  fly.  If,  however,  we  later  learn  that  Tweety 
is  a  penguin,  we  will  withdraw  our  prior  assumption.  If  we  try  to  model 
this  in  a  formal  system,  we  seem  to  have  a  situation  in  which  a  theorem 
P  is  derivable  from  a  set  of  axioms  S,  but  is  not  derivable  from  some 
set  S'  that  is  a  superset  of  S.  The  set  of  theorems,  therefore,  does 
not  increase  monotonically  with  the  set  of  axioms;  hence  this  sort  of 
reasoning  is  said  to  be  "nonmonotonic."  As  Minsky  [1974]  has  pointed 
out,  standard  logics  are  always  monotonic,  because  their  inference  rules 
make  every  axiom  permissive.  That  is,  the  inference  rules  are  always  of 
the  form  "P  is  a  theorem  if  Q^,...,Qn  are  theorems,"  so  that  new  axioms 
can  only  make  more  theorems  derivable;  they  can  never  invalidate  a 
previous  theorem. 

Recently  there  have  been  a  number  of  attempts  to  formalize  this 
type  of  nonmonotonic  reasoning.  The  general  idea  is  to  allow  axioms  to 
be  restrictive  as  well  as  permissive,  by  employing  inference  rules  of 
the  form  ’P  is  a  theorem  if  Q-j_,...,Qn  are  not  theorems."  The  inference 
that  birds  can  fly  is  handled  by  having,  in  effect,  a  rule  that  says 
that,  for  any  X,  "X  can  fly"  is  a  theorem  if  "X  is  a  bird"  is  a  theorem 
and  "X  cannot  fly"  is  not  a  theorem.  If  all  we  are  told  about  Tweety  is 
that  he  is  a  bird,  we  will  not  be  able  to  derive  "Tweety  cannot  fly"; 
consequently,  "Tweety  can  fly"  will  be  inferable.  If  we  are  told  that 
Tweety  is  a  penguin  and  we  already  know  that  no  penquin  can  fly,  we  will 
be  able  to  derive  the  fact  that  Tweety  cannot  fly,  and  so  the  inference 
that  Tweety  can  fly  will  be  blocked. 


1 


One  of  the  most  interesting  embodiments  of  this  approach  to 
nonmonotonic  reasoning  is  McDermott  and  Doyle's  "nonmonotonic  logic" 
[McDermott  and  Doyle,  1980;  McDermott,  1982].  McDermott  and  Doyle 
modify  a  standard  first-order  logic  by  introducing  a  sentential  operator 
"M,"  whose  informal  interpretation  is  "is  consistent."  Nonmonotonic 
inferences  about  birds  being  able  to  fly  would  be  sanctioned  in  their 
system  by  the  axiom  [McDermott,  1982,  p.  33] 

(ALL  X) (BIRD (X)  /\  M( CAN-FLY (X) )  ->  CAN-FLY(X)). 

This  formula  can  be  read  informally  as  "for  all  X,  if  X  is  a  bird  and  it 
is  consistent  to  assert  that  X  can  fly,  then  X  can  fly."  McDermott  and 
Doyle  can  then  have  a  single  general  nonmonotonic  inference  rule,  whose 
intuitive  content  is  "MP  is  derivable  if  ~P  is  not  derivable." 

McDermott  and  Doyle's  approach  to  nonmonotonic  reasoning  seems  more 
interesting  and  ambitious  than  some  other  approaches  in  two  respects. 
First,  since  the  principles  that  lead  to  nonmonotonic  inferences  are 
explicitly  represented  in  the  logic,  those  very  principles  can  be 
reasoned  about.  That  is,  if  P  is  such  a  principle,  we  could  start  out 
believing  Q  ->  P  or  even  MP  ->  P,  and  come  to  hold  P  by  drawing 
inferences,  either  monotonic  or  nonmonotonic.  So,  if  we  use  McDermott 
and  Doyle's  representation  of  the  belief  that  birds  can  fly,  we  could 
also  represent  various  inferences  that  would  lead  us  to  adopt  that 
belief.  Second,  since  they  use  only  general  inference  rules,  they  are 
able  to  provide  a  formal  semantic  interpretation  with  soundness  and 
completeness  proofs  for  each  of  the  logics  they  define.  In  formalisms 
that  use  content-specific  nonmonotonic  inference  rules  dealing  with 
contingent  aspects  of  the  world  (i.e.,  it  might  have  been  the  case  that 
birds  could  not  fly),  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  this  could  be  done. 
The  effect  is  that  nonmonotonic  inferences  in  McDermott  and  Doyle's 
logics  are  justified  by  the  meaning  of  the  premises  of  the  inferences. 

There  are  a  number  of  problems  with  McDermott  and  Doyle's 
nonmonotonic  logics,  however.  The  first  logic  they  define  [McDermott 
and  Doyle,  1980]  gives  such  a  weak  notion  of  consistency  that,  as  they 


2 


point  out,  MP  is  not  inconsistent  with  ~P.  That  is,  it  is  possible  for 
a  theory  to  assert  simultaneously  that  P  is  consistent  with  the  theory 
and  that  P  is  false.  McDermott  subsequently  [1982]  tried  basing 
nonmonotonic  logics  on  the  standard  modal  logics  T,  S4,  and  S5.  He 
discovered,  however,  that  the  most  plausible  candidate  for  formalizing 
the  notion  of  consistency  that  he  wanted,  nonmonotonic  S5,  collapses  to 
ordinary  S5  and  is  therefore  monotonic.  In  the  rest  of  this  paper  we 
develop  an  alternative  formalization  of  nonmonotonic  logic  that  shows 
why  these  problems  arise  in  McDermott  and  Doyle's  logics  and  how  they 
can  be  avoided. 


II  NONMONOTONIC  LOGIC  AND  AUTOEPISTEMIC  REASONING 


The  first  step  in  analyzing  nonmonotonic  logic  is  to  determine  what 
sort  of  nonmonotonic  reasoning  it  is  meant  to  model.  After  all, 
nonmonotonicity  is  a  rather  abstract  syntactic  property  of  an  inference 
system,  and  there  is  no  a  priori  reason  to  believe  that  all  forms  of 
nonmonotonic  reasoning  should  have  the  same  logical  basis.  In  fact, 
McDermott  and  Doyle  seem  to  confuse  two  quite  distinct  forms  of 
nonmonotonic  reasoning,  which  we  will  call  default  reasoning  and 
autoepistemic  reasoning.  They  talk  as  though  their  systems  were 
intended  to  model  the  former,  but  they  actually  seem  much  better  suited 
to  modeling  the  latter. 

By  default  reasoning  we  mean  the  drawing  of  plausible  inferences 
from  less-than-concluslve  evidence  in  the  absence  of  information  to  the 
contrary.  The  examples  about  birds  being  able  to  fly  are  of  this  type. 
If  we  know  that  Tweety  is  a  bird,  that  gives  us  some  evidence  that 
Tweety  can  fly,  but  it  is  not  conclusive.  In  the  absence  of  information 
to  the  contrary,  however,  we  are  willing  to  go  ahead  and  tentatively 
conclude  that  Tweety  can  fly.  Now  even  before  we  do  any  detailed 
analysis  of  nonmonotonic  logic,  we  can  see  that  there  will  be  problems 
in  interpreting  it  as  a  model  of  default  reasoning:  In  the  formal 
semantics  McDermott  and  Doyle  provide  for  nonmonotonic  logic,  all  the 
nonmonotonic  inferences  are  valid.  Default  reasoning,  however,  is 
clearly  not  a  form  of  valid  inference.! 

Consider  the  belief  that  lies  behind  our  willingness  to  infer  that 
Tweety  can  fly  from  the  fact  that  Tweety  is  a  bird.  It  is  probably 
something  like  most  birds  can  fly,  or  almost  all  birds  can  fly,  or  a 
typical  bird  can  fly.  To  model  this  kind  of  reasoning,  in  a  theory 
whose  only  axioms  are  "Tweety  is  a  bird"  and  "Most  birds  can  fly,"  we 
ought  to  be  able  to  infer  (nonmonotonically)  "Tweety  can  fly."  Now  if 


4 


this  were  a  form  of  valid  inference,  we  would  be  guaranteed  that  the 
conclusion  is  true  if  the  premises  are  true.  This  is  manifestly  not  the 
case.  The  premises  of  this  inference  give  us  a  good  reason  to  draw  the 
conclusion,  but  not  the  ironclad  guarantee  that  validity  demands. 

Now  reconsider  McDermott's  formula  that  yields  nonmonotonic 
inferences  about  birds  being  able  to  fly: 

(ALL  X) (BIRD(X)  /\  M(CAN-FLY(X) )  ->  CAN-FLY(X) ) 

McDermott  suggests  as  a  gloss  of  this  formula  "Most  birds  can  fly," 
which  would  indicate  that  he  thinks  of  the  inferences  it  sanctions  as 
default  inferences.  But  if  we  read  M  as  "is  consistent"  as  McDermott 
and  Doyle  repeatedly  tell  us  to  do  elsewhere,  the  formula  actually  says 
something  quite  different:  "For  all  X,  if  X  is  a  bird  and  it  is 
consistent  to  assert  that  X  can  fly,  then  X  can  fly."  Since  the 
inference  rule  for  M  is  intended  to  convey  "MP  is  derivable  if  ~P  is  not 
derivable,"  the  notion  of  consistency  McDermott  and  Doyle  have  in  mind 
seems  to  be  that  it  is  consistent  to  assert  P  if  ~P  is  not  derivable. 
McDermott's  formula,  then,  says  that  the  only  birds  that  cannot  fly  are 
the  ones  that  can  be  inferred  not  to  fly.  If  we  have  a  theory  whose 
only  axioms  are  this  one  and  an  assertion  to  the  effect  that  Tweety  is  a 
bird,  then  the  conclusion  that  Tweety  can  fly  would  be  a  valid 
inference.  That  is,  if  it  is  true  that  Tweety  is  a  bird,  and  it  is  true 
that  only  birds  inferred  not  to  fly  are  in  fact  unable  to  fly,  and 
Tweety  is  not  inferred  not  to  fly,  then  it  must  be  true  that  Tweety  can 
fly. 

This  type  of  reasoning  is  not  a  form  of  default  reasoning  at  all; 
it  rather  seems  to  be  more  like  reasoning  about  one's  own  knowledge  or 
belief.  Hence,  we  will  refer  to  it  as  autoepistemic  reasoning. 
Autoepistemic  reasoning,  while  different  from  default  reasoning,  is  an 
important  form  of  commonsense  reasoning  in  its  own  right.  Consider  my 
reason  for  believing  that  I  do  not  have  an  older  brother.  It  is  surely 
not  that  one  of  my  parents  once  casually  remarked,  "You  know,  you  don't 
have  any  older  brothers,"  nor  have  I  pieced  it  together  by  carefully 


5 


sifting  other  evidence.  I  simply  believe  that  if  I  did  have  an  older 
brother  I  would  know  about  it;  therefore,  since  I  don't  know  of  any 
older  brothers,  I  must  not  have  any.  This  is  quite  different  from  a 
default  inference  based  on  the  belief,  say,  that  most  MIT  graduates  are 
eldest  sons,  and  that,  since  I  am  an  MIT  graduate,  I  am  probably  an 
eldest  son. 

Default  reasoning  and  autoepistemic  reasoning  are  both 
nonmonotonic,  but  for  different  reasons.  Default  reasoning  is 
nonmonotonic  because,  to  use  a  term  from  philosophy,  it  is  defeasible: 
its  conclusions  are  tentative,  so,  given  better  information,  they  may  be 
withdrawn.  Purely  autoepistemic  reasoning,  however,  is  not  defeasible. 
If  you  really  believe  that  you  already  know  all  the  instances  of  birds 
that  cannot  fly,  you  cannot  consistently  hold  to  that  belief  and  at  the 
same  time  accept  new  instances  of  birds  that  cannot  fly.^ 

As  Stalnaker  [1980]  has  observed,  autoepistemic  reasoning  is 
nonmonotonic  because  the  meaning  of  an  autoepistemic  statement  is 
context-sensitive;  it  depends  on  the  theory  in  which  the  statement  is 
embedded.-3  If  we  have  a  theory  whose  only  two  axioms  are 

BIRD(TWEETY) 

(ALL  X) (BIRD(X)  / \  M ( CAN-FLY ( X ) )  ->  CAN-FLY(X)) , 

then  MP  does  not  merely  mean  that  P  is  consistent — it  means  that  P  is 
consistent  with  the  nonmonotonic  theory  that  contains  only  those  two 
axioms.  We  would  expect  CAN-FLY(TWEETY)  to  be  a  theorem  of  this  theory. 
If  we  change  the  theory  by  adding  "CAN-FLY (TWEETY)  as  an  axiom,  we  then 
change  the  meaning  of  MP  to  be  that  P  is  consistent  with  the 
nonmonotonic  theory  that  contains  only  the  axioms 

"CAN-FLY(TWEETY) 

BIRD (TWEETY) 

(ALL  X) (BIRD(X)  /\  M( CAN-FLY (X))  ->  CAN-FLY(X) ) , 

and  we  would  not  expect  CAN-FLY(TWEETY)  to  be  a  theorem.  The  operator  M 
changes  its  meaning  with  context  just  as  do  indexical  words  in  natural 
language,  such  as  "I,”  "here,"  and  "now."  The  nonmonotonicity 


6 


associated  with  autoepistemic  statements  should  therefore  be  no  more 
puzzling  than  the  fact  that  "I  am  hungry"  can  be  true  when  uttered  by  a 
particular  speaker  at  a  particular  time,  but  false  when  uttered  by  a 
different  speaker  at  the  same  time  or  the  same  speaker  at  a  different 
time.  So  we  might  say  that,  whereas  default  reasoning  is  nonmonotonic 
because  it  is  defeasible,  autoepistemic  reasoning  is  nonmonotonic 
because  it  is  indexical. 


7 


Ill  THE  FORMALIZATION  OF  AUTOEPISTEMIC  LOGIC 


Rather  than  try  directly  to  analyze  McDermott  and  Doyle's 
nonmonotonic  logic  as  a  model  of  autoepistemic  reasoning,  we  will  first 
define  a  logic  that  demonstrably  does  model  certain  aspects  of 
autoepistemic  reasoning  and  then  compare  nonmonotonic  logic  with  that. 
We  will  call  our  logic,  naturally  enough,  autoepistemic  logic .  The 
language  will  be  much  like  McDermott  and  Doyle's,  an  ordinary  logical 
language  augmented  by  autoepistemic  modal  operators.  McDermott  and 
Doyle  treat  consistency  as  their  fundamental  notion,  so  they  take  M  as 
the  basic  modal  operator  and  define  its  dual  L  to  be  ~M~.  Our  logic, 
however,  will  be  based  on  the  notion  of  belief,  so  we  will  take  L  to 
mean  "is  believed,”  treat  it  as  primitive,  and  define  M  as  ~L~.  In  any 
case,  this  gives  us  the  same  notion  of  consistency  as  theirs:  a  formula 
is  consistent  if  its  negation  is  not  believed.  Since  there  are  some 
problems  with  regard  to  the  meaning  of  quantifying  into  the  scope  of  an 
autoepistemic  operator  that  are  not  relevant  to  the  main  point  of  this 
paper,  we  will  limit  our  attention  to  propositional  autoepistemic  logic. 

Autoepistemic  logic  is  intended  to  model  the  beliefs  of  an  agent 
reflecting  upon  his  own  beliefs.  The  primary  objects  of  interest  are 
sets  of  autoepistemic  logic  formulas  that  are  interpreted  as  the  total 
beliefs  of  such  agents.  We  will  call  such  a  set  of  formulas  an 
autoepistemic  theory.  The  truth  of  an  agent's  beliefs,  expressed  as  a 
propositional  autoepistemic  theory,  will  be  determined  by  (1)  which 
propositional  constants  are  true  in  the  external  world  and  (2)  which 
formulas  the  agent  believes.  A  formula  of  the  form  LP  will  be  true  with 
respect  to  an  agent  if  and  only  if  P  is  in  his  set  of  beliefs.  To 
formalize  this,  we  define  notions  of  interpretation  and  model  as 
follows: 


8 


We  proceed  in  two  stages.  First  we  define  a  propositional 
Interpretation  of  an  autoepistemic  theory  T  to  be  an  assignment  of 
truth-values  to  the  formulas  of  the  language  of  T  that  is  consistent 
with  the  usual  truth  recursion  for  propositional  logic  and  with  any 
arbitrary  assignment  of  truth-values  to  propositional  constants  and 
formulas  of  the  form  LP.  A  propositional  model  of  an  autoepistemic 
theory  T  is  a  propositional  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the 
formulas  of  T  are  true.  The  propositional  interpretations  and  models  of 
an  autoepistemic  theory  are,  therefore,  precisely  those  we  would  get  in 
ordinary  propositional  logic  by  treating  all  formulas  of  the  form  LP  as 
propositional  constants.  We  therefore  inherit  the  soundness  and 
completeness  theorems  of  propositional  logic;  i.e.,  a  formula  P  is  true 
in  all  the  propositional  models  of  an  autoepistemic  theory  T  if  and  only 
if  it  is  a  tautological  consequence  of  T  (i.e.,  derivable  from  T  by  the 
usual  rules  of  propositional  logic). 

Next  we  define  an  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  an  autoepistemic 
theory  T  to  be  a  propositional  interpretation  of  T  in  which,  for  every 
■Formula  P,  LP  is  true  if  and  only  if  P  is  in  T.  It  should  be  noted  that 
the  theory  T  itself  completely  determines  the  truth  of  any  formula  of 
the  form  LP  in  all  the  autoepistemic  interpretations  of  T,  independently 
of  the  truth  assignment  to  the  propositional  constants.  Hence,  for 
every  truth  assignment  to  the  propositional  constants  of  T,  there  is 
exactly  one  corresponding  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T.  Finally, 
an  autoepistemic  model  of  T  is  an  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in 
which  all  the  formulas  of  T  are  true.  So  the  autoepistemic 
interpretations  and  models  of  T  are  just  the  propositional 
interpretations  and  models  of  T  that  conform  to  the  intended  meaning  of 
the  modal  operator  L. 

This  gives  us  a  formal  semantics  for  autoepistemic  logic  that 
matches  its  intuitive  interpretation.  Suppose  that  the  beliefs  of  an 
agent  situated  in  a  particular  world  are  characterized  by  the 
autoepistemic  theory  T.  The  world  in  question  will  provide  an 
assignment  of  truth-values  for  the  propositional  constants  of  T,  and  any 


9 


formula  of  the  form  LP  will  be  true  relative  to  the  agent  just  in  case 
he  believes  P.  In  this  way,  the  agent  and  the  world  In  which  he  is 
situated  directly  determine  an  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T.  That 
interpretation  will  be  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T,  just  in  case  all  the 
agent's  beliefs  are  true  in  his  world. 

Given  this  semantics  for  autoepistemic  logic,  what  do  we  want  from 
a  notion  of  inference  for  the  logic?  From  an  epistemological 
perspective,  the  problem  of  inference  is  the  problem  of  what  set  of 
beliefs  (theorems)  an  ideally  rational  agent  would  adopt  on  the  basis  of 
his  initial  premises  (axioms).  Since  we  are  trying  to  model  the  beliefs 
of  a  rational  agent,  the  beliefs  should  be  sound  with  respect  the 
premises;  we  want  a  guarantee  that  the  beliefs  are  true  provided  that 
the  premises  are  true.  Moreover,  since  we  assume  that  the  agent  is 
ideally  rational,  the  beliefs  should  be  semantically  complete;  we  want 
them  to  contain  everything  that  the  agent  would  be  semantically 
justified  in  concluding  from  his  beliefs  and  from  the  knowledge  that 
they  are  his  beliefs.  An  autoepistemic  logic  that  meets  these 
conditions  can  be  viewed  as  a  competence  model  of  reflection  upon  one's 
own  beliefs.  Like  competence  models  generally,  it  assumes  unbounded 
resources  of  time  and  memory,  and  is  therefore  not  a  plausible  model  of 
any  finite  agent.  It  is,  however,  the  model  upon  which  the  behavior  of 
rational  agents  ought  to  converge  as  their  time  and  memory  resources 
increase. 

Formally,  we  will  say  an  autoepistemic  theory  T  is  sound  with 
respect  to  an  initial  set  of  premises  A  if  and  only  if  every 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the  formulas  of  A  are 
true  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T.  This  notion  of  soundness  is  the 
weakest  condition  that  guarantees  that  all  of  the  agent's  beliefs  are 
true  whenever  all  his  premises  are  true.  Let  I  be  the  autoepistemic 
Interpretation  of  T  that  is  determined  by  what  is  true  in  the  actual 
world  (including  what  the  agent  actually  believes).  If  all  the  formulas 
of  T  are  true  in  every  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all 
the  formulas  of  A  are  true,  then  all  the  formulas  of  T  will  be  true  in  I 


10 


if  all  the  formulas  of  A  are  true  in  I;  hence,  all  the  agent's  beliefs 
will  be  true  in  the  world  if  all  the  agent's  premises  are  true  in  the 
world.  However,  if  there  is  an  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in 
which  all  the  formulas  of  A  are  true  but  some  formulas  of  T  are  false, 
then  it  is  possible  that  I  is  that  interpretation,  and  that  all  the 
agent's  premises  will  be  true  in  the  world,  but  some  of  his  beliefs  will 
not . 

Our  formal  notion  of  completeness  is  that  an  autoepistemic  theory  T 
is  semantically  complete  if  and  only  if  T  contains  every  formula  that  is 
true  in  every  autoepistemic  model  of  T.  If  a  formula  P  is  true  in  every 
autoepistemic  model  of  an  agent's  beliefs,  then  it  must  be  true  if  all 
the  agent's  beliefs  are  true,  and  an  ideally  rational  agent  should  be 
able  to  recognize  that  and  infer  P.  On  the  other  hand,  if  P  is  false  in 
some  autoepistemic  model  of  the  agent's  beliefs,  then  that  model,  for 
all  he  can  tell,  might  be  the  way  the  world  actually  is;  he  is  therefore 
justified  in  not  believing  P. 

The  next  problem  is  to  give  a  syntactic  characterization  of  the 
autoepistemic  theories  that  satisfy  these  conditions.  With  a  monotonic 
logic,  the  usual  procedure  is  to  define  a  collection  of  inference  rules 
to  apply  to  the  axioms.  For  a  nonmonotonic  logic  this  is  a  nontrivial 
matter.  Much  of  the  technical  ingenuity  of  McDermott  and  Doyle's 
systems  lies  simply  in  their  formulation  of  a  coherent  notion  of 
nonmonotonic  derivability .  The  problem  is  that  nonmonotonic  inference 
rules  do  not  yield  a  simple  iterative  notion  of  derivability  the  way 
monotonic  inference  rules  do.  We  can  view  a  monotonic  inference  process 
as  applying  the  inference  rules  in  all  possible  ways  to  the  axioms, 
generating  additional  formulas  to  which  the  inference  rules  are  applied 
in  all  possible  ways,  and  so  forth.  Since  monotonic  inference  rules  are 
monotonic,  once  a  formula  has  been  generated  at  a  given  stage,  it 
remains  in  the  generated  set  of  formulas  at  every  subsequent  stage. 
Thus  the  theorems  of  a  theory  in  a  monotonic  system  can  be  defined 
simply  as  all  the  formulas  that  are  generated  at  any  stage.  The  problem 
with  attempting  to  follow  this  pattern  with  nonmonotonic  inference  rules 


11 


is  that  we  cannot  draw  nonmonotonic  inferences  reliably  at  any 
particular  stage,  since  something  inferred  at  a  later  stage  may 
invalidate  them.  Lacking  such  an  iterative  structure,  nonmonotonic 
systems  often  use  nonconstructive  "fixed  point"  definitions,  which  do 
not  directly  yield  algorithms  for  enumerating  the  "derivable"  formulas, 
but  do  define  sets  of  formulas  that  respect  the  intent  of  the 
nonmonotonic  inference  rules  (e.g.,  in  McDermott  and  Doyle's  fixed 
points,  MP  is  included  whenever  ~P  is  not  included.) 

For  our  logic,  it  is  easiest  to  proceed  by  first  specifying  the 
closure  conditions  that  we  would  expect  the  beliefs  of  an  ideally 
rational  agent  to  possess.  Viewed  informally,  the  beliefs  should 
include  whatever  the  agent  could  infer  either  by  ordinary  logic  or  by 
reflecting  on  what  he  believes.  Stalnaker  [1980]  has  put  this  formally 
by  suggesting  that  a  set  of  formulas  T  that  represents  the  beliefs  of  an 
ideally  rational  agent  should  satisfy  the  following  conditions: 

^l,...,Pn  are  in  T,  and  P]_,...,Pn  |-  Q,  then  Q  is  in  T 
(where  means  ordinary  tautological  consequence). 

2.  If  P  is  in  T,  then  LP  is  in  T. 

3.  If  P  is  not  In  T,  then  ~LP  is  in  T. 

Stalknaker  [1980,  p.  6]  describes  the  state  of  belief  characterized  by 
such  a  theory  as  stable  "in  the  sense  that  no  further  conclusions  could 
be  drawn  by  an  ideally  rational  agent  in  such  a  state."  We  will 
therefore  describe  the  theories  themselves  as  stable  autoepistemic 
theories . 

There  are  a  number  of  interesting  observations  we  can  make  about 
stable  autoepistemic  theories.  First  we  note  that,  if  a  stable 
autoepistemic  theory  T  Is  consistent,  it  will  satisfy  two  more 
intuitively  sound  conditions: 

4.  If  LP  is  in  T,  then  P  is  In  T. 

5.  If  "LP  Is  In  T,  then  P  is  not  in  T. 


12 


Condition  4  holds  because,  if  LP  were  in  T  and  P  were  not,  ~LP  would  be 
in  T  (by  Condition  3)  and  T  would  be  inconsistent.^  Condition  3  holds 
because,  if  ~LP  and  P  were  both  in  T,  LP  would  be  in  T  (by  Condition  2) 
and  T  would  be  inconsistent. 

Conditions  2-5  imply  that  any  consistent  stable  autoepistemlc 
theory  will  be  both  sound  and  semantically  complete  with  respect  to 
formulas  of  the  form  LP  and  "LP:  If  T  is  such  a  theory,  then  LP  will  be 
in  T  if  and  only  if  P  is  in  T,  and  TP  will  be  in  T  if  and  only  if  P  is 
not  in  T.  Thus,  all  the  propositional  models  of  a  stable  autoepistemlc 
theory  are  autoepistemlc  models.  Stability  implies  a  soundness  result 
even  stronger  than  this,  however.  We  can  show  that  the  truth  of  any 
formula  of  a  stable  autoepistemlc  theory  depends  only  on  the  truth  of 
the  formulas  of  the  theory  that  contain  no  autoepistemlc  operators.  (We 
will  call  these  formulas  "objective.") 

Theorem  1.  If  T  is  a  stable  autoepistemlc  theory,  then  any 
autoepistemlc  interpretation  of  T  that  is  a  propositional 
model  of  the  objective  formulas  of  T  is  an  autoepistemlc  model 
of  T. 

(The  proofs  of  all  theorems  are  given  in  the  appendix.) 

In  other  words,  if  all  the  objective  formulas  in  an  autoepistemic 
theory  are  true,  then  all  the  formulas  in  that  theory  are  true.  Given 
that  the  objective  formulas  of  a  stable  autoepistemic  theory  determine 
whether  the  theory  is  true,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  also 
determine  what  all  the  formulas  of  the  theory  are. 

Theorem  2.  If  two  stable  autoepistemic  theories  contain  the 
same  objective  formulas,  then  they  contain  exactly  the  same 
formulas. ^ 

Finally,  with  these  characterization  theorems,  we  can  prove  that 
the  syntactic  property  of  stability  is  equivalent  the  semantic  property 
of  completeness. 

Theorem  3.  An  autoepistemic  theory  T  is  semantically  complete 
if  and  only  if  T  is  stable. 


13 


By  Theorem  3,  we  know  that  stability  of  an  agent's  beliefs 
guarantees  that  they  are  semantically  complete,  but  stability  alone  does 
not  tell  us  whether  they  are  sound  with  respect  to  his  initial  premises. 
That  is  because  the  stability  conditions  say  nothing  about  what  an  agent 
should  not  believe.  They  leave  open  the  possibility  of  an  agent's 
believing  propositions  that  are  not  in  any  way  grounded  in  his  initial 
premises.  What  we  need  to  add  is  a  constraint  specifying  that  the  only 
propositions  the  agent  believes  are  his  initial  premises  and  those 
required  by  the  stability  conditions.  To  satisfy  the  stability 
conditions  and  include  a  set  of  premises  A,  an  autoepistemic  theory  T 
must  include  all  the  tautological  consequences  of  A  U  {LP  |  P  is  in  T}  U 
{~LP  |  P  is  not  in  T}.  Conversely,  we  will  say  that  an  autoepistemic 
theory  T  is  grounded  in  a  set  of  premises  A  if  and  only  if  every  formula 

of  T  is  included  in  the  tautological  consequences  of  A  U  {LP  |  P  is  in 

T}  U  {~LP  |  P  is  not  in  T}.  The  following  theorem  shows  that  this 
syntactic  constraint  on  T  and  A  captures  the  semantic  notion  of 
soundness . 

Theorem  4.  An  autoepistemic  theory  T  is  sound  with  respect  to 

an  initial  set  of  premises  A  if  and  only  if  T  is  grounded  in 

A. 

From  Theorems  3  and  4,  we  can  see  that  the  possible  sets  of  beliefs 
that  an  ideally  rational  agent  might  hold,  given  A  as  his  premises, 

ought  to  be  just  the  extensions  of  A  that  are  grounded  in  A  and  stable. 

We  will  call  these  the  stable  expansions  of  A.  Note  that  we  say  "sets" , 
because  there  may  be  more  than  one  stable  expansion  of  a  given  set  of 
premises.  For  example,  consider  {~LP  ->  Q,  ~LQ  ->  P}  as  an  initial  set 
of  premises. 6  The  first  formula  asserts  that,  if  P  is  not  believed,  then 
Q  is  true;  the  second  asserts  that,  if  Q  is  not  believed,  then  P  is 
true.  In  any  stable  autoepistemic  theory  that  includes  these  premises, 
if  P  is  not  in  the  theory,  Q  will  be,  and  vice  versa.  But  if  the  theory 
is  grounded  in  these  premises,  if  P  is  in  the  theory  there  will  be  no 
basis  for  including  Q,  and  vice  versa.  Consequently,  a  stable  expansion 
of  {~LP  ->  Q,  ~LQ  ->  P}  will  contain  either  P  or  Q,  but  not  both. 


14 


It  can  also  happen  that  there  are  jno  stable  expansions  of  a  given 
set  of  premises.  Consider,  for  instance,  {~LP  ->  P}.7  If  T  is  a  stable 
autoepistemic  theory  that  contains  ~LP  ->  P,  it  must  also  contain  P.  If 
P  were  not  in  T,  ~LP  would  have  to  be  in  the  T,  but  then  P  would  be  in 
T — a  contradiction.  On  the  other  hand,  if  P  is  in  T,  then  T  is  not 
grounded  in  {~LP  ->  P}.  Therefore  no  stable  autoepistemic  theory  can  be 
grounded  in  {~LP  ->  P}. 

This  seemingly  strange  behavior  results  from  the  indexicality  of 
the  autoepistemic  operator  L.  Since  L  is  interpreted  relative  to  an 
entire  set  of  beliefs,  its  interpretation  will  change  with  the  various 
ways  of  completing  a  set  of  beliefs.  In  each  acceptable  completion  of  a 
set  of  beliefs,  the  interpretation  of  L  will  change  to  make  that  set 
stable  and  grounded  in  the  premises.  Sometimes,  though,  no  matter  how 
we  try  to  form  a  complete  a  set  of  beliefs,  the  result  never  coincides 
with  the  interpretation  of  L  in  a  way  that  gives  us  a  stable  set  of 
beliefs  grounded  in  the  premises. 

This  raises  the  question  of  how  to  view  autoepistemic  logic  a£  a 
logic.  If  we  consider  a  set  of  premises  A  as  axioms,  what  do  we 
consider  the  theorems  of  A  to  be?  If  there  is  a  unique  stable  expansion 
of  A,  it  seems  clear  that  we  want  this  expansion  to  be  the  set  of 
theorems  of  A.  But  what  if  there  are  several  stable  expansions  of  A — or 
none  at  all?  If  we  take  the  point  of  view  of  the  agent,  we  have  to  say 
that  there  can  be  alternative  sets  of  theorems,  or  no  set  of  theorems  of 
A.  This  may  be  a  strange  property  for  a  logic  to  possess,  but,  given 
our  semantics,  it  is  clear  why  this  happens.  An  alternative  (adopted  by 
McDermott  and  Doyle  with  regard  to  their  fixed  points)  is  to  take  the 
theorems  of  A  to  be  the  intersection  of  the  set  of  all  formulas  of  the 
language  with  all  the  stable  expansions  of  A.  This  yields  the  formulas 
that  are  in  all  stable  expansions  of  A  if  there  is  more  than  one,  and  it 
makes  the  theory  inconsistent  if  there  is  no  stable  expansion  of  A- 
This  too  is  reasonable,  but  it  has  a  different  interpretation.  It 
represents  what  an  outside  observer  would  know,  given  only  knowledge  of 
the  agent's  premises  and  that  he  is  ideally  rational. 


15 


IV  ANALYSIS  OF  NONMONOTONIC  LOGIC 


Now  we  are  in  a  position  to  provide  an  analysis  of  nonmonotonic 
logic  that  will  explain  its  peculiarities  in  terms  of  autoepistemic 
logic.  Briefly,  our  conclusions  will  be  that  the  original  nonmonotonic 
logic  of  McDermott  and  Doyle  [1980]  is  simply  too  weak  to  capture  the 
notions  they  wanted,  and  that  McDermott's  [1982]  attempt  to  strengthen 
the  logic  does  so  in  the  wrong  way. 

McDermott  and  Doyle's  first  logic  is  very  similar  to  our 
autoepistemic  logic  with  one  glaring  exception;  its  specification 
includes  nothing  corresponding  to  our  Condition  2  (if  P  is  in  T,  then  LP 
is  in  T).  McDermott  and  Doyle  define  the  nonmonotonic  fixed  points  of  a 
set  of  premises  A,  corresponding  to  our  stable  expansions  of  A.  In  the 
propositional  case,  their  definition  is  equivalent  to  the  following: 

T  is  a  fixed  point  of  A  just  in  case  T  is  the  set  of 
tautological  consequences  of  A  U  ("LP  |  P  is  not  in  T}. 

Our  definition  of  a  stable  expansion  of  A,  on  the  other  hand,  could  be 
stated  as 

T  is  a  stable  expansion  of  A  just  in  case  T  is  the  set  of 
tautological  consequences  of  A  U  {LP  |  P  is  in  T}  U  {~LP  |  P 
is  not  in  T} . 

In  nonmonotonic  logic,  {LP  I  P  Is  in  T}  is  missing  from  the  "base"  of 
the  fixed  points.  This  makes  it  possible  for  there  to  be  nonmonotonic 
theories  with  fixed  points  that  contain  P  but  not  LP.  So,  under  an 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  L,  McDermott  and  Doyle's  agents  are 
omniscient  as  to  what  they  do  not  believe,  but  they  may  know  nothing  as 
to  what  they  do  believe. 

This  explains  essentially  all  the  peculiarities  of  McDermott  and 
Doyle's  original  logic.  For  instance,  they  note  [1980,  p.  69]  that  MC 
does  not  follow  from  M(C  /\  D).  Changing  the  modality  to  L,  this  is 


16 


equivalent  to  saying  that  ~LP  does  not  follow  from  ~L(P  \/  Q).  The 
problem  is  that,  lacking  the  ability  to  infer  LP  from  P,  nonmonotonic 
logic  permits ■ interpretations  of  L  that  are  more  restricted  than  simple 
belief.  Suppose  we  interpret  L  as  "inferable  in  n  or  fewer  steps"  for 
some  particular  n.  P  might  be  inferable  in  exactly  n  steps,  and  P  \/  Q 
in  n+1.  According  to  this  interpretation  ~L(P  \/  Q)  would  be  true  and 
~LP  would  be  false.  Since  this  interpretation  of  L  is  consistent  with 
McDermott  and  Doyle's  definition  of  a  fixed  point,  ~LP  does  not  follow 
from  ~L(P  \/  Q).  The  other  example  of  this  kind  noted  by  McDermott  and 
Doyle  is  that  {MC,  ~C)  has  a  consistent  fixed  point,  which  amounts  to 
saying  simultaneously  that  P  is  consistent  with  everything  asserted  and 
that  P  is  false.  But  this  set  of  premises  is  equivalent  to  {~LP,  P}, 
which  would  have  no  consistent  fixed  points  if  LP  were  forced  to  be  in 
every  fixed  point  that  contains  P. 

On  the  other  hand,  McDermott  and  Doyle  consider  it  to  be  a  problem 
that  {MC  ->  D,  ~D}  has  no  consistent  fixed  point  in  their  theory. 
Restated  in  terms  of  L,  this  set  of  premises  is  equivalent  to  {P  ->  LQ, 
P}.  Since  a  stable  autoepistemic  theory  containing  these  premises  will 
also  contain  LQ,  it  must  also  contain  Q  to  be  consistent.  (Otherwise  it 
would  contain  ~LQ.)  But  Q  is  not  contained  in  any  theory  grounded  in 
the  premises  {P  ->  LQ,  P};  it  is  possible  for  P  ->  LQ  and  P  both  to  be 
true  with  respect  to  an  agent  while  Q  is  false.  So  there  is  no 
consistent  stable  expansion  of  {P  ->  LQ,  P}  in  autoepistemic  logic; 
hence,  this  set  of  premises  cannot  be  the  foundation  of  an  appropriate 
set  of  beliefs  for  an  ideally  rational  agent.  Thus,  our  analysis 
justifies  nonmonotonic  logic  in  this  case,  contrary  to  the  intuition  of 
McDermott  and  Doyle. 

McDermott  and  Doyle  recognized  the  weakness  of  the  original 
formulation  of  nonmonotonic  logic,  and  McDermott  [1982]  has  gone  on  to 
develop  a  group  of  theories  that  are  stronger  because  they  are  based  on 
modal  rather  than  classical  logic.  McDermott's  nonmonotonic  modal 
theories  alter  the  logic  in  two  ways.  First,  the  definition  of  fixed 
point  is  changed  to  be  equivalent  to 


17 


T  is  a  fixed  point  of  A  just  in  case  T  is  the  set  of  modal 

consequences  of  A  U  {"LP  |  P  is  not  in  T} , 

where  "modal  consequence"  means  that  P  |-  LP  is  used  as  an  additional 
inference  rule.  Second,  McDermott  considers  only  theories  that  include 
as  premises  the  axioms  of  one  of  the  standard  modal  logics  "T,"  "S4," 
and  ”S5. " 

Merely  changing  the  definition  of  fixed  point  brings  McDermott's 
logic  much  closer  to  autoepistemic  logic.  In  particular,  adding  P  [-  LP 
as  an  inference  rule  means  that  all  modal  fixed  points  of  A  are  stable 
expansions  of  A.  However,  adding  P  |-  LP  as  an  inference  rule,  rather 
than  adding  {LP  |  P  is  in  T}  to  the  base  of  T,  has  as  a  consequence  that 
not  all  stable  expansions  of  A  are  modal  fixed  points  of  A.  The 
difference  is  that,  in  autoepistemic  logic,  if  P  can  be  derived  from  LP, 
then  both  can  be  in  a  stable  expansion  of  the  premises,  whereas  in 
McDermott's  logic  there  must  be  a  derivation  of  P  that  does  not  rely  on 
LP.  Thus,  although  in  autoepistemic  logic  there  is  a  stable  expansion 
of  {LP  ->  P}  that  includes  P,  in  McDermott's  logic  there  is  no  modal 
fixed  point  of  {LP  ->  P}  that  includes  P.  It  is  as  If,  in  autoepistemic 
logic,  one  can  acquire  the  belief  that  P  and  justify  it  later  by  the 
premise  that,  if  P  is  believed,  then  it  is  true.  In  nonmonotonic  logic, 
however,  the  justification  of  P  has  to  precede  belief  in  LP.  This  makes 
the  interpretation  of  L  in  nonmonotonic  modal  logic  more  like  "justified 
belief"  than  simple  belief. 

Since  we  have  already  shown  that  autoepistemic  logic  requires  no 
specific  axioms  to  capture  a  competence  model  of  autoepistemic 
reasoning,  we  might  wonder  what  purpose  is  served  by  McDermott's  second 
modification  of  nonmonotonic  logic,  the  addition  of  the  axioms  of 
various  modal  logics.  The  most  plausible  answer  is  ’that,  besides 
behaving  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  autoepistemic  logic,  an 
ideally  rational  agent  might  well  be  expected  to  know  what  some  of  those 
principles  are.  For  instance,  the  modal  logic  T  has  all  instances  of 
the  schema  L(P  ->  Q)  ->  (LP  ->  LQ)  as  axioms.  This  says  that  the 
agent's  beliefs  are  closed  under  modus  ponens— which  is  true  for  an 


18 


ideally  rational  agent,  so  he  might  as  well  believe  it.  S4  adds  the 
schema  LP  ->  LLP,  which  means  that,  if  the  agent  believes  P,  he  believes 
that  he  believes  it  (Condition  2).  S5  adds  the  schema  ~LP  ->  L~LP, 
which  means  that,  if  the  agent  does  not  believe  P,  he  believes  that  he 
does  not  believe  it  (Condition  3).  Since  all  these  formulas  are  always 
true  with  respect  to  any  ideally  rational  agent,  it  seems  plausible  to 
expect  him  to  adopt  them  as  premises.  Thus,  S5  seems  to  be  the  most 
plausible  candidate  of  the  nonmonotonic  logics  as  a  model  of 
autoepistemic  reasoning. 

The  problem  is  that  all  of  these  logics  also  contain  the  schema 
LP  ->  P,  which  means  that,  if  the  agent  believes  P,  then  P  is  true — but 

Q 

this  is  not  generally  true,  even  for  ideally  rational  agents.  It  turns 
out  that  LP  ->  P  will  always  be  contained  in  any  stable  autoepistemic 
theory  (that  is,  ideally  rational  agents  always  believe  that  their 
beliefs  are  true),  but  making  it  a  premise  allows  beliefs  to  be  grounded 
that  otherwise  would  not  be.  As  a  premise  the  schema  LP  ->  P  can  itself 
be  justification  for  believing  P,  while  as  a  "theorem"  it  must  be 
derived  from  ~LP,  in  which  case  P  is  not  believed,  or  from  P,  in  which 
case  P  must  be  independently  justified,  or  from  some  other  grounded 
formulas.  In  any  case,  as  a  premise  schema,  LP  ->  P  can  sanction  any 
belief  whatsoever  in  autoepistemic  logic.  This  is  not  generally  true  in 
modal  nonmonotonic  logic,  as  we  have  also  seen,  but  it  is  true  in 
nonmonotonic  S5.  The  S5  axiom  schema  ~LP  ->  L~LP  embodies  enough  of  the 
model  theory  of  autoepistemic  logic  to  allow  LP  to  be  ’’self  grounding": 
The  schema  ~LP  ->  L~LP  is  equivalent  to  the  schema  ~L~LP  ->  LP,  which 
allows  LP  to  be  justified  by  the  fact  that  its  negation  is  not  believed. 
This  inference  is  never  in  danger  of  being  falsified,  but,  from  this  and 
LP  ->  P,  we  obtain  an  unwarranted  justification  for  believing  P. 

The  collapse  of  nonmonotonic  S5  into  monotonic  S5  follows 
immediately.  Since  LP  ->  P  can  be  used  to  justify  belief  in  any  formula 
at  all,  there  are  no  formulas  that  are  absent  from  every  fixed  point  of 
theories  based  on  nonmonotonic  S5.  It  follows  that  there  are  no 
formulas  of  the  form  ~LP  that  are  contained  in  every  fixed  point  of 


19 


theories  based  on  nonmonotonic  S 5 ;  hence  there  are  no  theorems  of  the 
form  ~LP  in  any  theory  based  on  nonmonotonic  S5.  (Recall  that  the 
theorems  are  the  intersection  of  all  the  fixed  points.)  Since  these 
formulas  are  just  the  ones  that  would  be  produced  by  nonmonotonic 
inference,  nonmonotonic  S5  collapses  to  monotonic  S5.  In  more  informal 
terms,  an  agent  who  assumes  that  he  is  infallible  is  liable  to  believe 
anything,  so  an  outside  observer  can  conclude  nothing  about  what  he  does 
not  believe. 

The  real  problem  with  nonmonotonic  S5,  then,  is  not  the  S5  schema; 
therefore  McDermott's  rather  unmotivated  suggestion  to  drop  back  to 
nonmonotonic  S4  [1982,  p.  45]  is  not  the  answer.  The  S5  schema  merely 
makes  explicit  the  consequences  of  adopting  LP  ->  P  as  a  premise  schema 
that  are  implicit  in  the  logic's  natural  semantics.  If  we  want  to  base 
nonmonotonic  logic  on  a  modal  logic,  the  obvious  solution  is  to  drop 
back,  not  to  S4,  but  to  what  Stalnaker  [1980]  calls  "weak  S5" — S5 
without  LP  ->  P.  It  is  much  better  motivated  and,  moreover,  has  the 
advantage  of  actually  being  nonmonotonic. 

In  autoepistemic  logic,  however,  even  this  much  Is  unneccessary . 
Adopting  any  of  the  axioms  of  weak  S5  as  premises  makes  no  difference  to 
what  can  be  derived.  The  key  fact  is  the  following  theorem: 

Theorem  5.  If  P  is  true  in  every  autoepistemic  interpretation 
of  T,  then  T  is  grounded  in  A  U  {P}  if  and  only  if  T  is 
grounded  in  A. 

An  immediate  corollary  of  this  result  is  that,  if  P  Is  true  in  every 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T,  then  T  is  a  stable  expansion  of 
A  U  {P}  if  and  only  if  T  is  a  stable  expansion  of  A. 

The  modal  axiom  schemata  of  weak  S5, 

L(P  ->  Q)  ->  (LP  ->  LQ) 

LP  ->  LLP 
~LP  ->  L~LP, 

simply  state  Conditions  1-3,  so  all  their  instances  are  true  in  every 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  any  stable  autoepistemic  theory.  The 


20 


nonmodal  axioms  of  weak  S5  are  just  the  tautologies  of  propositional 
logic,  so  they  are  true  in  every  interpretation  (autoepistemic  or 
otherwise)  of  any  autoepistemic  theory  (stable  or  otherwise).  It 
immediately  follows  by  Theorem  5,  therefore,  that  a  set  of  premises 
containing  any  of  the  axioms  of  weak  S5  will  have  exactly  the  same 
stable  expansions  as  the  corresponding  set  of  premises  without  any  weak- 
S5  axioms. 


21 


V  CONCLUSION 


McDermott  and  Doyle  recognized  that  their  original  nonmonotonic 
logic  was  too  weak;  when  McDermott  tried  to  strengthen  it,  however,  he 
misdiagnosed  the  problem.  Because  he  was  thinking  of  nonmonotonic  logic 
as  a  logic  of  provability  rather  than  belief,  he  apparently  thought  the 
problem  was  the  lack  of  any  connection  between  provability  and  truth. 
At  one  point  he  says  "Even  though  ~M~P  (abbreviated  LP)  might  plausibly 
be  expected  to  mean  'P  is  provable,'  there  was  not  actually  any  relation 
between  the  truth  values  of  P  and  LP,"  [1982,  p.  34],  and  later  he 
acknowledges  the  questionability  of  the  schema  LP  ->  P,  but  says  that 
"it  is  difficult  to  visualize  any  other  way  of  relating  provability  and 
truth,"  [1982,  p.  35].  If  one  interprets  nonmonotonic  logic  as  a  logic 
of  belief,  however,  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  any  connection  between 
the  truth  of  LP  and  the  truth  of  P.  And,  as  we  have  seen,  the  real 
problem  with  the  original  nonmonotonic  logic  was  that  the  "if"  half  of 
the  semantic  definition  of  L — that  LP  is  true  if  and  only  if  P  is 
believed — was  not  expressed  in  the  logic. 


22 


NOTES 


■*-  In  their  informal  exposition,  McDermott  and  Doyle  [1980,  pp.  44-46] 
emphasize  that  their  notion  of  nonmonontonic  inference  is  not  to  be 
taken  as  a  form  of  valid  inference.  If  this  is  the  case,  their  formal 
semantics  cannot  be  regarded  as  the  "real"  semantics  of  their 
nonmonotonic  logic.  At  best,  it  would  provide  the  conditions  that  would 
have  to  hold  for  the  inferences  to  be  valid,  but  this  leaves  unanswered 
the  question  of  what  formulas  of  nonmonotonic  logic  actually  mean. 

Of  course,  autoepistemic  reasoning  can  be  combined  with  default 
reasoning;  we  might  believe  that  we  know  about  most  of  the  birds  that 
cannot  fly.  This  could  lead  to  defeasible  autoepistemic  inferences,  but 
their  defeasibility  would  be  the  result  of  their  also  being  default 
inferences. 

O 

Stalnaker's  note,  which  to  my  knowledge  remains  unpublished,  grew  out 
of  his  comments  as  a  respondent  to  McDermott  at  a  Conference  on 
Artificial  Intelligence  and  Philosophy,  held  in  March  1980  at  the  Center 
for  Advanced  Study  in  the  Behavioral  Sciences.  N.B. ,  the  term 
"autoepistemic  reasoning"  is  ours,  not  his. 

^  Condition  4  will,  of  course,  also  be  satisfied  by  an  inconsistent 
stable  autoepistemic  theory,  since  such  a  theory  would  include  all 
formulas  of  autoepistemic  logic. 

This  theorem  implies  that  our  autoepistemic  logic  does  not  contain  any 
"nongrounded"  self-referential  formulas,  such  as  one  finds  in  what  are 
usually  called  "syntactical"  treatments  of  belief.  If,  instead  of  a 
belief  operator,  we  had  a  belief  predicate,  Bel,  there  might  be  a  term  p 
that  denotes  the  formula  Bel(p).  Whether  Bel(p)  is  believed  or  not  is 
clearly  independent  of  any  objective  beliefs.  The  lack  of  such  formulas 
constitutes  a  characteristic  difference  between  sentence-operator  and 
predicate  treatments  of  propositional  attitudes  and  modalities. 


23 


^  McDermott  and  Doyle  [1980,  p.  51]  present  this  example  as  {MC  ->  ~D, 
MD  ->  ~C}. 

^  McDermott  and  Doyle  [1980,  p.  51]  present  this  example  as  {MC  ->  ~C}. 

Q 

LP  ->  P  would  be  an  appropriate  axiom  schema  if  the  interpretation  of 
LP  were  "P  is  known"  rather  than  ”P  is  believed,"  but  that  notion  is  not 
nonmonotonic.  An  agent  cannot,  in  general,  know  when  he  does  not  know 
P,  because  he  might  believe  P — leading  him  to  believe  that  he  knows  P — 
while  P  is  in  fact  false.  Since  agents  are  unable  to  reflect  directly 
on  what  they  do  not  know  (only  on  what  they  do  not  believe),  an 
autoepistemic  logic  of  knowledge  would  not  be  a  nonmonotonic  logic; 
rather,  the  appropriate  logic  would  seem  to  be  monotonic  S5. 


24 


REFERENCES 


McDermott,  D.  and  J.  Doyle  [1980]  "Non-Monotonic  Logic  I,"  Artificial 
Intelligence ,  Vol.  13,  Nos.  1,  2,  pp.  41-72  (April  1980). 

McDermott,  D.  [1982]  "Nonmonotonic  Logic  II:  Nonmonotonic  Modal 
Theories,"  Journal  of  the  Association  for  Computing  Machinery , 
Vol.  29,  No.  1,  pp.  33-57  (January  1982). 

Minsky,  M.  [1974]  "A  Framework  for  Representing  Knowledge,"  MIT 
Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory,  AIM-306,  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts  (June  1974). 

Stalnaker,  R.  [1980]  "A  Note  on  Non-monotonic  Modal  Logic,"  Dept,  of 
Philosophy,  Cornell  University,  unpublished  manuscript. 


25 


APPENDIX:  PROOFS  OF  THEOREMS 


Theorem  1.  If  T  is  a  stable  autoepistemic  theory,  then  any 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  that  is  a  propositional 
model  of  the  objective  formulas  of  T  is  an  autoepistemic  model 
of  T. 


Proof.  Suppose  that  T  is  a  stable  autoepistemic  theory  and  I  is  an 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  that  is  a  propositional  model  of  the 
objective  formulas  of  T.  All  the  objective  formulas  of  T  are  true  in  I. 
T  must  be  consistent  because  an  inconsistent  stable  autoepistemic  theory 
would  contain  all  formulas  of  the  language,  which  would  include  many 
objective  formulas  that  are  not  true  in  I.  Let  P  be  an  arbitrary 
formula  in  T.  Since  stable  autoepistemic  theories  are  closed  under 
tautological  consequence,  T  must  also  contain  a  set  of  formulas 

Pl,...,Pk  that  taken  together  entail  P,  where,  for  each  i  between  1  and 
k,  there  exist  n  and  m  such  that  P.^  is  of  the  form 

Pi,l  \/  BPi,2  N/--A/  LI>i,n  \/  ~LPi,n+l  V--A/  "LPi,m 

and  P^  is  an  objective  formula.  (Any  formula  is  interderivable  with  a 
set  of  such  formulas  by  propositional  logic  alone.)  There  are  two  cases 
to  be  considered: 

(1)  Suppose  at  least  one  of  >2 , . . . .LP-l >n ,  ~LPi >n+i > • • • ,~LPi >m  is 
in  T.  By  Conditions  4  and  5,  we  know  that,  if  any  such  formula  is  in  T, 
it  must  be  true  in  I,  since  T  is  consistent  and  I  is  an  autoepistemic 
interpretation  of  T.  But,  since  each  of  these  formulas  entails  P.^ t  it 
follows  that  Pj^  is  also  true  in  I. 

(2)  Suppose  the  first  case  does  not  hold.  Conditions  2  and  3 
guarantee  that  in  every  stable  autoepistemic  theory,  for  every  formula 
P,  either  LP  or  ~LP  will  be  in  the  theory.  Hence,  if  T  does  not  contain 
any  of  LP^  •  .LP^ >n,  ~LPi#n+l »  ’  *  *  »~Lpi  ,m>  must  contain  all  of 

~LPi,2»***»~Lpi,n»  LPi,n+l> •* *»LPi,m-  But  pi,l  is  a  tautological 
consequence  of  P^  and  these  formulas  (imagine  repeated  applications  of 


26 


the  resolution  principle);  so  must  be  in  T.  But  Pi  l  is  objective, 
and  so,  by  hypothesis,  must  be  true  in  I.  Since  P^  ^  entails  P^ ,  it 
must  be  the  case  that  P^  is  true  in  I. 

In  either  case,  will  be  true  in  I.  All  the  P^  taken  together 
entail  P,  so  P  must  also  be  true  in  I.  Since  P  was  chosen  arbitrarily, 
every  formula  of  T  must  be  true  in  I;  hence  I  is  an  autoepistemic  model 
of  T. 


Theorem  2.  If  two  stable  autoepistemic  theories  contain  the 
same  objective  formulas,  then  they  contain  exactly  the  same 
formulas. 

Proof .  Suppose  that  and  T2  contain  the  same  objective  formulas  and 
T-^  contains  P.  We  prove  by  Induction  on  the  depth  of  nesting  of 
autoepistemic  operators  In  P  (the  "L-depth"  of  P)  that  T2  also  contains 
P.  If  the  L-depth  of  P  is  0,  the  theorem  is  trivially  true,  since  P 
will  be  an  objective  formula.  Now  suppose  that  P  has  an  L-depth  of  d 
greater  than  0,  and  that,  if  two  stable  autoepistemic  theories  contain 
the  same  objective  formulas,  then  they  contain  exactly  the  same  formulas 
whose  L-depth  Is  less  than  d. 

Since  stable  autoepistemic  theories  are  closed  under  tautological 
consequence,  must  also  contain  a  set  of  formulas  P that  are 
interderivable  with  P  by  propositional  logic,  where,  for  each  i  between 
1  and  k,  there  exist  n  and  m  such  that  P^  is  of  the  form 

Pi,l  V  LPi>2  \/--A/  LPi>n  \/  ~LPi>n+1  \/...\/  ~LPi>m 

and  ^  is  an  objective  formula.  Note  that,  since  propositional  logic 
will  treat  all  the  formulas  of  the  form  LP^  .  as  propositional 
constants,  it  is  Impossible  to  increase  the  L-depth  of  a  formula  by 
propositional  inference,  so  each  of  these  formulas  will  have  an  L-depth 
of  not  more  than  d . 

We  can  also  assume  that  and  T2  are  consistent.  If  one  of  these 
theories  were  inconsistent,  it  would  contain  all  formulas  of  the 
language.  Since,  by  hypothesis,  the  two  theories  contain  the  same 


27 


objective  formulas,  the  other  theory  would  contain  all  the  objective 
formulas  of  the  language  and,  since  these  formulas  are  inconsistent,  it 
would  also  contain  all  the  formulas  of  the  language.  For  each  P^,  there 
are  three  cases  to  be  considered: 

(1)  contains  LP.^  j  for  some  j  between  2  and  n.  Since  is 
consistent,  by  Condition  4  it  must  also  contain  P^  ^ .  Since  the  L-depth 
of  P.^  j  is  one  less  than  that  of  LP^  j,  it  must  be  less  than  d;  so,  by 
hypothesis,  T2  must  contain  P^  j  and,  by  Condition  2,  it  must  contain 
LP^  j.  But  P^  is  a  tautological  consequence  of  LP^  j,  so  contains 
Pi-’ 

(2)  T ^  contains  “LP^  j  for  some  j  between  n+1  and  m.  Since  T^  is 
consistent,  by  Condition  5  it  must  not  contain  P^  j,.  Since  the  L-depth 
of  is  one  less  than  that  of  ~LP^  j,  it  must  be  less  than  d; 
therefore,  by  hypothesis,  T2  must  not  contain  P^  j  and,  by  Condition  3, 
it  must  contain  ~LP^j.  But  P^  is  a  tautological  consequence  of  "LP-j^j, 
so  T£  contains  Pj. 

(3)  Suppose  neither  of  the  first  two  cases  holds.  Conditions  2  and 
3  guarantee  that  in  every  stable  autoepistemic  theory,  for  every  formula 
P,  either  LP  or  ~LP  will  be  in  the  theory.  Hence,  if  T-^  does  not 
contain  any  of  •  *  *  >^pi  n>  n+l>***>~Lpi  m>  it:  must  contain  all 
of  ~LP1j2,  ...,~LPi>n,  LPi>n+i>  ••  •»LPifin.  But  P^  is  a  tautological 
consequence  of  P^  and  these  formulas;  so  P^  ^  must  be  in  T^.  P^  is 
objective,  however,  so  P^-^  must  also  be  in  T2.  Since  P.^  is  a 
tautological  consequence  of  P^  T2  contains  P^ . 

Thus,  all  of  P'l,...,Pjc  are  in  T2*  Since  P  is  a  tautological 
consequence  of  these  formulas,  P  is  also  in  T2.  Since  P  was  chosen 
arbitrarily,  every  formula  in  Tx  is  also  in  T2.  The  same  argument  can 
be  used  to  show  that  every  formula  in  T2  is  also  in  T^,  so  and  T2 
contain  exactly  the  same  formulas. 

Theorem  3.  An  autoepistemic  theory  T  is  semantically  complete 

if  and  only  if  T  is  stable. 


28 


Proof.  "If"  direction:  we  show  that,  if  T  is  a  stable  autoepistemic 
theory,  then  T  contains  every  formula  that  is  true  in  every 
autoepistemic  model  of  T.  Let  T  be  a  stable  autoepistemic  theory  and 
let  P  be  an  arbitrary  formula  that  is  not  in  T.  We  show  that  there  is 
an  autoepistemic  model  of  T  in  which  P  is  false. 

We  know  from  propositional  logic  that  P  is  propositionally 
equivalent  to  (i.e.,  true  in  the  same  propositional  models  as)  the 
conjunction  of  a  set  of  formulas  P1,...,Pk,  where,  for  each  i  between  1 
and  k,  there  exist  n  and  m  such  that  P^  is  of  the  form 

Pi,l  V  LPi,2  \/--A/  LP1>n  \/  ~LPijn+1  \/...\/  ~LPi>m 

and  P^  is  an  objective  formula.  Since  P  will  be  a  tautological 

consequence  of  P^ . Pk  and  T  is  stable,  Condition  1  guarantees  that, 

if  P  is  not  in  T,  at  least  one  of  P^^j.-.jP^  must  not  be  in  T.  Let  be 
such  a  formula.  P^  is  a  tautological  consequence  of  each  of  its 
disjuncts,  so  none  of  them  can  be  in  T.  We  show  that  there  is  an 
autoepistemic  model  of  T  in  which  all  of  these  disjuncts  are  false. 

Since  is  not  in  T,  it  must  not  be  a  tautological  consequence 
of  the  objective  formulas  of  T.  Given  this  and  the  fact  that  P^  ^  is 
objective,  it  follows  from  the  completeness  theorem  for  propositional 
logic  that  there  must  be  a  truth  assignment  to  the  propositional 
constants  of  T  in  which  P.^^  is  false  and  all  the  objective  formulas  of 
T  are  true.  But,  we  can  extend  this  truth  assigment  (or  any  truth 
assignment  to  the  propositional  constants  of  T — see  Section  III)  to  an 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T.  Call  this  interpretation  I  and  note 
that  P^  is  false  in  I.  I  will  be  a  propositional  model  of  the 
objective  formulas  of  T;  so,  by  Theorem  1,  I  is  an  autoepistemic  model 
of  T  in  which  P^  is  false. 

Now  consider  the  other  disjuncts  of  P^.  Note  that  Conditions  2  and 
3  require  that  a  stable  theory  contain  all  the  formulas  of  the  form  LP 
or  ~LP  that  are  true  in  the  autoepistemic  interpretations  of  the  theory. 

Since  none  of  LP^^ . LPi,n»  ~LPi  ,n+l  ’  *  *  *  »~LPi  ,m  are  in  T>  none  of 

ljPi,2>  ■  *  *  »LPi  ,n*  ~LPi , n+1 . '  'LP^  m  are  true  in  any  autoepistemic 


29 


interpretation  of  T.  In  particular,  none  of  LP.,  9.....LP4 

1  j  ^  '  1  j  n  ^ 

}I1+1j  •  • • >~LPi >m  are  true  in  I.  Therefore,  I  is  an  autoepistemic 
model  of  T  in  which,  since  all  of  the  disjuncts  of  P^  are  false,  P^ 
itself  is  false.  But  P  is  propositionally  equivalent  to  a  conjunction 
that  includes  P^,  so  I  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T  in  which  P  is 
false . 

"Only  if"  direction:  we  show  that,  if  T  is  semantically  complete, 
then  T  is  stable.  Suppose  T  is  semantically  complete.  For  any  formula 
P,  if  P  is  true  in  every  autoepistemic  model  of  T,  then  P  is  in  T.  Let 
I  be  an  arbitrary  autoepistemic  model  of  T.  If  we  can  show  that  some 
formula  P  is  true  in  I,  P  must  be  true  in  every  autoepistemic  model  of  T 
(since  I  is  arbitrarily  chosen)  and,  thus,  P  must  be  in  T.  We  now  show 
that  T  satisfies  Conditions  1-3. 

(1)  Suppose  P-^,...,Pn  are  in  T  and  P^,...,Pn  |~  Q.  Since  I  is  a 
model  of  T,  P^,...,Pn  will  be  true  in  I.  Since  Pj,...,Pn  will  is  true 
in  I  and  Q  is  a  tautological  consequence  of  P P  Q  will  also  be 
true  in  I.  Therefore,  Q  will  be  in  T.  (2)  Suppose  P  is  in  T.  Since  I 
is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T,  LP  will  be  true  in  I.  Therefore,  LP 
will  be  in  T.  (3)  Suppose  P  is  not  in  T.  Since  I  is  an  autoepistemic 

model  of  T,  ~LP  will  be  true  in  I.  Therefore,  ~LP  will  be  in  T. 

Conditions  1-3  are  all  satisfied,  so  T  is  stable. 

Theorem  4.  An  autoepistemic  theory  T  is  sound  with  respect  to 

an  initial  set  of  premises  A  if  and  only  if  T  is  grounded  in 

A. 

Proof.  "If"  direction:  suppose  T  is  grounded  in  A.  Every  formula  of  T 
is  therefore  included  in  the  tautological  consequences  of  A  U  {LP  I  P  is 
in  T}  U  {“LP  |  P  is  not  in  T} .  We  show  that  T  is  sound  with  respect  to 
A — i.e.,  that  every  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the 
formulas  of  A  are  true  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T. 

Let  I  be  an  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the 

formulas  in  A  are  true.  We  show  that  I  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T. 
If  P  is  in  A,  then,  trivially,  P  is  true  in  I.  If  P  is  of  the  form  LQ 


30 


and  Q  is  in  T,  or  if  P  is  of  the  form  ~LQ  and  Q  is  not  in  T,  then  P  is 
true  in  I  because  I  is  an  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T.  We  have 
now  shown  that  all  the  formulas  in  A  U  {LP  I  P  is  in  T}  U  {~LP  I  P  is 
not  in  T}  are  true  in  I,  so  all  their  tautological  consequences  are  true 
in  I.  But  all  the  formulas  of  T  are  included  in  this  set,  so  I  is  an 
autoepistemic  model  of  T.  Since  I  was  an  arbitrarily  chosen 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the  formulas  of  A  are 
true,  every  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the  formulas 
of  A  are  true  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T. 

"Only  if"  direction:  suppose  T  is  sound  with  respect  to  A.  Every 
autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the  formulas  of  A  are 
true  is  therefore  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T.  We  show  that  T  is 
grounded  in  A — i.e.,  every  formula  of  T  is  a  tautological  consequence  of 
A  U  {LP  |  P  is  in  T}  U  {~LP  |  P  is  not  in  T}. 

Let  A'  =  A  U  {LP  !  P  is  in  T}  U  {~LP  I  P  is  not  in  T}.  Note  that, 
for  all  P,  if  P  is  in  T,  LP  will  be  in  A',  so  LP  will  be  true  in  every 
propositional  model  of  A';  however,  if  P  is  not  in  T,  ~LP  will  be  in  k' 
and  LP  will  not  be  true  in  any  propositional  model  of  A'.  Therefore,  in 
every  propositional  model  of  A',  LP  is  true  if  and  only  if  P  is  in  T,  so 
every  propositional  model  of  k'  is  an  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T. 
Since  every  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  all  the  formulas 
of  A  are  true  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T,  every  propositional  model 
of  A"  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T.  Since  every  formula  in  T  is  true 
in  in  every  autoepistemic  model  of  T,  every  formula  in  T  is  true  in 
every  propositional  model  of  A'.  By  the  completeness  theorem  for 
propositional  logic,  every  formula  of  T  is  therefore  a  tautological 
consequence  of  A'.  Hence  T  is  grounded  in  A. 

Theorem  5.  If  P  is  true  in  every  autoepistemic  interpretation 

of  T,  then  T  is  grounded  in  A  U  {P}  if  and  only  if  T  is 

grounded  in  A. 

Proof.  Suppose  that  P  is  true  in  every  autoepistemic  interpretation  of 
T.  For  any  set  of  premises  A,  the  set  of  autoepistemic  interpretations 
of  T  in  which  every  formula  of  A  U  {P}  is  true  is  therefore  the  same  as 


31 


the  set  of  autoepistemic  interpretations  of  T  in  which  every  formula  of 
A  is  true-  Thus,  every  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  every 
formula  of  A  U  {P}  is  true  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T  if  and  only  if 
every  autoepistemic  interpretation  of  T  in  which  every  formula  of  A  is 
true  is  an  autoepistemic  model  of  T.  Hence,  T  is  sound  with  respect  to 
A  U  {P}  if  and  only  if  T  is  sound  with  respect  to  A.  By  Theorem  4, 
therefore,  T  is  grounded  in  A  U  {P}  if  and  only  if  T  is  grounded  in  A, 


32 


