ADA  02  8 7 75 


TN 

3198 


NA\  A I [1ILT  HONIi 

c 


l AtlORA  1 OI^\  CtNU  R SAN  DILGO  CALIFORNIA  92152 


A DIGEST  OF  RESEARCH  APPLICATIONS 
FOR  THE  ADVANCED  COMMAND  CONTROL  ARCHITECTURAL 
TESTBED  (ACCAT) 


27  July  1976 


D.  C.  McCall 
Tactical  Command 
Control  & Navigation 

Division  (Code  3300)  NELC  J732 


THIS  IS  A WORKING  PAPER  GIVING  TENTATIVE  INFORMATION 
ABOUT  SOME  WORK  IN  PROGRESS  AT  NELC.  IF  CITED  IN  THE 
LITERATURE  THE  INFORMATION  IS  TO  BE  IDENTIFIED  AS 
TENTATIVE  AND  UNPUBLISHED. 


APPROVED  FOP  PUBLIC  RELEASE;  DISTRIBUTION  IS  UNLIMITED. 


D C 

r^nnjiE 


AUG  23  1976 


IblijU  U E 

B 


ucctsiw  M — — 

Dill  Wtl'K 

0?t  lull  s<mt«  □ 

wu#no«icEo  ' J 


JitSUMCMIM— 

II 

^ i 

I OISlHISUttOll/AVAllMUJn  CW» 

out. 

AlflL  aiwer  - 

[A 

I 

• 

ARPA  Order  Number:  3175 

Program  Code  Number:  6D30 


(Jp 


fn] 

/ 


/ 


/ 


A 


7 

A DIGEST  OF  RESEARCH  APPLICATIONS 


FOR  THE  ADVANCED  COMMAND  .CONTROL  ARCHITECTURAL 


TESTBED  (ACCAT)'  j 

ffpjTMt  976  i 

/X 

a w 


Qj)  HztC'’TH-3i'/rj  @ 


l. 


X 


^ / a 717  / ~ 

->  - i n,  / / v / r 


This  research  was  supported  by  the 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
of  the  Department  of  Defense  and  was 
monitored  by  Naval  Electronic  Systems 
Command  under  Task  No.  XF21 .211 .005.E052 


/ 


■1  •/ 


Contractor:  Naval  Electronics  Laboratory  Center 

Principal  Investigator:  J.  R.  Volpe,  714-225-6844 

Project  Scientist:  D.  C.  McCall,  714-225-7777 


The  views  and  conclusions  contained  in  the  document  are  those  of  the  author 
and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily  representing  the  official  policies 
either  express  or  implied,  of  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
or  the  U.  S.  Government. 


REPORT  SUMMARY 


This  note  presents  44  possible  research  applications  which  result  from 
, match-uD  of  Navy  command  control  problems  with  recent  research  results. 
Several  of  tt. Sensing  applications  will  be  selected  or  emons  ra  on 
on  the  Advanced  Command  Control  Architectural  Test bed  (JCCAT)  loc ate J ^ NELC. 
In  selecting  the  applications,  we  were  interested  in  those  areas  of  resear  h 
which  could9be  demonstrated  quickly  to  permit  an  early  assessment  of  the  tech- 
nology. 


In  the  hierarchy  of  Naval  Command  Control,  we  are  concerned  with  command 
control  problems  at  the  Fleet  Commander-in-Chief  and  Tactical  Flag  Commanders 
level.  The  functions  and  basic  command  control  processes  of  these  two  nodes 
are  sketched  herein. 


The  technological  research  areas  which  were  used  " ^ ™*;hing  Process 
were  limited  to  the  following  four  areas:  Artificial  Intelligence,  Data  Ba 

Management,  Query  Systems  and  Decision  Aids.  In  this  ^n;a\effo^ con- 
centrated  on  work  funded  by  the  Information  Processing  Technology  0 nee  of 
ARPA,  and  by  the  Information  Systems  Program  and  the  Operational  Decision  Aids 

Project  of  ONR. 


ii 


PURPOSE 


A series  of  brief  descriptions  of  possible  demonstrations  for  the  ACCAT 
program  was  produced.  Only  those  technologies  which  seemed  to  have  ready 
application  to  Navy  Command  Control  problems  were  included.  This  is  an  initial 
digest  and  as  such  will  undergo  several  levels  of  reviewing  before  final 
demonstration  selection  is  made. 

ADMINISTRATIVE  INFORMATION 

This  task  was  sponsored  by  the  Information  Processing  Technology  Office  of 
the  Advanced  Research  Agency  under  NELC  Project  J7 32 . 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


The  following  personnel  also  contributed  applications  or  comments: 


A.  C.  MacMurray  (Code  1200)  et.  al. 
H.  G.  Miller  (Code  233) 

R.  Brandenburg  (SEI) 

J.  P.  Sch ill  (Code  3200) 

B.  B.  Burris  (Code  5300) 

D.  Small  (Code  3200) 

A.  Freedy  (Perceptronics ) 

J.  A.  Grant  (Code  203) 

C.  Nuese  (Code  3300) 


N.  R.  Greenfeld  (MIT) 

V.  J.  Monteleon  (Code  233) 
R.  L.  Goodbody  (Code  233) 

L.  F.  Balas  (Code  3300) 

T.  H.  Crocker  (Code  3300) 
P.  S.  McIntosh  (Code  3300) 
J.  R.  Volpe  (Code  3020) 

M.  B.  Bernstein  (SDC) 


1.0  INTRODUCTION 


This  note  reports  on  some  of  the  work  performed  by  Code  3300  under  NELC 
Task  J732630.  The  task  had  the  tripartite  goal  of  identifying  an  ARPA  and 
ONR  funded  technology  baseline,  reviewing  Navy  C^  system,  and  identifying  2 
possible  demonstrations  of  the  applications  of  these  technologies  to  Navy  (T 
systems.  The  demonstrations  are  to  be  performed  on  the  Advanced  Command  Control 
Architectural  Testbed  (ACC-VT)  being  installed  in  the  EDATL  building  at  NELC. 

The  ACCAT  is  discussed  at  length  in  reference  1.  This  initial  presentation 
of  the  technology  baseline  was  limited  to  a few  areas  funded  by  the  Information 
Processing  Technology  Office  of  ARPA,  and  by  the  Information  Systems  Program 
and  Operational  Decision  Aids  Project  of  ONR. 

In  selecting  applications  for  possible  demonstrations  we  were  interested  in 
those  areas  of  research  which  could  be  demonstrated  quickly  to  permit  an  early 
assessment  of  the  technology.  A process  of  increasing  the  depth  and  breadth  of 
the  experimentation  can  thereby  be  followed  in  the  technology  evaluation  process. 
This  process  can  expect  to  be  truncated  when  either  the  expanded  scope  of  the 
experiment  no  longer  yields  an  increase  in  demonstrated  performance  or  the  techno- 
logy issue  is  clearly  ready  for  transition  to  more  advanced  stages  of  development. 

2.0  TECHNOLOGY  BASELINE 

The  technologies  addressed  for  possible  application  to  Navy  command  control 
problems  were  Artificial  Intelligence  ( AI ) , Data  Base  Management,  Query  Systems 
and  Decision  Aids.  Although  part  of  our  task  was  to  review  these  technology 
areas  it  is  Impossible  in  this  note  to  present  anything  but  a brief  description 
of  each  area. 

2.1  Artificial  Intelligence 

(2) 

Feigenbaum  defines  artificial  intelligence  research  as  follows. 

"Artificial  Intelligence  research  is  that  part  of  Computer  Science  that  is 
concerned  with  the  symbol -manipulation  processes  that  produce  intelligent  action. 
By  'intelligent  action'  is  meant  an  act  or  decision  that  is  goal -oriented, 
arrived  at  by  an  understandable  chain  of  symbolic  analysis  and  reasoning  steps, 
and  is  one  in  which  knowledge  of  the  world  informs  and  guides  the  reasoning". 

Subsets  of  AI  which  appear  to  have  immediate  applications  are  knowledge-based 
data  systems  and  production  systems.  In  knowledge-based  data  system  develop- 
ment the  emphasis  is  " ...  upon  the  encoding  of  knowledge  about  the  world  in 
symbolic  expression  so  that  this  knowledge  can  be  manipulated  by  programs;  and 
the  retrieval  of  these  symbolic  expressions,  as  appropriate,  in  response  to 
demands  of  various  tasks". (2)  A production  system  is  a collection  of  production 
rules,  a rule  interpreter  and  a data  base.  A production  rule(3)  1S  a statement 
of  the  form 


If:  predicate,  and  predicate,  and  ...  and  predicate 

12  m 

then:  action,  and  action,  and  ...  and  action 

l 2 n 

Depending  on  the  particular  strategies  incorporated  in  the  rule  interpreter, 
or  monitor,  the  actions  are  (at  least  potentially)  performed  when  all  the 


1 


predicates  are  true.  The  predicates  test  various  objects  and  their  attribute 
values  within  the  data  base.  The  intelligent  terminal  agent  project  at  Rand 
operates  using  a sophisticated  production  system. 

(2)  (2) 

Examples  of  knowledge  based  data  systems  are  Meta-Dendral  and  Mycin 
The  former  is  a molecule  structure  generator  and  the  latter  is  a medical  diagno- 
sis and  therapy  advice  system.  Both  of  these  systems  were  developed  by  close 
collaboration  between  experts  in  the  field  and  AI  researchers.  Each  system 
has  been  "custom  crafted." 

2.2  Data  Base  Management  System 

Data  Base  Management  systems  are  developed  and  marketed  today  under  various 
generic  names.  Such  appellations  as  data  management  system,  generalized 
information  retrieval  system,  information  management  system,  and  file  manage- 
ment system  are  the  main  terms  in  use.  The  more  elementary  systems  search  a 
sequential  file  having  simple  record  structures  and  provide  only  rudimentary 
report  formatting  facilities.  More  elaborate  systems  handle  several  files 
via  indexes  or  links  and  function  in  an  on-line  mode.  With  each  system  there 
may  be  a special  command  language  and  an  individual  data  structure. 

The  special  command  language  enables  a user  to  update  and  access  the  data 
base.  In  general  one  must  have  detailed  knowledge  of  what  is  in  the  data  base 
together  with  the  structure.  Even  armed  with  this  knowledge  selective  updates 
and  retrievals  can  be  both  cumbersome  and  time-consuming. 

The  research  in  this  area  has  two  major  thrusts,  one  of  efficient  manipulation 
of  very  large  data  bases  {i.e.,  computer-held  files  of  greater  than  10  11 
bits)  and  the  other  of  utilizing  existing  data  bases  in  an  effective  manner. 

Both  of  these  areas  could  have  impact  on  C2  systems.  Different  methods  must 
be  used  to  manipulate  and  access  very  large  data  bases  since  access  time  be- 
comes the  critical  feature.  Naive  extensions  of  textbook  data  manipulation  tools 
may  lead  to  unsatisfactory  response  times. 

An  important  effort  in  making  data  bases  easier  to  use  is  work  being  done 
in  Relational  Data  Bases.  In  a Relational  Data  Base  data  are  (conceptually) 
stored  in  two  dimensional  matrices  called  relations.  Each  row  and  column  has 
a name  and  associations  between  records  (rows)  are  represented  solely  by  data 
values  in  columns  drawn  from  a common  domain.  For  example  we  could  have  the 
following  relation  in  a data  base. 


HULL  # 

SNAME 

LENGTH 

LOCATION 

7 

CRAIG 

250 

Newport 

25 

JONES 

300 

San  Diego 

964 

FOSTER 

350 

Newport 

Using  relational  algebra  we  could 

"Find  SNAME  for  ships  in  Newport." 


2 


This  would  create  a relation 


SNAME 

CRAIG 

FOSTER 


Two  other  methods  of  effective  utilization  of  data  bases  are  concerned 
with  setting  "alerts"  which  notify  the  user  that  preset  thresholds  have 
been  exceeded,  and  searching  the  data  bases  to  detect  preset  patterns 
in  the  data.  Efforts  along  this  line  are  the  Targe  File  Management  Information 
Systems^4!  project  at  Stanford  Research  Institute  (SRI)  and  the  Decision-Aiding 
Information  System  (DAISY)  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  The  DAISY 
system  has  other  capabilities  other  than  setting  alerts,  as  its  name  implies 
it  is  a decision  aiding  system. 

2.3  Dec i sion  Aids 


A decision  aid  is  a resource  used  by  a decision  maker  which  either 
facilitates  the  making  of  decisions,  improves  the  quality  of  decisions,  or 
improves  the  consistency  of  decisions.  The  decision  aid  may  be  a person, 
or  group  of  persons.  The  technological  thrust  is  toward  the  use  of  mechanical 
decision  aids.  These  can  range  from  query  systems  which  make  information 
available  to  the  decision  maker,  to  automata  which  can  be  trained  to  make 
decisions  fo”  the  decision  maker  (comparing  observed  events  with  prestored 
criteria).  A sophisticated  decision  aid  can  provide  measures  of  optimization  - 
normally  through  maximization  of  the  decision  maker's  expected  utility. 

Decision  making  under  uncertainty  is  enhanced  by  use  of  a decision  aid  which 
will  systematically  apply  the  axioms  of  probability.  Automated  decision 
aids  can  be  constructed  with  a ready  access  to  stored  data,  and  the  ability 
to  make  mathematical  calculations  and  logical  manipulations.  Such  aids  can 
be  very  quick  and  very  consistent.  The  decision  maker  must  provide  sub- 
jective estimates  of  probability,  and  must  provide  measures  of  personal 
preference  on  which  utility  assignments  can  be  based.  The  human  decision 
maker  normally  monitors  the  actions  of  the  mechanical  decision  aids,  and 
usually  exercises  his  experience,  intuition  and  judgement  in  accenting  or 
modifying  courses  of  action  offered  or  suggested  by  the  decision  aids.  Work 
in  the  theory  and  application  of  mechanical  decision  aids  is  being  actively 
pursued  by  Perceptronics , Inc.,  Decisions  and  Designs,  Inc.,  Stanford  Research 
Institute  and  other  organizations. 

2 . 4 Query  Systems 

Query  Systems  or  natural  language  processors  as  they  are  sometimes  known, 
permit  the  noncomputer  scientist  user  to  easily  access  data  bases.  Design 
goals  for  these  systems  are  to  provide  a robust  man/machine  interface  which 
will  enable  a user  to  obtain  information  with  a minimum  of  jargon  learning. 

Some  systems  have  a fixed  list  cf  English-like  commands  which  are  recognized. 
Others  can  be  quite  sophisticated  in  terms  of  the  complexity  of  syntax  recognized. 
For  example  a simple  system  could  answer  the  following  questions: 


3 


a.  Where  is  the  FOSTER? 


b.  Where  is  the  KENNEDY? 

where  the  FOSTER  and  KENNEDY  are  ships,  and  positionial  information  about  them 
is  stored  in  a data  base.  A sophisticated  system  could  answer  the  following 
incomplete  set  of  sentences: 

a.  Where  is  the  FOSTER? 

b.  The  KENNEDY? 

c.  How  soon  to  rendezvous? 

Of  course  as  the  sophistication  of  the  systems  increase  so  does  program  com- 
plexity and  storage.  Work  in  this  area  is  being  done  in  the  PLANES  system  at 
the  University  of  Illinois,  LUNAR  systems  at  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  (BBN)  and  the 
SHRDLV  program  at  MIT. 

3.0  COMMAND  CONTROL  FRAMEWORK 

This  section  presents  tentative  information  on  the  NCCS  architectural 
framework  and  the  macro  relationships  of  a C?  node  in  the  total  network. 

3.1  Nodal  Description 

The  architectural  elements  of  the  Navy  Command  and  Control  System  (NCCS) 
can  be  categorized  into  ten  subject  areas  which  pertain  to  the  node  (where 
the  C2  function  is  exercised)  and  the  network  (within  which  the  nodes  are 
provided  connectivity).  These  elements  are  as  follows: 

. Command  Facilities 
. Communication  Systems 
. Waming/SensGr  Systems 
. Reporting  Structure 
. Personnel  and  Procedures 
. Data  Processors 
. Data  Bases 
. Application  Programs 
. System  Programs 
. Man/Machine  Information  Couplers 

The  last  five  aggregate  to  Automatic  Data  Processing  (ADP)  facilities  which 
are  exercised  within  the  nodes  and  are  of  further  interest  co  this  note.  Figure 
1 illustrates  the  relationships  cf  the  elements  of  the  C 2 network  and  the  nodes. 

The  nodes  of  the  NCCS  may  be  characterized  in  terms  of  four  basic  command 
and  control  processes.  They  are: 

Information  Input  Process 
Situation  Assessment  Process 
Decision  and  Direction  Process 
Report  Generation  Process 


4 


The  impl  station  of  these  processes  at  the  various  NCCS  nodes  will  be 
dependent  or 

a.  Tie  nodal  mission  and  location  within  the  command  hierarchy. 

b.  The  time  frame  in  which  the  node  is  viewed. 

However,  the  processes  themselves  are  invariant  with  respect  to  node  and  time 
frame,  and  can  be  characterized  by  subprocesses  which  are  generic  in  nature 
and  nodal ly  independent. 

3.1.1  Information  Input 

The  Information  Input  Process  is  the  front  end  processing  function  which, 
in  effect,  prepares  the  information  for  use  by  a man  in  either  the  Situation 
Assessment  or  Decision  and  Direction  Process. 

3.1.2  Situation  Assessment 

The  Situation  Assessment  Process  is  the  process  in  which  own  force  missions 
and  tasks  are  analyzed  with  respect  to  own  and  enemy  capabilities,  and  poten- 
tial enemy  courses  of  action  (COA).  The  resulting  estimates  of  the  situation 
become  the  major  input  to  the  Decision  and  Direction  Function.  Situation 
Assessment  is  a continuous  monitoring  and  evaluation  process,  and  its  results 
may  modify  existing  data  base  information  or  create  new  information. 

3.1.3  Decision  and  Direction 

The  Decision  and  Direction  Process  formulates  and  analyzes  alternative 
courses  of  action  to  accomplish  assigned  tasks  and  missions  in  the  face  of 
potential  or  actual  opposition.  The  output  of  the  Decision  and  Direction 
Process  may  change  the  operational  assignments/status  of  assigned  assets. 

3.1.4  Report  and  Directive 

The  Report  and  Directive  Generation  Process  provides  the  means  by  which 
a command  node  passes  information,  orders,  alerts,  queries  and  requests  to 
external  nodes.  The  process  is  not  confined  to  handling  information  developed 
after  a particular  decision  has  been  made;  it  provides  a means  of  immediately 
outputting  to  cognizant  commands,  critical  information  received  and  identified 
by  the  Information  Input  or  Situation  Assessment  process. 

3.2  Principal  Function  Description 

The  above  nodal  discussion  can  be  presented  in  terms  of  principal  functions 
ordered  with  respect  to  an  event-action-reaction  time  line  which  would  be  a 
typically  stressed  environment  for  an  NCCS  Command  Center. 

3.2.1  Alerts  and  Notifications 

An  alert  is  a received  warning  of  an  impending  mission  and  the  notification 
is  the  command  center  response.  This  function  involves  procedures  and  methods 


5 


fnr  receiving  processing,  and  distributing  alerts.  Through  a combination  of 
ha?dHare.  sS?tware  and  aSdio/visual  alarm,  the  Watch  Officer  5 assisted  m 
performing  alert/notification  functions. 

3.2.2  Operational  Evaluation  and  Threat/Situati^n^ 

Thic  function  provides  event  summaries  of  own  forces  and  threat  iorces. 

It  i ncorporates°s i tuatiorfcorrel  ati  on  of  environment,  Red  Track  position,  and 
Blue  Track  position. 

3.2.3  Operation/Resource  Availability  Planning 

This  function  details  readiness  status  and  performance  characteristics  of 
Rlup  and  Red  resources,  including  presonnel , facilitites,  weapons,  and  plat- 
fir^s  It  pr^viSes  opera??onal  status  regarding  location,  situation,  employment 

category,  etc. 

3.2.4  Current  Operational  Planning 

This  function  encompasses  aids  in  developing  mission  plans,  the  development 
of  auernatwes  courses  of  action  (COA's),  the  determination  of  resource  require 
ments,  the  allocation  of  resources,  logistic  determinations,  and  planning  o 
decision  execution. 

3.2.5  Execution 

The  execution  function  provides  tasking  orders  and  directives  for  resource 
assignment  and  force  employment.  It  involves  force  coordination/feedback  an 
operation  monitoring  to  determine  directive  compliance  and  situation  changes. 


3.2.6 


port  Functions 


These  functions  are  employed  in  support  of  most  of  the  ^incipal  Functions 
and  to  some  degree,  are  event/scenario  independent.  They  consist  °f  Compu 
rational  Support,  Display/Presentation  Support,  Communications  Support,  Data 
Base  Sanagement.  Training,  and  Security.  Application  program  element  details 
are  listed  in  the  ACCAT  systems  description  document. 

4.0  APPLICATIONS 

4.1  Each  application  is  briefly  described  in  the  following  format. 

Application  No. 

1.  Title 

2.  Operational  Function 

3.  Technology 

4.  Application  Definition 

5.  Approach 

6.  Capability  Goals/Value  to  the  Fleet  , 

7.  Related  Applications,  other  efforts 

Some  entries  might  not  appear  since  the  listed  applications  differ  greatly  in 
levefof  detail9  In  some  the  "Approach"  may  be  quite  obvious  while  in  others 


a well  thought  out  approach  would  be  a separate  task  even  though  the  definition 
is  clear. 

Since  a number  of  people  contributed  applications  and  used  terms  familiar 
to  themselves  in  their  descriptions,  technologies  appear  in  the  applications 
which  were  not  listed  in  section  2.  Table  2 is  a grouping  of  the  technology 
areas  that  appear  in  the  applications  section  relative  to  section  2,  plus 
miscellaneous,  but  highly  related  technologies. 

4.2  Application  Summaries 


Art i ficial  Intelligence 

Intelligent  terminals 
Production  rule^ 
Heuristic  programming 
Heuristic  search 
Adaptive  programs 

Decision  Aids 


Real  time  interactive  decision  networks 

Deductive  data  management 

Adaptive  decision  aids 

Advanced  command  and  control  decision  aids 

Query  Systems 

High  level  language 
Query  language 
Natural  language 

Natural  language  interface  to  data  management  systems 
Man/machine  interface 

Data  Base  Management 

Sensor  data  management 
Underway  procedures  management 
Distributed  data  bases 
Information  input  processing 
Distributed  information  processing 
Large  data  base  management 

Miscellaneous  Technologies 

Networks 

Sensor  correlation 
Digital  data  transmission 
Displays 

Computational  support 
Simulation  modelling 
Secure  voice 
Encryption 

Character  recognition 
Navigation 
Prediction 
Interactive  terminal 
Optimal  searching 
Human  factors 
Computer  Science 


Table  II.  Technology  Breakdown 


APPLICATION  1 

1 TITLE:  STATUS/READINESS  REPORTING  MESSAGE  PREPARATION  AID 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Intelligent  Terminals,  Production  Rules,  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Local  intelligent  terminals  with  additional  storage 

(tape  cartridge  or  small  disk)  can  serve  as  aids  to  the  preparation  of  reporting 
messages  (MOVEREPS,  CASREPS,  FORSTAT,  ccc.)  thereby  reducing  the  errors  in  their 
content.  Past  efforts  have  been  concerned  with  the  communications  portion  of 
the  message  preparation  problem,  while  the  message  content  causes  the  bulk  of 
the  problems  with  the  Navy  command  control  data  bases.  This  type  of  aid  could 
assist  the  report  originator  to  understand  each  element  in  the  reporting  message, 
and  to  also  store  information  that  could  be  helpful  in  filling  in  the  message 
reports.  Additional  readiness/status  information  could  be  collected  on-line 
from  the  Operational  Readiness  Monitor  System  (ORMS). 

4.  APPROACH: 

~a.  Initial  experiment  (a  portion  of  one  reporting  message)  using  large 
host  and  high  level  language 

b.  Complete  experiment  (with  all  message  types)  on  large  host  with  high 
level  language 

c.  Translate  the  Aid  system  to  a RITA  type  terminal/system  and  demonstrate 
it  as  a stand  alone  system 

d.  Incorporate  a tie-in  to  the  ORMS  test  bed  (NAVSEA  6.2  program)  and  the 
AFCCT  terminal 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Many  of  the  data  bases  which  we  now  have  are  filled  with 

partially  incomplete,  erroneous,  and  untimely  data  due  to  the  problems  asso- 
ciated with  preparing  the  reporting  messages  at  sea.  A reduction  in  the 
'source'  error  rate  would  increase  the  Fleet  Commander's  knowledge  of  the 
Fleet's  readiness  and  status  greatly  (It  will  also  upgrade  the  value  of  the 
shore  data  bases  and  associated  ADP  hardware/software). 


APPLICATION  2 

1.  TITLE:  OPTIMUM  FORCE  POSTURE 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 

3 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Calculate  the  optimum  posture  of  own  force  to 

oppose  the  known  or  most  likely  threat.  Calculations  to  include:  best  placement 
of  carriers  in  a single  or  multi-carrier  task  force;  best  placement  of  AEGIS 
platforms,  singly  or  in  combination  with  3-T  missile  platforms;  against  a 
multi -dimensional  missile  threat;  best  placement  and  employment  of  surface 
combatants  with  tactical  towed  arrays,  LAMPS,  and  various  sonars,  against  the 
submarine  threat;  best  placement  and  employment  of  patrol  aircraft,  fixed 
wing  carrier  ASW  aircraft,  and  ASW  helicopters  in  concert  with  friendly  SSN  s 
and  surface  ASW  forces;  and  best  employment  of  CAP  and  EW  aircraft  in  com- 
bination with  AEGIS  and  3-T  platforms.  Additional  considerations  include: 

EMCON  plan;  overall  surveillance  plans  and  schedules;  replenishment  schedule; 

PIM  projections;  and  own  capability  as  modified  by  CASREPS,  logistic  shortages,  etc. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  give  the  operational  commander  the  capability  to 
optimize  strategy  and  tactics  on  the  basis  of  available  information;  and  to 
make  timely  adjustments  in  the  light  of  new  information.  Would  partially 
satisfy  O.R.  P-14  of  the  Navy  C3  Architecture  Workbook,  dated  August  1975. 


APPLICATION  3 

|.  TITLE:  ASSESS  ENEMY  CAPABILITIES/INTENTIONS 


■'.«  


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decis'on  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  the  estimated  composition  of  an  enemy  force, 

assess  the  capabilities  of  that  force  with  respect  to  the  mission(s)  of  own 
force.  Using  knowledge  of  the  enemy's  strategy  and  tactics,  observed  use  of 
sensors,  disposition  and  for  nation(s),  available  logistic  support,  material 
readiness,  supporting  surveillance  forces,  and  possible  cooperating  combat 
forces,  assess  the  enemy's  intended  course  of  action. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  permit  the  operational  commander  to  make  timely 

assessments  of  the-  situation,  preparatory  to  determining  the  optimum  posture 
of  his  force.  Would  indirectly  provide  partial  satisfaction  of  O.R.  P-14 

of  the  Navy  C^  Architecture  Workbook,  acted  August  1975,  by  facilitating 
analysis  of  the  threat  against  which  own  force  posture  is  to  be  optimized. 


__ . r *V 


14 


APPLICATION  4 

1.  TITLE:  COVER  AND  DECEPTION 

2 TECHNOLOGY:  Decision  Aids,  Heuristic  Programming,  Data  Base  Management 

3 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  own  force  mission,  and_ postulated  operating 

constraints,  the  estimated  surveillance  and  combat  capabilities  of  the  opposing 
force,  and  environmental  conditions,  determine  the  optimum  cover  and  deception 
plan  to  be  employed  by  own  force. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  give  the  operational  commander  the  ability  to  make 

rapid  comparative  evaluations  of  alternatives  with  respect  to  cover  an 
deception  tactics,  and  to  make  timely  adjustments  when  required  by  changes 
in  the  perceived  situation. 


APPLICATION  5 


1.  TITLE:  LOGISTIC  SUPPORT  REQUIREMENTS 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  a requirement  to  execute  an  OPLAN,  or  to 

satisfy  an  ad  hoc  operational  demand,  determine  the  logistic  support  required. 
This  would  include  not  only  estimation  of  requirements  for  consumables  such 

as  fuel,  ammunition,  repair  parts,  and  food,  but  also  identification  of  the 
sources  of  such  support.  If  necessary  supplies  are  not  on  hand  within  the 
action  force,  identify  which  mobile  logistics  forces  have  the  supplies.  Cal- 
culate earliest  times  and  best  positions  for  underway  replenishment,  and  their 
possible  impacts  on  the  intended  operation.  Determine  logistic  train  require- 
ments which  would  ensue  from  a prolonged  action,  and  identify  ships  and  supply 
bases  which  would  provide  the  necessary  support. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  give  the  operational  commander  the  ability  to  make 

timely  decisions  regarding  logistic  factors  which  might  otherwise  constrain 
his  tactical  options. 


APPLICATION  6 

1 . TITLE:  EXPECTED  RESOURCE  COST  OF  A COMBAT  ACTION 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  a known  friendly  force  and  an  estimated 

enemy  force,  with:  disposi tions ; stochastic  and  deterministic  capabilities 

of  weapons,  sensors,  communications,  platforms,  and  logistics;  environmental 
conditions;  and  availability  of  re-inforcements ; and  rules  of  engagement. 
Compute  the  expected  costs  which  would  be  incurred  by  each  side  in  terms  of: 
ship  and  aircraft  losses  and  damage;  personnel  casualties;  fuel  and  ammunition 
expenditures;  and  loss  of  ability  to  perform  subsequent  missions. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET : This  capability  would  provide  an  operational  commander 

with  a rapid  and  accurate  assessment  of  the  probable  outcome  of  a planned  or 
potential  engagement,  and  thus  would  afford  a better  means  of  preserving  fleet 
effectiveness  by  avoiding  unintentional  participation  in  combat  actions  which 
would  impose  unacceptable  resource  costs. 


•> 


17 


APPLICATION  7 

1.  TITLE : ASSESS  THE  ENEMY'S  LOGISTIC  OPTIONS 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 

3 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  the  logistic  support  available  to  the  enemy 

force  from  both  afloat  and"  base  sources,  the  estimated  levels  of  fuel  and 
ammunition  on  board  the  enemy  force,  and  estimated  rates  of  consumption,  assess 
the  enemy's  logistic  options  with  respect  to  his  action  radius  and  ability  to 
carry  out  postulated  plans.  Assess  the  impact  of  denying  the  enemy  any  specified 
subset  of  his  available  logistics  options. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  This  capability  would  permit  an  operational  commander  to 

readily  assess  the  enemy's  capability  in  terms  of  logistic  limits,  and  to  assess 
the  cost  of  interdicting  the  enemy's  supply  lines  in  terms  of  the  probable 
effect  of  partial  or  complete  success. 


APPLICATION  8 

1.  TITLE:  BATTLE  MANAGEMENT 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  that  own  force  is  committed  to  combat,  monitor 

and  lisess  all  battle  events  with  respect  to  the  current  and  projected  ability  of 
own  force  to  carry  out  assigned  mission(s).  Effects  of  attacks  delivered  and 
defensive  measures  employed  by  both  sides  would  be  measured  in  terms  of  fuel  and 
ammunition  expenditures,  and  losses  and  damage  sustained  by  both  sides,  to- 
gether with  resultant  changes  in  the  offensive  and  defensive  envelope  parameters 
of  own  and  opposing  forces.  Impact  assessment  would  include  recommendations  as 
to  reassignment  of  own  force  unit  missions,  diversion  of  resources  to  compensate 
for  losses,  modification  of  engagement  range,  etc.  Defensive/counteracti ve 
resource  real  1 oca  cions  considered  would  recognize,  inter  alia,  the  estimated 
view  that  the  enc-"  holds  with  respect  to  his  missions  and  target  priorities. 

Collateral  assessment  would  be  in  terms  of  the  likelihood  of  successful 
outcome  of  the  engagement,  together  with  an  estimate  of  the  latest  time  at  which 
a decision  to  comnit  additional  forces  or  to  disengage  could  be  successfu.ly 
implemented. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  give  the  operational  commander  the  ability  to  make 

operational  time  judgments  over  the  full  multi-dimensional  spectrum  of  the 
battle  management  problem,  thus  enhancing  the  probability  that  he  will  remain 
in  control  of  the  situation. 


APPLICATION  9 

1.  TITLE:  SHORTFALL  AND  ALTERNATIVE  CORRELATION 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Provide  correlation  capability  to  make  the  following 

types  of  comparison  to  identify  shortfalls  and  alternatives: 

a.  Quantities  of  forces  required  by  an  OPLAN  - vs  - forces  currently 
available  or  projected  for  a future  date. 

b.  Force  requirements  as  derived  from  threat  analysis  - vs  - forces 
actually  available  or  forces  required  by  an  OPLAN. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET  : Would  provide  the  operational  commander  with  the  means  of 

readily  assessing  force  requirements  with  respect  to  planned  or  potential 
operations.  Would  partially  satisfy  O.R.  P-14  of  the  Navy  C3  Architecture 
Workbook,  dated  August  1975. 


n 


APPLICATION  10 


1 TITLE:  QUICK  REACTION  ADAPTATION  OF  OPLANS  TO  CONFORM  TO  ACTUAL  FORCES 

AND  DISPOSITIONS 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 


T APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  that  available  forces  are  different  Jroin  those 

required  by  a given  OPLAN-,  compute  the  necessary  modifications  to  the  OPLAN  in 
order  to  make  most  effective  use  of  available  forces  in  pursuance  of  the  OPLAN 

objectives. 


4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  enable  operational  commanders  to  rapidly  assess  the 

feasibility  of  adapting  existing  OPLANS  to  available  forces,  thus  enhancing 


TcdS  1 U 1 I I CY  ui  auapuuy  cAiouny  , . ' . . „ . ' 

quick  reaction  capability  in  situations  where  force  levels  are  changing 
mi  cal ly . Would  be  particularly  valuable  during  the  redirection  and  reconstitution 
phase.  This  development  would  partially  satisfy  O.R.  P-14  of  the  Navy  C 
Architecture  Workbook,  dated  August  1975. 


APPLICATION  11 

1 .  TIT  c:  QUIET  TASK  FORCE 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Using  surveillance  and  intelligence  information 

obtained  from  systems  outside  the  task  force,  and  from  passive  systems  within 
the  task  force,  evaluate  the  threat  situation  with  respect  to  both  detection 
and  attacks,  and  determine  the  optimum  time  to  resume  active  sensor  search 
and  to  resume  external  communications. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  provide  the  operational  commander  with  a means  of 

assessing  the  effectiveness  of  his  EMCON  plan,  and  of  determining  the  time  at 
which  resumption  of  electronic  activity  would  yield  inf  oration  about  the 
enemy  which  is  of  significantly  greater  value  than  the  information  which  the 
enemy  could  gain  from  electronic  intercepts. 


22 


I 


APPLICATION  12 


1.  TITLE:  REVISION  OF  UNDERWAY  PROCEDURES  FOR  SHIPS  OPERATING  IN  CONSORT  WITH 

AIRCRAFT  'CARRIERS 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Sensor  Data  Management  and  Underway  Procedures  Management 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  During  the  past  few  years  a number  of  calamitous 
collisions  and  near  collisions  have  occurred  between  small  to  medium  naval 
vessels  and  aircraft  carriers.  The  ordinary  rules  of  the  road  between  vessels 
presumably  have  applied  (and  used  by  the  subordinate  vessels),  but  the  tragedies 
still  occurred.  It  is  fact  that  carriers  even  when  operated  by  the  prescribed 
regulations  are  of  such  size  that  proper  evasive  tactics  may  not  be  feasible. 
Further  this  is  particularly  true  when  deploying  aircraft.  It  may  be  that 
special  tactics  should  be  employed  to  prevent  these  tragedies.  This  task  would 
entail  collecting  all  available  data  on  crashes  and  near  crashes,  applicable 
tactics  and  rules  of  the  road,  and  using  this  data  and  the  ARPA  facilities  to 
determine  what  tactics,  maneuvers,  use  of  sensors,  computer  algorithms  or  others 
should  be  employed  by  ships  in  the  presence  of  carriers. 

4.  APPROACH: 

a.  Initial  data 

b.  Data  analysis 

c.  Development  of  improved  tactics 

d.  Validation  of  new  tactics  with  Fleet  Personnel 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET : Accident  prevention,  collision  avoidance. 


h , 


APPLICATION  13 

1.  TITLE:  OVER  THE  HORIZON  TARGET  COORDINATION 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  (NELC,  ARPA,  and  Contractors)  _ _ _ , 

Distributed  Data  Bases,  Networks,  Data  Transmission,  Sensor  Correlation 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  development  of  the  cruise  missile  (and  any 

other  "Over  the  Hori z'o n"Ts trike  capability  for  ship  platforms  requires  an  equal 
capability  in  detection  and  target  assignment.  Efforts  are  being  made  to  pro- 
vide some  sort  of  sensor  for  the  ship  without  great  success.  One  possibility 

is  for  data  bases  such  as  OSIS  and  the  main  floor  WWMCCS  systems  which  collect 
"enemy"  and  "friendly"  position  information  from  a variety  of  sensors  to  supply 
the  data  to  the  ship.  The  study  effort  proposed  here  is  to  determine  the  tech- 
niques required  to  give  the  ships  rapid  shore  data  base  query  capability  from 
any  or  all  of  the  data  bases  with  the  required  information. 

4.  APPROACH: 

a.  Collect  data  from  ongoing  programs  on  requirements 

b.  Collect  data  on  information  content  of  presently  planned  data  bases 

c.  Analyze  and  propose  alternative  methods  to  provide  the  ship/shore  data 
transmission  capability 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  The  development  of  the  cruise  missile  is  underway.  The _ 

threat  is  clearly  defined.  The  sensor  detection  capability  must  be  developed 
to  make  use  of  the  missile  to  counteract  the  threat. 


APPLICATION  14 

1.  TITLE:  CRISIS  MANAGEMENT,  STATUS  ACCOUNTING 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Decision  Aids,  Intelligent  Terminals  (NELC,  SRI,  RAND  (RITA), 

Perceptronics) 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  During  a time  of  crisis  many  actions  are  initiated 

and  many  more  results/inputs  are  generated.  These  actions  must  in  turn  be  moni- 
tored along  with  external  inputs  to  keep  up  with  the  status  of  the  situation 

(crisis).  One  of  the  key  issues  in  a crisis  situation  is  the  generation  of  new 
events  which  can  impact  the  initial  plan  and  result  in  modified  actions. 


A solution  to  the  crisis  management-status  accounting  problems  is  to  pro- 
vide a decision  aiding/pl arming  tool  in  an  intelligent  terminal  environment. 
Plans  for  different  crisis  situations  can  be  stored  on  a magnetic  tape  cassette 
or  equivalent  and  initialized  for  each  situation.  Parameterized  inputs  can  be 
made  for  each  situation  to  establish  variables  together  with  exception  data. 

As  the  crisis  situation  progresses  the  output  of  the  aid  device  will  be  noti- 
fication of  action  items  which  are  scheduled  and  the  dynamic  'picture'  of  the 
crisis  as  modified  by  new  events.  M.-mua1  or  automatic  inputs  could  be  used  to 
maintain  the  status  situation.  The  SAP  (Search  and  Rescue)  demonstrations  are 
representative  examples  of  this  problem  domain.  Both  network  and  stand  alone 
solutions  are  applicable. 

4.  APPROACH: 

a.  First  experiment  (subset) 

b.  Second  phase  (complete  subset  showing  all  major  functions) 

c.  Full  scale  capability  (unci as) 

d.  Operational  data  experiments 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Crisis  management  is  a universal  problem  which  can_be_ 

focused  at  a single  ship  level  or  on  major  portion  of  the  world.  A goal  of 
this  research  would  be  to  identify  a single  tool  or  family  of  tools  which  could 
fit  most  situations. 


25 


APPLICATION  15 


1 TITLE:  SOFTWARE  LANGUAGE  AND  DATA  TRANSFER  PROTOCAL  FOR  SHIP/SHORE  COVER  & 

DECEPTION  (C&D)  INFORMATION  EXCHANGE. 

2.  TECHNOLOGY: 

Hi  Level  Language,  Distributed  Data  Bases,  and  Digital  Data  Transmission 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Problem  - One  of  the  major  command  control  defi- 

ciencies  in  the  Fleet  today  is  the  inability  to  provide  specific  C&D  data 
(which  resides  in  one  or  more  shore  based  computer  data  banks)  to  Fleet  elements 
which  could  use  the  data  in  a timely  manner. 

The  data  transfer  between  shore  sites  is  being  investigated  and  resolved 
by  such  programs  as  ARPA,  OSIS,  WWMCCS,  AUTODIN  II,  and  others.  To  resolve 
the  shore  to  ship  data  base  query  problem,  a different  set  of  criteria  must  be 
developed  due  to  the  nature  of  the  ship  based  operators,  and  the  NTDS  and  other 
ship  data  systems.  It  is  likely  that  the  ship  operators  will  not  have  the 
technical  computer  operator  oriented  background  of  the  counterparts  in  the 
shore  establishments;  therefore  a simple  hi -level  language  should  be  developed 
to  allow  him  to  make  specific  queries  from  the  shore  data  bases.  In  addition, 
the  terminal  for  shipboard  use  and  the  message  transfer  protocal  from  the  ship 
must  be  developed. 

This  task  is  intended  to  provide  the  initial  analysis  and  tradeoffs  necessary 
to  undertake  the  required  development. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Resolution  of  a critical  C&D  problem. 


26 


APPLICATION  16 

1.  TITLE:  FREQUENCY  MANAGEMENT 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Distributed  Data  Bases,  Networks 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Multiple  data  bases  (ships  equipment,  sensor  1 invi ta- 
tions,  weather,  weapons  systems,  etc.)  will  be  accessed  to  provide  a set  of 
task  force  operating  frequencies  which  will  minimize  mutual  inference.  Since 
frequency  couplers  will  overload  if  required  to  carry  a particular  frequency 
mix  there  must  be  an  automated  test  to  insure  against  this.  Often  frequency 
assignments  are  made  without  knowledge  of  what  couplers  are  on  board  ship. 

The  ownsbips  equipment  data  base  should  contain  this  information  for  use  by 
the  frequency  management  program. 

A.  VALUE  TO  THE  FLEET:  This  capability  will  provide  the  task  force  with  an 
organized  method  of  assigning  communications  frequencies,  sensor  frequencies 
and  weapon  system  frequencies  to  minimize  i nterference . The  present  method  is 
computer  assisted  which  can  handle  a small  number  of  missile  frequencies.  There 
is  no  automatic  checking  for  possible  coupler  damage.  Having  this  protection 
will  reduce  down  time  due  to  equipment  failure. 


1 

: 


1 

APPLICATION  17 


1 . TITLE:  FLEET  SENSOR  COVERAGE 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Distributed  Data  Bases,  Displays,  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Since  the  detection  coverage  of  shipboard  sensors 

is  affectecT  by  the  environment,  a task  force  commander  must  continually  be 
monitoring  both  weather  conditions  and  positions  of  ships  in  company  force  to 
assure  adequate  sensor  coverage  of  the  task  force.  If  a sensor  asset  goes  down 
or  the  weather  changes,  then  the  formation  may  be  changed  to  compensate.  At 
present,  colored  plastic  overlays  are  used  as  an  aid  in  determining  sensor 
coverage.  What  is  needed  is  advanced  display  presentation  of  radar  coverage 
profiles  (path  loss  vs  range)  and  sonar  profiles  (e.g.,  convergence  zones)  to 
enable  a force  commander  to  properly  dispose  his  task  force  for  optimum 
coverage. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Manual  plotting  of  radar  profiles  would  be  eliminated  with 

this  system.  Since  the  plotting  system  is  mathematically  based,  a message 
could  be  sent  when  coverage  degradation  occurs,  due  to  environmental  changes 

or  equipment  failure. 


28 


APPLICATION  18 

1.  TITLE:  HULL-TO-EMITTER  CORRELATION 


2.  OPERATIONAL  FUNCTION:  Evaluation  and  Threat  Situation 

3.  TECHNOLOGY : Query  Lanugage,  Computation  Support,  Decision  Aids 

4.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  identification  of  own-force  platforms  can  be 
enhanced  by  examining  EM  emanations,  traffic  activity,  and  spectrum  utilization 
characteristics.  The  denial  of  this  identification  capability  to  hostile  forces 
first  requires  assessment  of  possible  platform  configuration  and  then  employ- 
ment of  appropriate  counter-measures.  This  research  application  is  concerned 
with  providing  assistance  in  estimating  probability  of  identification  for  given 
input  parameters  and  alternative  employment  of  EM  (electromagnetic)  assets  and 
their  impact  on  given  mission  conditions. 

5.  APPROACH: 

a.  Construct  data  base  from  given  platform  characteristic  elements. 

b.  Develop  computational  routines  for  assessing  uniqueness  of  platforms 
based  on  the  identification  parameters. 

c.  Develop  query  language  and  decision  aids  to  support  best  selection  of 
platforms  emissions  as  a function  of  time,  position  and  environment.  Alternative 
platform  (or  platforms)  configurations  will  be  presented  in  terms  of  impact 

on  mission  objectives. 


29 


APPLICATION  19 


1.  TITLE • THREAT  RECOGNITION 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Natural  Language,  Distril  ited  Data  Bases,  Decision  Aid 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  following  is  a classification  of  three  types  of 

navaT* threat  recognition  problems  (at  the  task  force  thru  fleet  level  of  command) 
They  have  been  differentiated  on  the  basis  of  technology  needed  to  support 

the  effort. 

Level  1.  Proximity  Threats 

These  can  be  considered  fairly  simple  queries  to  a status  of  forces  data 
base.  They  are  generally  queries  of  the  form:  "if  there  are  any  ---  within 

— nautical  miles,  sound  an  alert."  Examples:  (assume  the  appropriate  con- 

text has  been  given) 

Immediate  Threats 

a.  Charlie  class  submarine  with  initial  detection  < 30  miles 

b.  Echo  class  sub  with  initial  detection  < 250  miles 

* c.  Bear  aircraft  with  i.d.  < 250  miles 

d.  Any  submarine  within  torpedo  range  (about  5 miles) 

e.  Any  SSBN  with  i.d.  < missile  range  (about  1500  miles  for  Yankee) 

* f.  Any  surface  missile  boat  < 30  miles 
Secondary  Threats 

g.  If  Charlie  class  sub  has  i.d.  < 30  and  course,  speed  vector  will  place 
it  < 30  miles,  then  it  is  a "potential  threat".  System  should  keep 
track  of  it  and  up/down  grade  it  as  appropriate. 

h.  Same  for  echo  class  and  250  miles 
Most  Important  Threats 

* i.  Low  flyer  closing  and  < 50  miles 

* j.  Cruise  missile  inbound 
Surface  Threats 

k.  DDG  < 30  miles, 

l . CLG  < 250  miles, 

m.  CA  < 10  miles,  etc. 

*Means  this  information  does  not  exist  in  unclassified  data  base. 


Level  2.  Situational  Threats 

These  are  threats  represented  by  particular  situations  which  should  be 
recognizable  to  a system,  where  the  discovery  of  the  situations  is  left  to  the 
experienced  naval  personnel.  The  notion  here  is  that  a situation  can  be  des- 
cribed, and  if  the  state  of  the  world  is  such  that  the  situation  exists,  that  is 
an  irmediate  threat.  But  systems  should  also  have  the  capability  for  recognizing 
partial  situations,  and  note  the  potential  tin  eats  and  their  level. 

An  example  of  a "situation"  as  used  here  is  the  following:  A Swerdlov  class 

ship  normally  "'sused  as  a forward  spotter  for  an  Echo  class  submarine.  The 
tracking  rangi  of  a Swerdlov  is  100  miles,  while  the  communication  range  from 
o Swerdlov  to  a sub  is  3C0  miles.  Thus,  if  a Swerdlov  is  within  100  miles  of 
friendly  forces,  and  is  tracking  them,  and  an  E class  sub  is  within  300  miles 
of  the  Swerdlov,  then  a danger  situation  exists.  (The  attack  scenario  is  that 
the  sub  would  move  into  missile  range  (250  miles)  of  the  friendlies,  then  fire. 

This  means  that  if  the  sub  is  already  within  that  range,  the  danger  is  that 
much  greater.) 

Note  that  the  notion  of  "tracking"  is  not  an  observable  piece  of  information 
which  is  in  the  data  base.  It  can  be  inferred,  perhaps,  that  if  the  Swerdlov 
stays  on  the  same  course  and  bearing  from  the  friendlies,  it  is  tracking  them. 

And  perhaps  if  it  is  ever  within  tracking  range  of  them  it  may  be  tracking  for 
that  period  of  time.  And  there  may  be  other  inference  rules  to  guide  the  deter- 
mination of  probabili  y of  existence  of  tracking. 

Note  also  that  there  may  be  more  than  one  submarine  which  is  communicating 
with  the  Swerdlov,  each  of  which  is  a potential  threat.  Or  there  may  be  some 
forward  spotter  substituting  for  the  Swerdlov  this  particular  time. 

Level  3.  "Creative"  Threat  Recognition 

This  is  a category  built  simply  to  contain  all  those  activities  not  covered 
in  the  other  two.  The  discovery  of  "threat  situations"  as  used  in  Level  2 is 
one  area.  Noticing  abnormal  patterns  of  behaviour  may  be  another  example. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  fill  a Situation  Assessment  need  in  the  NCCS  Architecture. 


APPLICATION  20 


1.  TITLE:  ADAPTIVE  DECISIONS  IN  TASK  FORCE  MULTITHREAT  MISSILE  DEFENSE 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Problem  Solving  Methodology  including  Heuristic  Search.  Adaptive 

Programs,  Real  Time  Interactive  Decision  Networks 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  decision  making  functions  used  to  counter 

task  force  missile  threats  are  characterized  by  a complex,  time  conctrained 
process  of  data  assimilation,  data  evaluation,  and  deployment  of  assets  such 
as  sensors,  EW,  ECM,  ships,  aircraft  and  weapons.  Operational  effectiveness 
depends  heavily  on  decision  making  performance.  Problem  solving  and  heuristic 
search  techniques  allow  the  structuring  and  evaluation  in  real  time,  of  possible 
alternatives  while  considering  probable  consequences  arising  from  future  counter- 
measures by  looking  ahead  a few  steps  in  time.  The  values  placed  on  information 
and  decision  consequences  are  taken  from  human  experience  and  judgment.  Decision 
recommendations  (along  with  supporting  evidence)  are  available  to  the  Commander 
based  upon  a comparison  of  a great  number  of  possible  courses  of  action. 

4.  APPROACH: 

a.  Demonstration  of  counter  missile  threat  decision  functions  using  one 
type  of  ASCM  attack  under  constrained  resources  (PDP-10  high  level 
language ) . 

b.  Complete  system  function  demonstration  including  a realistic  decision 
environment,  real-time  interaction,  and  events  uodate  capability. 

c.  Full  scale  system  implementation  on  a PDP-11  (UNIX  operating  system) 
with  a capability  for  real  time  environment  update  as  well  as  expanded 
interactive  capabilities  for  evaluation  function  adjustment.  Demon- 
stration with  simulated  data. 

d.  Demonstration  and  experimental  evaluation  with  operational  data. 

5.  VALUE  TO  THE  FLEET: 

a.  Increased  operational  effectiveness  of  ASCM  defense  through  generation, 
selection,  and  recommendation  of  high-probability  threat  countermeasures. 

b.  Improved  ability  to  maintain  optimal  defense  strategies  in  varying 
environments  by  adapting  to  changes. 

c.  Reduced  potential  threat  effectiveness  througn  reduction  of  decision 
time  allowing  earlier  threat  engagements  before  reaching  WRL. 


32 


APPLICATION  21 


1.  TITLE:  CONCEPTUAL  PROCESSING 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Natural -Language  Interface  to  Data  Management  Systems 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Information  retrieval  is  a basic  need  in  most  of 

the  basic  command  and  control  processes:  situation  assessment,  decision  and 

direction,  and  report  generation.  In  addition  to  having  an  adequate  data 
management  facility,  a most  important  need  is  the  user  interface.  Natural 
language  seems  to  be  amost  attractive  choice  for  user  communication,  but  most 
developments  of  natural  language  processors  were  large,  inefficient,  and  imprac- 
tical. Conceptual  Processing  is  a newly  developed  technology  at  SDC  which  is 
based  on  a nonconventional  approach  to  Natural  Language  Processing.  The 
approach  suggests  that  a Natural  Language  Interface  (NLI)  to  a given  application 
system  should  emphasize  the  modeling  (conceptualization)  of  structures  and 
functions  of  the  application,  rather  than  the  linguistic  properties  cf  Natural 
Language.  Thus,  the  NLI  will  be  required  to  deal  only  wi+h  the  subset  of  English 
that  the  application  program  can  handle.  In  the  area  of  data  base  retrieval, 
the  NLI  has  to  be  powerful  enough  to  process  English  queries  against  a data  base 
only, avoiding  the  complexity  of  "understanding"  irrelevant  forms  of  English. 
Furthermore,  because  the  NLI  relies  on  explicit  modeling  of  structures  and  functions 
of  the  underlying  data  management  system.  It  can  perform  the  "understanding" 
process  in  a more  concise  and  efficient  manner,  since  it  does  not  need  to 

search  for  possible  English  constructs  that  are  not  used  in  the  application. 

A prototype  version  of  the  conceptual  processor  is  currently  implemented 
in  LISP.  Several  data  bases  were  experimented  with  including  Jane's  ship  data 
base.  The  program  is  small  (about  15K  bytes),  efficient  (less  than  a second 
for  an  average  query),  tolerant  of  non-perfect  (ungrammatical)  input  queries, 
and  adaptable  to  any  data  management  system  that  supports  a query  language. 

4.  APPROACH:  We  propose  to  incorporate  the  NLI  in  the  core  of  the  testbed  on 
the  PDP-1Q  (or  PDP-11  if  so  desired),  using  an  INTERLISP  or  LISP  versions 
existing  on  these  machines.  This  process  will  take  place  in  three  phases  with 
the  ultimate  goal  of  being  able  to  process  English  queries  directed  to  the 
testbed  data  base  described  in  NELC  Technical  Note  J732. 

Phase  1:  In  this  phase,  an  appropriate  subset  of  the  NELC  data  base  (in 

Technical  Note  J732)  will  be  "conceptualized  and  semantically  described  on  the 
existing  NLI  prototype.  This  phase  will  culminate  with  a demonstration,  on  our 
prototype  in  which  English  queries  to  the  data  base  will  be  accepted  and  an 
equivalent  query  in  the  data  management  query  language  will  be  produced  (the 
current  version  produces  TDMS-like  queries).  This  phase  will  require  3-4  man- 
months  of  effort. 

Phase  2:  The  Installation  of  the  prototype  on  a PDP-10  (nr  PDP-11)  at  NELC. 

Since  there  are  several  differences  between  versions  of  LISP  or  INTERLISP, 
some  changes  will  be  required  to  the  prototype  version  before  installation. 

The  effort  for  this  installation  is  estimated  at  1-2  man-months.  If  by  this 
time  a specific  data  management  system  has  been  identified  for  the  testbed, 
then  a "translator"  to  generate  queries  in  this  DMS  query  language  will  be 
implemented.  Since  the  translator  is  a separate  module  from  the  language 
analizer,  its  cost  is  only  incremental.  This  task  is  estimated  at  about  4-5 
man-months . 


33 


Phase  3;  In  this  phase,  the  NLI  will  be  interfaced  with  the  DMS  for  the  pur- 
pose of  retrieving  actual  data.  The  complete  description  of  the  data  base 
for "the  language  analyzer  will  be  produced,  and  mechanisms  required  to  tune  _ 
the  system  for  the  specific  needs  of  users  of  the  data  base  will  be  added.  A 
rough  estimate  jf  this  phase  effort  is  4-7  man-months. 

5 VALUE  TO  FLEET : Permitting  command  and  control  personnel  in  different 

levels  "and  capacities  to  extract  data  base  information  through  tne  use  of  _ 
natural  language.  The  potential  value  is  in  cost  reduction  in  personnel  train 
ing,  in  the  elimination  of  the  need  to  use  rigid  formats  in  many  applications, 
and  in  the  availability  of  the  system  to  the  casual  computer-naive  user. 


I 


1 


c 


APPLICATION  22 

1 . TITLE:  ADADTATION  OF  OPLANS  TO  ACTUAL  FORCE  DISPOSITION 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Deductive  Data  Management,  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Derive  a modification  that  will  give  an  OPLAN  that  will 

make  most  effective  use  of  available  forces  in  obtaining  OPLAN  objectives. 

Utilize  deductive  inference  to  discover  the  consequences  of  change  in  available 
forces  on  achievement  of  OPLAN  objectives.  Aid  situation  assessment  and  decision 
making  processes  by  selective  presentation  of  evidence  for  (and  against;  various 
alternatives. 

Move  NELC  unclassified  data  base  into  SDC's  Deductive  Data  Management  pro- 
totype and  construct  general  statements  (premises)  characterizing  a simulated 
OPLAN.  Utilize  ."What  if"  queries  to  explore  consequences  of  variations  in 
available  forces  on  attainment  of  various  OPLAN  objectives.  Iterative  refine- 
ment and  expansion  of  the  file  of  general  statements  to  represent  increasingly 
more  realistic  OPLAN  sitautions. 

4.  APPROACH : 

a.  First  Phase  (small  scale  experiments  with  NELC  data  base  subset)  - 3 
man-months . 

b.  Second  Phase  (demonstrate  all  major  functions)  - 12  to  18  man-months. 

c.  Full  scale  capability  (with  connection  to  DATACOMPUTER  data  base  and 
Natural  Language  Processor)  - 18  man-months. 

d.  Operational  experiments  - ? 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  (Similar  to  application  10  in  ACCAT  Note  #1).  Would  pro- 

vide"  commanders  with  the  ability  to  rapidly  assess  the  feasibility  and  likely 
consequences  of  adapting  existing  OPLANs  to  forces  at  hand.  Would  enhance 
quick  reaction  capability  in  dynamically  changing  environments  and  would  provide 
information  of  use  in  refining  and  elaborating  OPLANs. 


APPLICATION  23 


1 • TITLE:  RADIO  CHANNEL  ALLOCATION 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Heuristic  Programming,  Advanced  Command  and  Control  Decision 

Aids 

3 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  Navy  is  currently  experiencing  radio  channel 

interference.  The  cause  of  this  interference  is  not  a lack  of  available  channels, 
but** a lack  of  efficient  allocation  of  the  available  channels.  It  is  desirable 

thv  t the  Navy  have  an  automated  charnel  allocation  program  that  could  use  the 
Navy  data  base  to  assign  channels  to  minimize  channel  interference.  The  Navy 
allocation  problem  can  be  modeled  as  a graph  coloring  problem  by  imagining  radio 
broadcast  locations  as  the  verticles  of  a graph,  with  a common  edge  in  the  graph 
if  the  two  locations  would  interfere  with  each  other  if  they  were  to  use  the  same 
channel.  Then  a channel  allocation  is  a graph  coloring  if  no  two  broadcast 
locations  are  assigned  channels  so  that  they  interfere.  Recent  findings  in  graph 
theory  pertaining  to  graph  colorings  would  be  incorporated  into  a cot  puter  program 
that  would  assess  the  Navy  data  base  to  obtain  ship  locations,  and  allocate  radio 
channels  that  minimize  channel  interference. 

4.  APPROACH:  4 man-months  to  have  an  initial  version  operational,  an  additional 

4 man -month's  to  test  and  compare  various  other  heuristic  algorithms  for  optimal 
performance. 

4.  VALUE  TO  THE  FLEET:  The  proposed  program  would  provide  the  Navy  with  a 

capability  of  rapidly  changing  the  allocation  of  radio  channels  during  wartime 
operations  thus  reducing  the  interference  produced  by  enemy  electronic  counter- 
measures while  allowing  the  fleet  to  maintain  effective  communications  between 
ships. 


APPLICATION  24 

1.  TITLE:  WORK  AND  INFORMATION  FLOW  SIMULATION  MODEL 


2.  TECHNOLOGY : Adaptive  Decision  Aids,  Simulation  Modelling 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Simulate  the  effect  of  fleet  readiness  changes  in 

the  staffing,  use  of  automated  equipment,  and  priority  assignment  during  the 
routine  and  wartime  operation  of  Command  and  Control  processes.  The  simulation 
model  written  in  SIMULA  would  be  interactive  and  easy  for  an  uninitiated  user  to 
understand  and  use.  It  would  be  general  enough  to  al1  "*w  the  modelling  of  many 
diverse  Command  and  Control  processes.  The  model  would  include  the  capability 
to  allow  the  user  to  interactively  make  structural  changes  in  his  model  during 
simulation  run  time  and  to  interactively  save  the  state  of  the  model  for  use  as 

a starting  point  for  future  simulations.  The  model  could  be  used  to  simulate 
many  Command  and  Control  environments,  including  the  following: 

a.  The  flow  of  message  traffic  through  a global  communications  network. 

b.  The  flow  of  messages  th'  ough  a single  station  of  a communications  network. 

c.  The  flow  of  supplies  in  a logistics  network. 

d.  The  flow  of  ships  through  a shipyard. 

e.  The  flow  of  paper  in  a command  center. 

SDC  has  constructed  and  installed  such  a system  for  the  state  of  California's 
Fingerprint  identification  activity. 

4.  APPROACH : 4 man-monthsto  complete  an  initial  version  of  the  model  and  8 

man-months  to  provide  the  final  version  including  all  proposed  features. 

5.  VALUE  TO  THE  FLEET : The  model  would  provide  a Commander  with  a powerful 

tool  to  assist  him  in  the  decision  process.  A Commander  could  evaluate  the  effect 
on  operations  of  replacing  manual  processes  with  automatic  or  semi-automatic 
processes  or  of  altering  the  priority  assignments.  During  wartime  operations, 
the  effect  of  damage  could  be  measured  and  damage  control  strategies  studied 
quickly.  Within  the  ACCAT  application  program  itself,  the  model  will  be  a valuabl 
aid  in  evaluating  the  effect  on  work  and  information  flow  of  various  proposed 
operational  uses  of  ACCAT  application  programs. 


37 


APPLICATION  25 

1.  TITLE:  AUTOMATIC  DATA  RE-DISTRIBUTOR  FOR  DISTRIBUTED  PROCESSING  SYSTEMS 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Distributed  Data  Bases,  Information  Input  Processing 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Where  users  require  rapid  interactive  response  from^ 

a data  base  management  system  on  a network  of  distributed  processors,  the  optimal 
data  organization  is  the  construction  of  local,  single  processor  data  base  sub- 
sets of  active  data  and  the  maintenance  of  an  index  of  entry  keys  of  other  data 
base  subsets  to  be  used  for  global  queries.  By  the  relatively  simple  expedient 
of  logging  and  flagging  all  data  base  communications  between  processors  we  can 
determine  the  selection  of  data  needed  at  each  processor.  There  are  two  variations 
for  creating  data  base  subsets,  different  data  base  structural  definitions  and 
same  definitions  with  different  entries.  The  largest  unit  of  data  per  index 
retrieval  is  a single  entry  (record)  and  at  the  same  time  the  smallest  unit  of 
data  on  which  a complete  qualification  can  be  made  is  an  entry;  thus  we  must 

move  an  entire  entry  when  migrating  data.  When  a request  for  data  is  sent  to 
another  processor,  the  reply  is  intercepted  and  returned  as  both  a reply  to  the 
user  and  a temporary  update  of  the  entry  to  the  local  data  base  subset  with  source, 
time,  and  status  flags.  The  original  entry  is  flagged  also.  Then  the  next 
request  by  the  user  will  be  processed  locally.  There  are  a variety  of  requests 
which  will  not  trigger  data  movement.  A request  for  all  ships  names  will  not 
move  all  ships  data.  Periodically  an  entry  status  list  will  be  sent  among  all 
processors  and  the  original  entries  will  be  deleted  and  temporary  entries  will 
become  permanent.  While  there  are  a number  of  other  activities  to  handle,  this 
method  can  be  implemented  by  adding  a small,  simple  monitoring  program  to  the 
data  base  management  system  together  with  the  flag  items  needed  for  control. 

Data  flow  will  be  kept  at  a minimum. 

4.  VALUE  TO  THE  FLEET:  While  test  bed  data  bases  will  be  few  and  readily 

maintained  by  hand  iTTthe  beginning,  their  number,  size,  complexity  and  distri- 
bution will  increase  rapidly  as  they  become  more  usable.  The  automatic  re- 
distribution will  be  a requirement,  particularly  for  following  ships  and  crews 
from  port  to  port. 


38 


APPLICATION  26 


- • 4 


it  3tt 

* 


1 • TITLE:  AUTOMATED  DISTRIBUTION  OF  TASKS  IN  A DISTRIBUTED  PROCESSOR  ENVIRONMENT 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Distributed  Information  Processing 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  SDC  has  developed  a program  verifier  to  ana^ze  the 
source  code  and  deduce  premises  for  proving  the  correctness  of  program  auto- 
matically. As  a side  effect  of  this  analysis,  those  items  shared  by  several 
routines  or  by  external  programs  are  noted.  The  format  of  all  items  input  and 
output  are  also  noted.  -DC  has  developed  a distributed  processor  language  with 
special  features  for  both  keeping  the  status  of  dependent  jobs  running  on  separate 
processors  and  for  synchronising  the  sharing  of  data  between  jobs.  The  sharing 

of  data  and  control  information  in  a central  processor  isaccompl ished  by  para- 
meter passing  in  subroutine  calls,  by  I/O  to  work  files,  or  by  accessing  a 
common  area  in  memory.  To  perform  the  same  data  sharing  in  a multiple  processor 
environment  the  data  is  sent  by  communications  channel  in  response  to  requests 
for  data  over  the  same  channel.  I/O  sharing  presents  no  more  problems  in  dis- 
tributed processing  than  in  central  processing  with  access  deadlocks,  the 
principal  issue,  being  solved  by  using  a priority  scheme.  Data  Base  access  is 
a well  solved  problem  and  can  most  easily  be  provided  by  assigning  one  processor 
to  manage  data  bases  and  service  data  base  requests  from  the  other  processor  jobs. 

The  method  we  will  establish  by  combining  known  solutions  with  new  develop- 
ments will  follow  these  steps: 

a.  Scar,  the  source  code  of  all  programs  of  a system  we  wish  to  move  from  a 
central  processor  to  a distributed  processor. 

b.  Note  all  program  references  to  shared  data  and  shared  I/O. 

c.  Substitute  communication  request/reply  subroutines  for  shared  data  access 
code. 

d.  Allocate  separate  routines  to  processors  and  establish  synchronization 
control  procedures  to  run  the  distributed  processor  system. 

This  method  can  be  re-applied  as  often  as  necessary  to  reflect  changes  in 
the  distributed  ^ocessing  environment  of  the  programming  system. 

4.  VALUE  TO  THE  FLEET : The  test  bed  center  plans  to  use  distributed  processing 
techniques  on  many  programs  which  were  designed  for  centralized  processing.  We 
believe  that  this  change  from  centralized  to  distributed  processing  will  be 
expensive  and  time  consuming  without  the  method  described  here. 


APPLICATION  27 

1.  TITLE:  MULTILEVEL  SECURE  SPEECH 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Secure  Voice,  Encryption,  Secure  Kernel 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  ARPA  has  had  an  on  going  series  of  projects  to 

develop  a mechanism  for  economically  transmitting  speech  over  packet  switched 
networks.  Such  transmission  has  been  demonstrated  both  at  Lincoln  Labs  and 

at  LSI  with  different,  but  compatible,  systems.  Both  systems  employ  combinations 
of  general  purpose  and  special  purpose  computers  to  compress  the  bandwidth  re- 
quired and  to  manage  the  interface  to  the  ARPA  net.  At  least  the  ISI  system 
is  capable  of  processing  simultaneous  conversations.  In  a secure  system  it  is 
necessary  to  assure  that  there  is  no  mechanism  within  the  speech  processor  that 
allows  a user  to  eavesdrop  on  other  conversations. 

Two  measures  are  required  to  assure  that  conversations  can  not  be  monitored 
or  mixed  in  the  communications  network  or  the  general  purpose  computers  in  the 
speech  processors.  These  measures  provide  unique  encryption  of  individual 
speech  streams  and  assure  separation  of  speech  streams  wherever  speech  must  be 
represented  in  clear  text  form.  Ultimately  the  program  provides  for  handling 
separate  voice  streams  at  different  security  levels. 

ENCRYPTION:  This  effort  is  an  experiment  in  end-to-end  voice  privacy  based  upon 

new  advances  in  communication  security  protocols  a, id  the  NBS  data  encryption 
algorithm.  The  approach  would  use  an  SDC  product  called  a network  cryptographic 
device  (NCD) , adapted  to  interface  between  the  ARPANET  IMP  and  PDP  11  speech 
processors,  in  order  to  provide  privacy  between  speech  streams.  The  NCDs  pro- 
vide separation  between  individual  speech  streams  from  the  output  interface  of 
the  source  host  to  the  input  of  the  destination  host  (i.e.  End-to-3id  encryption). 
Individual  conversations  are  encrypted  by  unique,  dynamically  changed  keys  so 
that  misrouted  packets  can  not  be  decrypted. 

Note  that  the  NCD  provides  a different  level  of  privacy  than  the  PLIs  pro- 
vide. PLIs  are  dedicated  to  providing  communications  between  a specific  pair  of 
hosts.  NCDs  cancommuni cate  with  several  hosts.  PLIs  encrypt  all  packets  with 
the  same  key,  providing  no  stream  separations.  NCDs  use  dynamically  changed 
keys. 

KERNALIZATION : This  effort  is  an  experiment  to  demonstrate  the  guaranteed 

separation  of  conversations  within  the  speech  processor.  Security  sensitive 
portions  of  a general  purpose  operating  system  can  be  collected  into  a module 
called  a security  kernel.  A mathematical  proof  can  be  constructed  to  show  that 
the  security  kernal  performs  its  specified  functions  correctly  and  observes 
security  criteria.  The  purpose  of  the  security  kernel  in  the  speech  processor 
is  to  guarantee  that  no  process  whose  functions  have  not  been  mathematically 
verified  can  handle  more  than  one  clear  text  speech  stream,  or  make  unauthorized 
copies  of  the  stream.  Thus,  separation  of  independent  streams  can  be  assured. 

At  least  one  proven  security  kernel  exists  for  the  PDP  11/45.  The  kernalization 
task  involves  interfacing  the  operating  system  used  by  the  speech  processor  to 
the  kernel . 

4.  APPROACH  AND  ESTIMATED  COST:  ENCRYPTION:  18  man-months.  A demonstration^ 

utilizing  two  network  sites  can  occur  after  four  elapsed  months.  The  demo  will 
show  tije  transmission  of  separately  encrypted  streams  of  text.  Encryption  of 
speech  streams  will  be  demonstrated  later.  The  man  month  estimate  includes 


40 


the  equivalent  cost  of  the  use  of  two  NCDs  for  1 year. 

KERNALIZATI ON : Feasibility  Study  — 5 man-months.  At  the  end  of  the  feasibility 

study  a report  will  be  delivered  covering  the  feasibility  of  kernalizing  one  of 
the  speech  processor  operating  systems,  and  detail  time  and  cost  estimates  for 
completing  the  kernal ization  task. 

Specification,  implementation  and  test  --  2 1/2  man-years  (scoping  estimate 
only).  Some  of  the  labor  in  this  period  will  be  subcontracted  to  the  contractor 
developing  the  speech  compressor.  This  aspect  will  be  clarified  in  the  feasi- 
bility study. 

Other  Direct  Costs  — PDP  11/45  computer  time  1/2  prime  shift  during  imple- 
mentation and  test. 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Provides  a demonstration  that  individuals  with  access  to  a 

speech  processor  can  carry  on  private  conversations.  This  protects  against  both 
overt  penetration  attempts  and  browsing.  Secure  and  private  speech  can  be  used 
in  conjunction  with  mixed  media  conferencing  or  by  itself.  The  possibilities  in 
a tactical  situation  are  obvious. 


i 


J 

a 

A. 

«*. 

v’l 

Jfc 

* 


I 


APPLICATION  28 


1 . TULL:  DATA  TABLET  INPUT  FOR  EDITING  AND  MESSAGE  PROCESSING 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Intelligent  Terminals,  Character  Recognition,  Information 

Input  Processing 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Rapid  and  accurate  message  and  text  creation,  editing, 

formatting,  and  other  manipulations  require  methods  and  techniques  that  are  eerily 
learned,  used,  and  properly  human  engineered.  In  a Command  and  Control  environ- 
ment, where  stress  can  become  exceedingly  high,  errors  and  the  resultant  delays 
(or  worse)  can  be  costly.  Most  keyboard  oriented  text  processing  systems  (editors 
and  formatters)  require  a considerable  amount  of  skill  and  knowledge  by  the  user 

to  take  advantage  of  their  full  power.  To  change,  delete,  or  add  a word  to  an 
existing  text  requires  a considerable  number  of  keystrokes,  many  of  which  are 
concerned  with  locating  the  line  and  position  of  the  word  and  supplying  sufficient 
context  so  that  the  command  is  unambiguous.  The  addition  of  a data  tablet,  display, 
and  software  to  an  intelligent  terminal  would  permit  a user  to  perform  such 
functions  rapidly,  accurately,  and  "naturally"  ty  permitting  direct  action  to  be 
taken  on  the  item  to  be  modified. 

SDC  has  had  extensive  experience  with  data  tablets,  their  integration  into 
an  interactive  environment,  and  has  developed  character  recognition  techniques 
that  are  directly  applicable  to  the  development  of  a graphic/data  tablet  operated 
text  processing  system. 

To  provide  a fully  comprehensive  user  interface  for  an  intelligent  terminal 
implies  the  additional  function  of  recognizing  connected  writing  (cursive  script) 
in  addition  to  recognizing  individual  symbols  and  letters.  To  date,  the  capa- 
bility to  do  so  has  not  been  brought  to  an  operational  level  and  requires  additional 
research  to  do  so.  We  believe  that  the  existing  SDC  developed  character  recog- 
nition technique  can  be  extended  to  provide  this  function. 

4.  APPROACH : Phase  1,  integrate  data  tablet  and  display  to  a PDP  11  and  convert 

character  recognizer  for  demonstration  and  evaluation  - 12  man-months  (3  people 
for  4 months).  Phase  2,  interface  character  recognizer  to  text  editing,  for- 
matting and  message  system  - 12  man-months  (conditional  on  the  difficulty  of 
adapting  existing  editor,  etc.  to  operate  via  graphic  input).  Phase  3,  development 
and  demonstration  of  cursive  script  recognition  - 24  man-months  (can  be  done  in 
paral lei  with  Phase  2) . 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Increased  efficiency  and  accuracy  of  those  responsible  for 

creating,  manipulating  and  transmitting  messages  and  other  text  material  in  a 
Command  and  Control  environment  can  improve  overall  function  as  well  as  avoid 
the  potential  penalty  associated  with  errors  and  delays.  Ease  of  use  of  such  a 
system  minimizes  training  requirements  and  the  probability  of  error  under  stressful 
conditions . 


APPLICATION  29 

1.  TITLE:  OVER-THE-HORIZON  WEAPONS  PRE  FIRE  DECISIONS 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Large  data  bases.  Decision  Aids,  Correlation 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Tactical  commanders  possess  weapons  which  have  a 
range  greater  than  present  day  shipboard  sensors.  To  effectively  use  these 
weapons  the  OTC  must  have  OTH  targeting  information.  This  OTH  information 

is  generally  not  continuously  available  to  the  OTC  nor  under  his  total  control 
(he  may  have  dedicated  control  of  this  OTH  information  source  for  a certain 
fraction  of  an  hour).  The  OTC  needs  a planning  and  decision  aid  which  takes  into 
account  the  ship  positions  in  the  target  area  (both  hostiles  and  neutrals), 
when  his  OTH  sensors  are  available  to  him,  possible  and/or  probable  enemy/neutral 
ship  movements,  best  estimate  of  the  enemy's  capability  to  fire  his  OTH  weapons,  etc 
Based  on  this  information  the  OTC  could,  for  example,  set  a course  which  would 
minimize  the  capability  of  the  enemy  to  target  him  while  putting  his  own  force 
in  an  optimal  targeting  position  when  the  OTH  targeting  asset  is  next  available. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  The  fleet  commander  now  has  limited  means  to  do  near  term 

planning  involving  correlation  of  OTH  targets,  probable  COA  and  the  ability  to 
compute  surveillance  satellite  revisit  times  (both  ours  and  theirs).  This  pre- 
fire planning  is  necessary  to  gain  the  best  possible  targeting  information  while 
denying  the  same  to  the  enemy. 


T 


" — — — ^ — ' 


APPLICATION  30 

1.  TITLE:  SAILING  DIRECTIONS  COMPUTATION 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Large  Data  Base  Management,  Navigation,  Displays 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Given  any  two,  ocean  or  littoral  positions  on  the 

globe  this  program  would  compute  sailing  courses  based  on  sailing  directions  for 
mariners  published  by  either  the  U.  S.  Defense  Mapping  Agency  Hydrographic  Center 
or  the  U.  S.  Naval  Oceanographic  Office,  and  standard  Navigation  policy. 

4.  VALI E TO  THE  FLEET:  Results  of  this  program  would  enable  task  force  commanders 
to  have  pre-plotted  sailing  courses  presented  to  them  for  their  evaluation. 

Results  of  this  program  could  be  used  in  surveillance  work  in  which  one  must 
estimate  the  intended  sailing  courses  of  ships  of  interest.  This  program  could 

be  called  on  by  the  "Single  Ship  Refueling"  program  to  give  more  accurate  sailing 
times  and  probable  courses. 


APPLICATION  31 

1.  TITLE:  SINGLE  SHIP  REFUELING  PROBLEM 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  L ^ge  Data  Base  Management,  Navigation,  AI 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Surveillance  reports  for  a soviet  or  soviet  block 

ship  have  stopped  coming  in.  Based  on  best  estimates  of  on-board  fuel  supplies 
and  last  reported  position  course  and  speed,  where  would  the  ship  be  most  likely 
to  refuel?  Data  bases  would  have  to  be  access  to  determine  refueling  ports  and 
locations  of  soviet  block  orders.  Once  these  locations  nave  been  determined 
probable  sailing  course  and  ETA  could  be  computed. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Would  give  the  operational  commander  the  capability  to 

optimize  strategy  and  actions  on  the  basis  of  likely  enemy  ship  movements. 


APPLICATION  32 


1.  TITLE: 


TARGET  CORRELATION  AND  IDENTIFICATION 


2.  TECHNOLOGY : Intelligent  Terminals,  Production  Rules,  Decision  Aids,  Distri- 

buted Data  Bases,  Digital  Data  Transmission 


3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION : The  at-sea  forces  have  the  sensors  and  will  have  the 

computer  capability  to  perform  track  corr  Nation  of  targets  within  the  sensor 
range  of  their  forces.  This  correlation  is  based  primarily  on  state  vector 
information  (position  and  velocity).  The  information  received,  though,  often 
contains  identification  information  which  will  be  beyond  the  capability  of  the 
at-sea  forces  to  process  locally.  This  data  could  be  processed  against  the 
shore  data  bases  to  aid  in  the  identification  of  contacts. 


4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET : By  using  the  shore  establishments'  extensive  data  bases 

of  enemy  platform  parameters  and  knowledge  of  the  general  location  of  ocean 
contacts,  the  identification  of  targets  of  interest  to  the  at-sea  commander 
may  be  augmented,  giving  the  at-sea  commander  a better  picture  of  his  environment 
which  can  help  him  perform  his  many  missions  more  effectively. 


APPLICATION  33 


1.  TITLE:  MISSION  PLANNING 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Production  Rules,  Decision  Aids,  Distributed  Data  Bases 

3 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  One  of  the  major  responsibilities  of  the  at-sea 

commander  is  mission  planning.  Planning  can  require  extensive  amounts  of 
information,  e.g.,  descriptions  of  port  facilities,  airports,  local  governments, 
weather,  energy  and  own  resources,  etc.  There  is  too  much  information  for  it 
all  to  be  stored  and  used  efficiently  at  sea.  Data  bases  distributed  ashore 
could  be  queried  to  obtain  information  required  for  making  decisions.  Production 
rules  and  other  decision  aids  could  be  used  to  suggest  weapons  mixes  and  tactics. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  More  information  useful  in  mission  planning  would  be 

efficiently  available  to  the  at-sea  commander  and  decision  aids  would  help  in 
making  more  effective  and  timely  plans  and  decisions.  Also  inherent  in  this 
approach  is  an  augmented  capability  in  distributing  the  plans  and  decisions. 


APPLICATION  34 


1.  TITLE:  WHAT- IF  DISPLAY 

2.  TECHNOLOGY : Prediction,  Man-Machine  Interface,  Decision  Aids 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  A display  presents  a graphic  picture  (which  can  be 

formed  using  alphanumeric  characters)  of  own-force  and  detected  hostile  platforms 
The  operator  can  enter  conditions  and  assumptions,  and  ask  questions  such  as: 

"if  all  platforms  maintain  present  speed  and  course,  where  will  they  be  in 

15  minutes?"  The  answer  will  be  displayed.  Time  speedup  can  be  used  to  present 
a graphic  presentation  of  the  activity  which  would  result  if  the  entered  con- 
ditions held.  The  process  can  be  reversed  to  determine  what  the  history  has 
been  if  the  assumptions  are  correct.  The  operator  may  enter  turns,  criteria 
under  which  own  or  hostile  platforms  will  change  course  or  speed,  or  requirements 
that  platforms  avoid  certain  areas  or  approaching  each  other  too  close!''. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET : This  would  provide  a training  aid,  to  be  used  before 

entering  a combat  area  with  canned  scenarios  and  guidance  of  trainees.  It 
would  be  a planning  aid,  to  be  used  both  before  combat  and  also  during  combat 
where  changes  in  previous  plans  were  needed.  It  is  a decision  aid,  showing 

a commander  the  likely  effect  of  his  decisions.  It  is  a measurement  tool, 
showing  how  far  and  how  fast  a platform  can  move  before  reaching  an  area  of 
effectiveness  or  hazard.  It  can  be  used  for  exercises  and  for  gaming  (players 
for  each  side  entering  their  conditions  for  movement  and  their  decisions  as 
the  game  progresses).  The  program  and  display  can  be  extended  to  cover  other 
characteristics  beside  position. 


APPLICATION  35 


1 


TITLE:  SENSOR  AND  WEAPON  COVERAGE 


2.  TECHNOLOGY : Decision  Aids,  Interactive  Terminal 

3 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Own-force  data  base  is  accessed  to  determine  status, 

characteristics  and  parameters  of  sensors  and  weapons  on  each  own  force  platform. 
Hostile-force  data  base  is  accessed  to  obtain  similar  information  on  hostile 
assets  Operator  enters  request  for  display,  indicating  whether  surveillance, 
weaponry  or  other  capability  is  of  interest,  and  the  constraints  involved. 

The  position  of  each  platform  is  displayed,  together  with  boundaries  showing 
coveraqe  of  weapons,  sensors  or  other  capability  as  desired  - such  as  surveillance 
capabilities  against  medium  altitude  air  targets,  or  50%  destruction  capabilities 
of  antisubmarine  weapons  against  deep  subsurface  targets.  This  type  or  aid 
enables  corrmander  to  see  whether  he  can  expect  to  monitor  passage  of  unfriendly 
platforms,  whether  he  will  be  able  to  effect  their  passage,  whether  they  can 
observe  or  attack  his  force  or  all  er  some  of  its  elements,,  and  what  changes  in 
force  configuration  are  desirable.  The  operator  is  allowed  to  place  conditions 
into  the  presentation  (what  if  sensor  number  five  on  platform  six  loses  10% 
power,  or  what  if  enemy  has  twice  the  range  in  weapon  type  four  as  that  reported 

by  intelligence  sources). 

4.  ESTIMATED  COST: 


a.  Definition  of  algorithms  and  preparation  of  program 

b.  Initial  demonstration  using  standard  scenario 


c. 


Eventual  attempt  to  use  actual  exercise  data 


A fleet  or  force  level  commander  wants  to  know  what  he 
knows  and_w?iirTs "uncertain.  A display  which  shows  not  only  the  targetswhich 


5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET: 


KMUWb  CIIIU  wnau  n unvu  turn.  1,-1, 

have  been  detected  and  tracked  but  also  the  area  beyond  which  his  sensors  lack 
coverage  provides  him  with  a feel  for  the  kind  of  surprises  an  enemy  may  present. 
Display  of  hostile  coverage  capability  allows  deceptive  ta<  s -0  be  more 
effectively  orchestrated. 


49 


APPLICATION  36 

1.  TITLE:  IN-PORT  TRAINING  AND  SHIP  OPERATIONAL  PROGRAM  (SOP)  EXERCISER 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Digital  generation  and  realistic,  real-time  simulation  of 

maneuvering  targets,  Ownship  (O/S)  motion,  and  digital  outputs  of  shipboard 
sensors,  such  as  Radars,  Sonars,  IFF  (Interrogation  Friend  or  Foe),  ESM 
(Electronic  Support-Measures),  ECM  (Electronic  Counter-Measures),  and 
Navigation. 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  To  provide  realistic  and  real-time  multi-threat 

and  multi -sensor  stimuli  and  digital  input  data  tor  the  land-based  or  in-port 
exercise  of  NTDS  Ship  Operational  Programs  (SOP)  and  for  the  pierside  training 
of  the  ships'  CIC  operators.  A simulated,  coordinated,  dynamic  scenario  would 
require  real-time  generation  of  the  following  digital  parameters: 

a.  Maneuvering  Targets: 

(1)  Airborne 

(2)  Surface 

(3)  Subsurface 

b.  Ownship  (0/S)  Motion: 

(1)  0/S  Position  and  Velocity 

(2)  0/S  Gyro  output  (Heading,  Pitch,  Roll) 

c.  Simulated  Digital  Outputs  of  0/S  Sensors,  Such  As: 

(1)  Radars  (3-Dimensional,  2-Dimensional,  Gun-Control,  Missile-Control) 

(2)  Sonars 

(3)  IFF  Equipment 

(4)  ESM  and  ECM  Equipment 

(5)  Navigation  Receivers  (Manual  inputs  by  the  Navigator,  OMEGA, 

Satellite  Navigation  (Doppler),  NAVSTAR/GPS  (Global  Positioning  System)). 

This  SOP  and  Training  Exerciser  will  check  out  the  following  CIC  operator 
functions : 

- Detection 

- Tracking 

- Correlation 

- Identification 

- Classification 

- Threat  Evaluation 

- Weapon  Assignment 

- Aircraft  and  Ship  Control 

- Situation  and  Status  Reporting 

- Data  Extraction  (on-line,  during  the  exercise) 

- Data  Reduction  (off-line,  after  the  exercise) 

5.  VALUE  TO  FLEET: 

a.  Approximates  Fleet  Exercises:  Fleet  Exercises  are  expensive  and  non- 

repeatable . Moreover,  ships  at  sea  have  a specific  role  and  often  can- 
not deviate  from  that  role  to  perform  a variety  of  training  exercises. 


50 


Provides  a realistic  test  of  the  SOP:  Only  the  sensors  and  inputs  are 

simulated,  the  actual  configurations  of  CIC  operations  of  men,  computers 
and  displays  are  real . 

Provides  realistic  training  for  CIC  Operators:  Rapid  turnover  of  Navy 

personnel  requires  a continued  training  effort,  whenever  possible.  This 
pier-side  training  would  be  realistic  and  cost-effective. 

May  au  jnvnt  or  replace  existing  simulation  systems,  such  as  the  JITF 
(Joint"  Interface  Test  Force)  Simulation  System,  which  performs  similar 
pierside  simulation  and  exercise  functions.  The  JITF  Simulation  System 
connects  one  or  more  ships  with  the  central  simulation  generation 
facility,  via  voice-grade  telephone  lines,  to  provide  multiunit  on- 
board tactics  training. 


APPLICATION  37 

1.  TITLE!:  SEARCH  PATHS 

2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Theory  of  Optimal  Search,  Production  Rules,  Intelligent 

Terminals,  Distributed  Data  Bases 

3 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Different  searches  require  different  search  strate 

qies  and  paths  depending  on  the  goals  and  constraints  of  the  search.  For  ex- 
ample, a SAR  operation  could  have  time  as  a very  critical  constraint  but  have 
limited  resources  with  which  to  perform  the  search.  However,  in  a search  f>r  a 
lost  nuclear  device  time  may  not  be  as  critical  as  maximizing  the  probabi 1 i ty 
of  finding  it,  with  a minimum  expenditure  of  resources.  This  would  be  the 
case  if  the  lost  device  landed  in  a third  world  country  that  didn  t relish  the 
idea  of  having  the  Marines  land  to  help  find  the  device.  Moving  targets  require 
quite  different  strategies  than  stationary  ones.  Strategies  may  also  be  adap- 
tive depending  on  the  results  of  areas  searched  and  dynamically  changing 
resources . 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Fleet/area  commanders  would  have  the  capability  to  perform 

a variety  of  searches,  under  varying  conditions  and  constraints  with  an  educated 
estimate  of  probability  of  success  for  a given  time.  He  can  also  ascertain 
the  effect  of  committing  additional  resources  to  the  task. 


APPLICATION  38 

1.  TITLE:  ENVIRONMENTALLY  INFLUENCED  SAILING  DIRECTION 


2.  TECHNOLOGY:  Distributed  Data  Bases,  Navigation,  Production  Rules 

3.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  Route  ships  to  avoid  storms,  high  sea  states, 

landlrasses,  avoid  detection,  conserve  fuel,  certain  ship  classes  containing 
deck  cargo  cannot  sail  in  sea  states  greater  than  k or  cannot  fit  through  the 
Panama  Canal.  This  program  would  be  required  to  access  a variety  of  data _ 
bases  (weather,  geographical,  etc.)  and  computer  programs  (sailing  directions 
computation,  detection  profiles,  satellite  ephemerides,  etc.,)  and  to  display 
optimal  and  sub-optimal  sailing  courses  for  the  commanders  approval.  Sailing 
times  would  also  be  computed. 

4.  VALUE  TO  FLEET:  Based  on  weather,  intelligence  and  other  timely  information 

a force  comander  or  fleet  cine  can  use  this  program  for  both  mission  planning 
and  execution. 


53 


.TV 


_ 'zSjL  ....  ^ ^ ..  „ . 


APPLICATION  39 


1.  TITLE:  CENSOR  MANAGEMENT/TASKING 

2.  OPERATIONAL  FUNCTION:  Operational  Planning,  Resource  Availability  Planning 

3.  TECHNOLOGY : Query  Language,  Distributed  Data  Base 

4.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  tasking  of  sensors  by  the  operational  commander 

which  are  not  in  his  direct  purview  of  authority  can  be  supported  by  knowledge 
of  sensor  capability,  position,  and  performance  status.  The  management  function 
further  requires  correct  procedures  and  routing  for  tasking  requests.  The 
decision  to  request  employment  of  an  overhead  photographic  reconnaissance  plat- 
form to  support  mission  objectives  can  be  reinforced  by  knowledge  of  sensor 
parameters  in  terms  of  availability,  time  of  arrival,  time  of  information 
availability,  expect  accuracy/resolution , etc. 

5.  APPROACH: 

a.  Develop  data  base  of  sensor  capabilities  and  status. 

b.  Apply  query  language  and  computational  routines  to  assist  in  utilization 
decision. 

c.  Develop  guidance  assist  for  requesting  sensor  employment. 


54 


W i iij'pipj. . jsis  m 


APPLICATION  40 

1-  TITLE:  SENSOR  OPTIMIZATION 

2.  OPERATIONAL  FUNCTION:  Operational  Planning,  Computational  Support 

3.  TECHNOLOGY:  Query  Language 

4.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION  : The  performance  of  own-force  sensors  is  dependent 

on  tFiF  envi  ronmental  conditions  in  which  they  operate  as  well  as  the  status  of 
the  individual  sensors.  Coverage  areas  of  in-place  sonobuoys  as  a function  of 
the  sea  environment  is  one  example.  Sensors  are  also  subject  to  mutual  inter- 
ference. The  optimization  process  consists  of  sensor  assessment,  selection  and 

employment. 

5 . APPROACH : 

a.  From  a data  base  consisting  of  sensor  capability,  status,  location,  and 
schedule,  a guery  technigue  will  allow  guick  assessment  of  resource 
availability  and  best  application. 

b.  Computational  routines  will  be  applied  to  sensor  configurations  for 
best  placement.  The  routines  are  determined  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  sensor,  its  position  in  the  sensor  field,  and  its  sensitivity  to 
envi ronment. 


APPLICATION  41 


1.  TITLE:  TACTICAL  EM  UTILIZATION 

2.  OPERATIONAL  FUNCTION:  Operational  Planning 

3.  TECHNOLOGY : Query  Language,  Decision  Aids 

4.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  optimum  utilization  of  the  electromagnetic 

spectrum  is  dependent  on  the  awareness  of  the  needs  of  the  platform  functional 
tasks  (e.g.  detection,  location,  identification,  information  transfer,  counter- 
measures, etc.),  the  nature  of  the  threat  to  the  EM  operation,  the  character- 
istics of  the  EM  self-interference  (EMI),  and  the  availability  of  monitor  and 
control  techniques. 

5.  APPROACH: 


a.  Develop  data  base  of  typical  EM  radiation  and  reception  equipment  and 
capabil ities . 


b. 


c. 


d. 


Develop  data  base  of  interference  characteristics. 


Develop  decision  aids  which  assist  first  level  judgment  of  appropriate 
platform  EM  profile  for  given  scenario  conditions. 


Provide  computation  routines  which  support  queries 
profiles  to  meet  changing  tactical  conditions. 


for  alternative  EM 


< 


it  i-:  y^'1*  t 


56 


Jg.  itrWi’W  -iitf -rTir 


APPLICATION  42 


1.  TITLE:  MAN/SYSTEM  INFORMATION  COUPLERS 

2.  OPERATIONAL  FUNCTION:  Display  Support 

3.  TECHNOLOGY : Human  Factors,  Computer  Science 


4.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  general  term  of  cognitive  aspects  deals  with 

the  sensory  capabilities  of  audio,  visual,  and  tactile  perception.  The  opti- 
mum C^  decision  making  is  a system  problem  wherein  best  ways  of  routirg,  dis- 
playing and  using  information  are  a function  of  the  environment  in  which  the 
commander  operates.  Aspects  of  modularity  and  flexibility  in  organization  of 
information  display  are  more  important  than  any  other  factor  in  maintaining 
continuity  of  capability  from  commander  to  commander  and  situation  to  situation. 

5.  CAPABILITY  GOALS: 

a.  Determine  the  optimum  modes  of  coding  information  for  d';  -play  to  enhance 

human  comprehension:  shape,  color,  size,  orientation,  intensity  varia- 

tion, and  others. 

b.  Determine  the  optimum  means  of  coupling  information  elements  to  the 
human  decision  maker  as  a function  of  the  operational  environment. 
Factors  such  as  graphic,  alpha-numeric,  tabularized  geographic  plot, 
narrative  voice,  audible  alarm,  large  group  display,  and  microform  are 
considered. 


APPLICATION  43 


1.  TITLE:  FORCE  DIRECTION 

2.  OPERATIONAL  FUNCTION:  Execution 


3.  TECHNOLOGY:  Decision  Aids,  Query  Language 

4 APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  assignment  of  resources  to  carry  out  ^oper- 

ational plan  is  done  via  operational  orders  and  directives  which  are  usually 
manifested  through  electronic  message  distribution.  The  acknowledgement  of 
such  orders  and  the  subsequent  response  of  the  tasked  forces  is  vnal  to  the 
q2  process.  This  application  concerns  improving  the  timeliness  of  distribution, 
improving  the  accuracy  of  the  bookkeeping  related  to  reporting  feedback,  and 
providing  an  input  for  display  of  force  situation  status. 


5 .  CAPABILITY  GOALS: 

a Provide  message  preparation  aids  which  relate  the  operational  plan  to 
the  specific  characteristics  (location,  means  of  transmission,  acknow- 
ledgement procedure,  etc.)  of  the  assigned  platforn. 

b.  Provide  techniques  for  setting  threshold  limits  for  acknowledgement 
times,  setting  of  critical  junctures  in  time  arid  position  o,  forces, 
and  accommodating  changes  in  force  status  with  respect  to  platform  or 
element  capability. 


6.  APPROACH: 

a.  Develop  data  base  of  critical  parameters  of  assigned  resources. 

b.  Develop  query  language  techniques  to  access  the  resource  allocation 
data  base  and  prepare  message  composition. 

c.  Develop  decision  aids  which  allow  automatic  setting  of  threshold  limits 
dependent  on  situation  unique  characteristics. 

d.  Develop  dynamic  status  indicators  in  alpha-numeric  or  geo  display 
elements . 

7.  RELATED  APPLICATIONS,  OTHER  EFFORTS:  This  application  uses  RA  "Message 

Preparation  Aid"  as  input. 


58 


1.  TITLE:  SIMULATION  EXERCISE 


2.  OPERATIONAL  FUNCTION:  Training  Support 


3.  TECHNOLOGY:  Query  Language,  Heuristic  Programming,  Decision  Aids 


4.  APPLICATION  DEFINITION:  The  training  function  can  be  organized  towards 

improving  skill  levels  of  the  team  (scenario  simulation  and  gaming)  or  towards 
that  of  the  individual  (job  performance  aids).  Thi;  application  addresses  the 
improvement  of  indoctrination  and  training  of  the  individual  in  one  or  more 
predefined  watch  positions  of  a command  control  node.  Application  of  computer 
aided  instruction  techniques  to  predetermined  scenario  conditions  and  utilizing 
the  set  of  applications  tools  will  minimize  user  effectiveness. 


5.  APPROACH: 


a.  Define  the  training  goals  and  the  curriculum  required  to  support  them. 


b.  Develop  self-contained  "scenarios"  which  pertain  to  the  trainee  station. 


c.  Examine  and  evaluate  alternative  application  tools,  e.g.  heuristic 
programming  and  query  langauge,  in  terms  of  improved  comprehension  of 
function  and  improved  timeliness  of  response  on  the  part  of  the  operator. 


APPLICATION  44 


"1 


5.0  REFERENCES 

1.  Volpe,  J.,  et.ai.,  "Advanced  Command  Control  Architectural  Testbed 
(ACCAT)  System  Description,"  (preliminary  title)  to  be  published. 

2.  Earnest,  L.,  et.ai.,  "Recent  Research  in  Artificial  Intelligence  Heuristic 
Programming,  and  Network  Protocols." 

3.  Anderson,  R.H . and  J.J.  Gillogly,  "Rand  Intelligent  Terminal  Agent  (RITA); 
Design  Philosophy,"  R-1809-flRPA,  Feb  1976,  RAND. 

4.  Goldberg,  J.,  et.  al . , "Large  File  Management  Information  Systems," 
Stanford  Research  Institute,  AD-752-507. 

5.  Morgan,  H.L.,  DAISY:  An  Application  Perspective,  University  of  Pennsy- 

lvania, Working  Paper,  75-11-03. 


