UNCLASSIFIED 


F/G  9/2 


NL 


FRENCH  PLANS  FOR  FIFTH  GENERATION  COMPUTER  SYSTEMS 


J.F.  BLACKBURN 


BRANCH 


LONDON 

ENGLAND 


7  DECEMBER  1984 


S 


DT1C 

ELECTE| 
JAN  2  4  £85 


UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


This  document  is  issued  primarily  for  the  information  of  U.S.  Government 
scientific  personnel  and  contractors.  It  is  not  considered  part  of  the  scien¬ 
tific  literature  and  should  not  be  cited  as  such. 


APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE;  DISTRIBUTION  UNLIMITED 


85  01  15  181 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


2.  OOVT  ACCESSION  NO 


R-12-84 


4.  TITLE  (md  Submit) 

French  Plans  for  Fifth  Generation 
Computer  Systems 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 


s.  recipient*;  catalog  number 


5.  TYRE  OF  REPORT  A  PERIOD  COVERED 


Technical 


S.  PERFORMING  ORG.  REPORT  NUMBER 


T.  author^ 


s.  contract  or  GRANT  NUMBERO) 


J.F.  Blackburn 


PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  AODRESS 

US  Office  of  Naval  Research  Branch  Office  London 
Box  39 

FPO  NY  09510 


M.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  ANO  AODRESS 


0.  PROORAM  ELEMENT.  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  A  WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 


12.  REPORT  DATE 


■ 

I 


.  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  A  AOORESST/f  dlUtrtnl  from  Controlling  Ollleo) 


IS-  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

7 


IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (ot  thl,  rtpo rt) 

UNCLASSIFIED 


18a.  DECLASSIFICATION  DOWNGRADING 
SCHEDULE 


18-  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  thi e  Report) 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  the  mbetrect  on toted  It •  Block  20,  If  different  from  Report) 


19.  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  rover  ee  el  do  It  nocoeoorr  end  Identify  by  Sleek  number) 

Computer  science 
Fifth  generation  computers 
Artificial  intelligence 
France 


20.  ABSTRACT  ('Conflnu*  on  rover  ee  ml  do  If  nocooeory  end  Identify  by  block  number) 

7  Since  the  October  1981  announcement  of  Japan's  Fifth  Generation  Projpct, 
the  French  scientific  and  industrial  communities  have  shoyn  an ;  Increased 
interest  in  artificial  Intelligence  languages,  expert  systems,  mafe -computer 
interaction,  novel  computer  structures,  and  knowledge-based  computer  systems. 

This  report  describes  the  French  effort  and  includes  a  survey  of  the 
various  French  initiatives  in  hardware  and  software  technologies  aimed  toward 
fifth  generation  computer  systems  and  applications.  These  separate  projects 


DO  |  JAN*7J  1473  EDITION  OP  I  NOV  •»  IS  OBSOLETE 


S  N  0)02-  LF-  014- 4601 


_ UNCLASSIFIED _ 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGE  (Whtn  Dmtm  tntorod) 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  FAQE  fWMn  Ml  tntm4) 


-Fare  the  National  Projects,  the  Joint  Research  Projects,  the  Centre  National  de 
Recherche  Sclentlflque  Cooperative  Research  Groups,  and  the  Thematic  Research 
Program.  /j> 


Accession  For 

NT  IS  GRAAI 
DTIC  TAB 
Unannounced 
Justif lcatlon. 


By - 

_D1 strlbut 1 on/ _ 

Availability  Codes 
jAvall  and/or 
list  I  Special 


/I'l 


FRENCH  PLANS  FOR  FIFTH  GENERATION  COMPU¬ 
TER  SYSTEMS 

Since  the  October  1981  announcement 
of  Japan's  Fifth  Generation  Project,  the 
French  scientific  and  industrial  com¬ 
munities  have  shown  an  increased  inter¬ 
est  in  artificial  intelligence  (AI) 
languages,  expert  systems,  man-computer 
interaction,  novel  computer  structures, 
and  knowledge-based  computer  systems. 

The  Japanese  Fifth  Generation  Pro¬ 
gram  is  heavily  oriented  toward  AI  ap¬ 
plications.  France  is  currently  active 
in  artificial  intelligence  and  is  devel¬ 
oping  hardware  and  software  components 
and  structures  for  the  design  and  imple¬ 
mentation  of  AI  applications,  which  are 
expected  to  increase  in  importance  dur¬ 
ing  the  next  decade. 

Although  there  is  no  overall  plan 
in  France  that  corresponds  precisely  to 
Japan’s,  parts  of  the  French  effort  cor¬ 
respond  to  the  Japanese  program  (see  ESN 
38-3:125-127  r 1984] ) .  And  while  the 
Japanese  announcement  has  been  a  factor 
in  ministerial  and  industrial  awareness 
of  the  potential  significance  of  AI  ap¬ 
plications,  most  of  the  ongoing  projects 
in  France  originate  from  earlier  work. 
It  should  be  noted,  for  example,  that 
the  Prolog  language  chosen  by  the 
Japanese  for  their  Fifth  Generation 
Project  originated  mainly  in  France. 

There  is  no  single  centrally  man¬ 
aged  project  in  France  that  covers  all 
the  facets  of  the  Japanese  Program.  The 
A Ivey  Program  (ESN  39-1:12-13  r 1985] )  in 
the  UK  and  the  European  Strategic  Plan¬ 
ning  of  Research  and  Development  in 
Information  Technology  (ESPRIT)  program 
( ESN  38-2:69-71  [1984])  of  the  European 
Economic  Community  are  somewhat  closer 
in  organization  to  the  Japanese  program. 
In  France,  research  and  development 
efforts  corresponding  to  the  various 
facets  consist  of  distinct  projects  that 
complement  each  other  in  technical  con¬ 
tent  and  in  scientific  and  industrial 
objectives. 

This  report  describes  the  French 
effort  and  includes  a  survey  of  the 
various  French  initiatives  in  hardware 
and  software  technologies  aimed  toward 


fifth  generation  computer  systems  and 
applications.  These  separate  projects 
are  the  National  Projects,  the  Joint 
Research  Projects,  the  Centre  National 
de  Recherche  Sclentlfique  (CNRS)  Cooper¬ 
ative  Research  Groups  (GRECO) ,  and  the 
Thematic  Research  Program. 

The  National  Projects 

The  French  Ministry  of  Research 
launched  the  concept  of  "filiere"  (a 
French  expression  for  "the  whole  mill") 
in  May  1981.  The  purpose  was  to  make  the 
French  electronics  industry  successful 
and  competitive  in  French  and  world  mar¬ 
kets.  In  order  to  do  so,  it  was  believed 
that  the  French  electronics  industry 
should  master  all  the  technological  com¬ 
ponents  from  basic  technologies  to  soft¬ 
ware  products  and  end  products  incorpo¬ 
rating  hardware  and  software  subsystems. 
These  filieres  cover  vertical  chains  of 
production  from  raw  materials  to  finish¬ 
ed  products  in  sectors  including  energy, 
biotechnology,  and  electronics.  The 
government  attempts  to  coordinate  the 
overall  technical  direction  of  the 
filieres  by  promoting  joint  research 
activities  linking  industry  with  large 
research  organizations  and  univer¬ 
sities. 

To  implement  the  policy  a  committee 
was  appointed  in  the  fall  of  1981  to 
assess  strong  and  weak  points  of  the 
French  industry  in  electronics,  compu¬ 
ters,  software,  and  services  and  to  make 
proposals  for  action.  The  committee  con¬ 
cluded  its  work  in  May  1982.  Proposals 
were  made  for  industrial  strategy,  the 
role  of  nationalized  companies  (Bull, 
Compagnie  General  d ' Electricite  [CGE], 
Matra,  Thompson-CSF) ,  education,  and 
research  and  development.  One  proposal 
was  to  launch  several  R&D  projects, 
called  national  projects,  through  which 
industry  and  public  research  laborator¬ 
ies  should  collaborate  over  a  period  of 
about  3  years  in  the  development  of  pro¬ 
ducts  based  on  advanced  research  proto¬ 
types  projects.  This  objective  is  quite 
similar  to  that  of  the  Alvey  and  ESPRIT 
Programs. 

The  following  themes  for  National 
Projects  have  been  defined: 


1.  Very  large  scale  integration/ 
computer-aided  design  (VLSI/CAD)  tools 

2.  Software  engineering 

3.  Computer-aided  design/computer- 
aided  manufacturing  (CAD/CAM) 

4.  Computer-aided  instruction 

5.  Automatic  translation 

6.  Display  hardware 

7.  Basic  components  and  subsystems 
for  microcomputers  and  minicomputers 

8.  A  supercomputer  project  managed 
by  the  French  Ministry  of  Defense. 

These  projects  began  in  1983,  and  most 
of  them  are  now  in  the  detailed  specifi¬ 
cation  stage.  Descriptions  of  their 
actual  content  and  organization  should 
be  publicly  released  by  early  1985. 

About  150  professionals  from  acade¬ 
mia  and  public  research  and  60  profes¬ 
sionals  from  industry  are  participating 
in  the  national  projects.  More  than  20 
companies,  more  than  a  dozen  departments 
of  government,  and  about  a  dozen  univer¬ 
sities  are  involved  in  the  national 
projects. 

The  work  in  software  engineering  is 
a  good  example  of  a  National  Project 
growing  out  of  previous  work.  Software 
engineering  is  recognized  as  a  key  fac¬ 
tor  in  industrial  and  economic  develop¬ 
ment.  In  1978  the  first  software  engi¬ 
neering  curriculum  appeared  in  France  at 
the  university  of  Rennes,  and  a  national 
software  engineering  committee  was 
established.  The  committee  is  respon¬ 
sible  for:  determining  orientations  and 
priorities  for  R&D  in  software  engineer¬ 
ing  and  making  recommendations  for  pro¬ 
jects  to  be  funded  by  the  Agence  de 
1 ' In forma tique. 

The  committee  consists  of  experts 
drawn  from  public  research  laboratories, 
computer  manufacturers,  software  houses, 
and  users  from  industry  (electronics, 
avionics,  automotive  industry,  and 
others) . 

During  the  past  4  years,  about  50 
RAD  projects  have  been  funded,  covering 
the  whole  spectrum  of  software  engineer¬ 
ing  tools,  techniques,  and  procedures. 
These  projects  concern  basic  or  applied 
research  and  are  most  often  joint  ven¬ 


tures  among  industry  and  public  research 
laboratories.  Three  competing  projects 
were  funded  in  1981  in  the  detailed 
specification  of  a  common  environment  on 
which  forthcoming  software  engineering 
environments  could  be  based.  Tn  1983  a 
choice  was  made  among  them  which  led  to 
the  two  projects  on  which  the  present 
French  software  engineering  work  is 
based. 

The  first  project,  called  Projet 
National  Genie  Logical  was  launched  in 
1983  concurrently  with  six  others  cover¬ 
ing  key  areas  of  information  technology. 
It  consists  of  two  complementary  subpro¬ 
jects.  The  first  one,  known  as  EMERAUDE, 
concerns  the  refinement  and  actual  im¬ 
plementation  of  the  common  environment 
mentioned  above.  The  second  one — known 
as  the  Tools  Project — concerns  the 
development  of  specific  tools  meant  to 
be  integrated  by  means  of  the  EMERAUDE 
environment  and  the  implementation  of 
fully  integrated  software  engineering 
factories  especially  designed  for  speci¬ 
fic  languages  and  development  proce¬ 
dures.  Most  of  the  candidate  tools 
originated  from  the  projects  funded  in 
earlier  software  engineering  requests 
for  proposals.  This  National  Project  has 
been  planned  for  a  3-year  period,  and  it 
is  expected  to  lead  to  commercial  pro¬ 
ducts  exhibiting  a  technology  jump  when 
they  are  released.  Participants  are 
mainly  industries  with  some  collabora¬ 
tion  from  public  research  laboratories. 
The  French  Ministry  of  Industry  shares 
roughly  50  percent  of  the  cost  with 
industrial  participants. 

The  second  main  cooperative  pro¬ 
ject,  CONCERTO,  follows  a  different 
line.  Although  its  purpose  and  struc¬ 
ture  are  similar  to  those  of  the  Nation¬ 
al  Project,  it  is  more  deliberately  long 
range.  It  is  not  intended  to  lead  to 
full-fledged  products  when  it  is  com¬ 
pleted  at  the  end  of  1985.  Instead, 
working  prototypes  based  on  real-life 
investigations  should  lead  to  imple¬ 
mentations,  after  refining  and  pruning. 
The  CONCERTO  project  is  conducted  by 
Centre  National  d' Etudes  des  Telecommun¬ 
ications  (CNET)  in  cooperation  with 


2 


several  public  research  laboratories  and 
software  houses  In  Grenoble,  Lannlon, 
Paris,  and  Toulouse. 

Software  engineering  projects  are 
complemented  by  other  fundamental  or 
applied  research  projects  known  as  Joint 
Research  Projects. 

The  Joint  Research  Projects 

Since  the  National  Projects  are 
essentially  technology-transfer  pro¬ 
jects,  they  have  been  complemented  by 
long-range  research  initiatives.  After 
the  beginning  of  the  National  Projects 
in  1983,  the  main  research  organizations 
started  several  fundamental  research 
cooperation  projects  dealing  with  basic 
computer  engineering.  One  objective  of 
these  projects  is  to  concentrate  the 
resources  of  many  research  groups  on  a 
common  topic  relevant  to  fifth  genera¬ 
tion  issues.  Included  among  the  projects 
are  advanced  programming;  basic  problems 
relating  to  concurrency,  cooperation, 
and  communication  In  computer  systems; 
fifth  generation  database  management 
systems;  the  various  facets  of  AI; 
advanced  electronic  components;  and 
man-machine  communication. 

Participants  in  these  projects  are 
the  main  research  organizations  in 
France,  including  CNRS,  CNET,  Instltut 
National  de  Recherche  en  Informatique  et 
en  Automatlque  (INRIA),  universities, 
and  the  large  industrial  laboratories 
performing  basic  research  (Bull,  CGE, 
Thompson-CSF) . 

GRECO  and  Thematic  Research  Programs 

In  addition  to  the  two  categories 
of  projects  described  above — which  draw 
the  main  part  of  public  funds  for  R&D  in 
computer  science  and  engineering — there 
are  also  the  cooperative  research  groups 
managed  by  CNRS.  These  groups  gather, 
less  formally  than  in  the  case  of 
National  Projects,  various  laboratories 
conducting  research  in  the  same  field, 
some  of  which  relate  to  fifth  generation 
issues. 

The  main  funding  sources  for  the 
CNRS  programs  are: 


•  The  Ministry  of  Industry  and  Re¬ 
search,  including  its  research  and 
technology  budget  and  Agence  National 
pour  la  Valorization  de  la  Recherche 

•  French  Telecom,  including  CNET 

•  Agence  de  1' Informatique 

•  The  Ministry  of  Defense,  including 
Direction  de  Recherche  d'Etude  et 
Technique  (DRET) ,  somewhat  similar  to 
the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Pro¬ 
jects  Agency  in  the  US. 

GRECO  is  made  up  of  cooperative 
groups  under  the  management  of  CNRS. 
The  participants  in  the  GRECO  program 
are  the  CNRS  laboratories,  CNET,  INRIA, 
Institut  de  Recherche  en  Informatique 
et  Systems  Aleatoire  (IRISA),  and  the 
following  universities:  Paris  6,  7,  8, 
and  11;  Grenoble;  Nancy;  Rennes;  Tou¬ 
louse;  Bordeaux;  Poitiers;  Matz;  and 
Strasbourg.  The  industrial  firms  Bull, 
CGE,  and  Thompson-CSF  also  have  research 
and  development  programs  that  are  a  part 
of  the  CNRS  program. 

In  GRECO  the  main  research  topics 
relevant  to  fifth  generation  computing 
are  languages,  translations,  specifica¬ 
tions,  proofs  of  correctness,  and  trans¬ 
formations.  Among  the  readily  available 
tools  are  a  Digital  Equipment  Corpora¬ 
tion  VAX  system  in  Bordeaux  running  the 
operating  system  MULTICS,  and  an  SM90 
system  open  to  research  groups.  The 
SM90  system  uses  Motorola  68000  micro¬ 
processors  as  components.  The  coordina¬ 
tor  is  R.  Cori  of  the  University  of 
Bordeaux. 

GRECO  "PAROLE"  is  a  speech  synthe¬ 
sis  and  recognition  program,  coordinated 
by  J.-P.  Hatton  (University  of  Nancy). 
GRECO  "Calcul  Formel"  is  a  program  of 
research  on  symbolic  manipulation  coor¬ 
dinated  by  D.  Lazard  (University  of 
Poitiers).  GRECO  C3  is  a  military  pro¬ 
gram  on  communication,  cooperation,  and 
control  coordinated  by  Messers.  G. 
Roucairol  and  M.  Nivat  in  the  Ministry 
of  Defense.  A  program  on  advanced 
robotics  is  coordinated  by  G.  Giralt, 
Laboratoire  d' Automat ique  et  d' Analyse 
des  Systemes  (LAAS,  Toulouse)  and 


.V ’.Vs \-.\V 


••  .•  V  ' 
■■■ 


.VA  V.V.V'.V, 


%  "L 


includes  participation  from  many  other 
CNRS  locations  (see  ESN  36-1 i,  37-1, 
37-3,  and  37-5). 

Other  CNRS  programs  include  a  data¬ 
base  management  system  £01*  fifth  genera¬ 
tion  computers.  This  effort  deals  with 
new  applications  and  functions  and  is 
done  in  collaboration  with  CGE  and 
Comptoir  d* Etudes  Radio  Techniques. 
Relational  databases  are  not  properly 
organized  to  handle  varied  information 
such  as  graphics  and  documents.  A  pro¬ 
ject  to  identify  the  needs  of  databases 
for  these  new  applications  began  in 
January  1982.  CNRS  has  had  an  artifi¬ 
cial  intelligence  program  since  1979. 
Its  application  in  robotics  is  under  way 
at  TNR1A,  LAAS,  Laboratoire  d'lnformati- 
que  pour  Mechanique  et  les  Sciences  de 
1 '  Ingenieur  (LIMSI),  and  IRISA  (ESN 
36-11,  37-1,  37-3,  37-5,  and  38-8).  The 
use  of  artificial  intelligence  in 
designing  programming  languages — includ¬ 
ing  logic  and  functional  programming — is 
especially  active  at  INRIA,  Rocquen- 
court . 

The  work  in  robotics  research  is  of 
very  high  quality.  Visual  sensing  is 
the  major  emphasis  at  INRIA,  Rocquen- 
court.  Researchers  elsewhere  have  been 
largely  concerned  with  two-dimensional 
problems  of  image  analysis  and  under¬ 
standing.  At  INRIA  the  need  for  three- 
dimensional  scene  analysis  in  robotics 
has  been  recognized  and  is  a  major  re¬ 
search  effort.  New  sensors  and  new  meth¬ 
ods  of  representing  three-dimensional 
objects  are  needed.  Among  the  most  prom¬ 
ising  sensors  are  the  geometric  sensors 
which  provide.  In  a  reference  frame,  the 
Cartesian  coordinates  of  points  lying  on 
the  surface  of  an  object.  The  sensors 
give  some  intrinsic  information  about 
the  shape  of  the  object  and  are  less 
dependent  on  the  environment  than,  for 
example,  a  camera  which  depends  on  the 
level  of  illumination. 

Most  such  sensors  use  a  structural 
light  such  as  a  laser  beam,  but  tactile, 
optical,  and  acoustical  devices  also  can 
provide  geometrical  information  about 
shapes.  In  each  case,  a  number  of  points 
on  the  surface  of  an  object  are  measured 
and  combined  with  other  information, 


such  as  normals  to  the  surface.  With  a 
large  number  of  such  points  the  shape  of 
the  object  is  determined. 

INRIA  has  developed  a  polyhedral 
representation  of  objects.  An  object  is 
represented  by  a  set  of  three  coordi¬ 
nates  of  points  lying  on  its  surface, 
with  a  spatial  data  structure  linking 
them,  precisely  defined  as  a  graph  whose 
vertices  are  the  measured  points  and 
whose  edges  join  the  points  which  are 
related  in  some  sense.  Structures  that 
have  the  fewest  edges  and  that  preserve 
the  topology  of  the  surface  play  an  im¬ 
portant  role.  Such  a  minimal  structure 
is  a  polyhedron  with  the  measured  points 
as  vertices.  Polyhedra  can  approximate 
any  kind  of  shape.  The  storage  require¬ 
ment  is  proportional  to  the  number  of 
points. 

Based  on  Delaunoy  triangulation  and 
an  algorithm  developed  by  J.D.  Boisson- 
nat,  the  INRIA  researchers  have  been 
able  to  overcome  the  problems  and  have 
succeeded  in  approximating  the  shape  of 
target  objects. 

The  mass  properties  can  be  computed 
by  looking  at  the  mass  properties  of 
the  set  of  interior  tetrahedra.  The 
equilibrium  positions  are  obtained  by 
looking  for  the  faces  of  the  convex 
hulls  of  the  object,  which  is  approx¬ 
imated  by  the  boundary  of  the  Delaunoy 
triangulation.  The  hulls  contain  in 
their  interior  the  normal  projection 
onto  them  of  the  center  of  mass. 

The  interior  tetrahedra  constitute 
a  mesh  which  can  be  used  to  perform 
stress  and  thermal  analysis  using 
finite-element  techniques. 

At  IRISA,  Rennes,  the  two  principal 
areas  of  research  in  robotics  are  in 
sensing  the  environment  and  controlling 
the  robot.  In  sensing  the  environment 
the  robot  must  identify: 

•  An  obstacle — an  object  preventing  the 
completion  of  a  task. 

•  A  target — any  object  on  which  the 
robot  must  act  instantly  to  complete 
a  task. 

At  IRISA,  emphasis  has  been  mainly 
on  local  control  loops.  The  approach 


4 


T 


-  v  v:-  w 


can  be  described  as  follows:  assume  a 
target  that  can  be  gripped  and  a  grasp¬ 
ing  arm  in  an  area  with  obstacles.  The 
proximity  sensors  are  placed  in  the 
pincers  to  permit  centering,  straighten¬ 
ing,  and  movement.  An  observation  site. 
Cl;  a  direction  of  observation,  DI;  a 
signal,  SI  (combination  of  elementary 
signals);  an  action  site,  XI;  and  a 
direction  of  action,  01,  are  associated 
with  each  sensor  or  group  of  sensors. 
Between  two  successive  times,  KT  and 
(K+l )T,  the  desired  elementary  action  is 
to  move  the  point  XI  toward  the  point 
XI+WIOI,  where  WI  is  a  function  of  SI. 
The  specification  of  XI,  01,  FI,  and  SI 
determine  the  character  of  each  elemen¬ 
tary  function  (repulsion  or  attraction) 
as  well  as  the  dynamics  of  the  system. 
The  incremental  control  required  is  the 
combination  of  translation  and  rotation 
needed  between  KT  and  (K+1)T  to  satisfy 
all  constraints  required  by  the  desired 
elementary  actions. 

In  most  cases  an  explicit  solution 
can  be  found  with  little  computation. 
Using  signals  from  optical  sensors 
directly  furnishes  a  repulsion  corre¬ 
sponding  to  a  Newtonian  potential,  and 
continuity  with  gripping  is  assured  by 
the  choice  of  certain  combinations  (Cl, 
DI,  XI,  01,  WI).  For  bi-digital  or  tri¬ 
digital  grippers,  the  choice  results 
naturally  from  the  geometry  adopted  for 
the  fingers  and  the  contact  sensors. 

Control  of  Robots 

To  improve  the  accuracy  of  manipu¬ 
lators,  controllers  must  be  designed  to 
allow  reliable,  high-velocity  movement. 
Moving  an  effector  to  a  final  position 
with  a  given  dynamical  behavior  or 
tracking  a  desired  trajectory  are  class¬ 
ical  control  problems.  Difficulties 
arise  at  high  velocity  when  the  required 
behavior  must  be  independent  of  parame¬ 
ters  such  as  the  payload  and  the  loca¬ 
tion  of  the  effector.  If  the  control  is 
handled  by  a  fixed,  linear,  monodimen¬ 
sional  servo  system  on  each  joint,  the 
desired  accuracy  generally  cannot  be 
achieved  for  high-velocity  motions. 

An  alternative  is  to  derive  dynamic 
control  algorithms  that  take  into 


account  coupling  and  nonlinearities  by 
using  a  dynamic  model  of  the  manipula¬ 
tor,  Including  gravity,  inertial,  cen¬ 
trifugal  and  coriolis  forces,  and 
torques.  One  approach  is  to  precompen¬ 
sate  for  nonlinear  terms  using  a 
theoretical  model  with  a  feed-forward 
loop.  In  case  the  model  is  precisely 
known,  a  linear  decoupled  feedback  may 
be  enough  to  assign  the  dynamics  of  the 
closed-loop  system.  Control  systems 
using  a  dynamic  model  of  the  manipulator 
have  drawbacks:  real-time  computation 
is  costly,  accuracy  of  the  system  may  be 
degraded  by  modeling  errors,  and  adapta¬ 
tion  to  variations  and  drifts  is  not 
certain  even  if  the  parameters  of  the 
basic  model  have  been  well  defined. 

The  objective  of  a  study  at  IRISA 
was  to  test  several  alternatives  to  the 
classic  technique.  A  direct  adaptive 
control  algorithm  was  applied  in  one 
case  and  an  indirect  adaptive  control  in 
the  other.  The  algorithms  have  been 
studied  for  linear  systems.  Modeling  a 
manipulator  joint  by  a  stationary  linear 
system  would  be  satisfactory  for  small 
and  slow  motions.  However,  for  large 
and  fast  motions  a  linear  model  of  the 
joint  was  considered  nonstationary.  The 
variation  of  the  model  coefficients 
comes  from  nonlinearities  and  coupling 
terms.  To  track  the  nonstationary 
characteristics  of  the  model,  identifi¬ 
cation  algorithms  with  gains  never 
decreasing  to  zero  were  used.  The  work¬ 
ing  hypothesis  is  that  variations  of  the 
model  are  slow  compared  with  the  dynam¬ 
ics  of  the  adaptation. 

Simulation  results  were  obtained  by 
applying  direct  and  indirect  adaptive 
control  algorithms  to  each  of  two  manip¬ 
ulator  systems.  The  first  manipulator 
was  a  three-link  cylindrical  coordinate 
type.  The  second  was  a  three-link, 
three- joint  (two  rotations  and  one 
translation)  manipulator. 

Adaptive  techniques  are  inconveni¬ 
ent  primarily  because  they  were  devel¬ 
oped  for  linear  systems,  but  robots  are 
nonlinear  systems.  Therefore,  it  is 
difficult  to  analyze  precisely  and 
theoretically  the  results  of  such 
controls. 


1 


5 


Thus,  research  at  IRISA  is  oriented 
toward  "robust"  control  techniques, 
which  are  nonlinear  (variable  gain)  with 
reference  models.  Simulation  tests  will 
soon  be  carried  out  with  a  fast  indus¬ 
trial  robot. 

At  LAAS,  Toulouse,  a  nonspecialized 
mobile  robot  called  HILARE  is  equipped 
with  multisensor  systems  and  uses  a 
multilevel  computer  and  decision  system. 
The  machine  has  microprocessors  for 
locomotion  control,  ultrasonics,  camera 
control,  image  preprocessing,  and  com¬ 
munication.  Higher  level  processing  of 
Information  is  by  a  larger  local  compu¬ 
ter;  computers  at  Paris  and  Montpelier 
are  back-up.  HILARE  is  intended  to  serve 
as  an  experimental  support  vehicle. 

The  perception  system  for  the 
three-dimensional  universe  of  the  robot 
combines  information  received  from  a 
two-dimensional  video  and  from  a  laser 
telemeter  giving  the  depth.  Two  coordi¬ 
nates  of  a  point  can  be  derived  from  the 
tilt  of  the  mirrors  used  to  deflect  a 
laser  beam  onto  the  target.  The  third 
coordinate  is  determined  by  the  travel 
time  cf  the  laser  beam. 

The  system  must  be  able  to  find  the 
position  and  orientation  of  obstacles, 
which  are  always  treated  as  polyhedrons. 
The  system  must  also  be  able  to  recog¬ 
nize  objects  in  a  room,  which  requires 
complex  pattern  recognition. 

The  video  signal  from  the  camera  is 
coded  over  several  levels  of  grey.  From 
the  coded  image,  the  contours  of  objects 
and  adjacent  objects  are  determined.  The 
information  from  the  camera  is  transmit¬ 
ted  to  a  higher  level  of  the  computer 
and  decision  system  and  combined  with 
the  laser  range  information.  The  tele¬ 
meter  is  coupled  to  the  camera  so  that 
their  optical  axes  are  in  agreement.  The 
entire  apparatus  is  mounted  on  a  turn¬ 
table  on  the  robot.  Commands  to  the 
motors  used  to  deflect  the  laser  beam 
are  based  on  data  from  the  micropro¬ 
cessor  associated  with  image  processing 
(INTEL  8030)  or  from  the  higher  level 
decision  center.  The  number  of  measure¬ 
ments  by  the  telemeter  are  reduced 
through  using  only  information  in  the 
zones  where  a  change  of  direction  of  a 


contour  is  detected;  thus  corners  of  an 
obstacle  or  object  are  located. 

All  obstacles  are  assumed  to  be 
polyhedral  and  are  represented  in  two 
dimensions  by  polygons  or  parts  of  poly¬ 
gons.  The  main  objectives  in  path  plan¬ 
ning  are  to  create  a  structure  composed 
of  polygonal  cells  and  to  construct  a 
graph  connecting  those  cells  to  trans¬ 
form  the  geometric  model  into  a  topolo¬ 
gical  one.  The  four  steps  are  percep¬ 
tion,  space  structuring,  path  search, 
and  path  execution. 

A  system  to  navigate  a  mobile  robot 
has  been  written  in  APL  programming  lan¬ 
guage  and  implemented  on  an  IBM  3033 
linked  to  a  16-bit  minicomputer  (M1TRA 
15).  The  microcomputer  is  in  turn  linked 
to  the  on-board,  five-microcomputer 
structure  (INTEL  8085)  controlling  the 
robot's  motors  and  sensors.  The  system 
has  been  tested  for  many  obstacle 
configurations. 

The  preceding  examples  are  indica¬ 
tive  of  the  level  of  research  in  robo¬ 
tics  in  France.  Robotics  is  one  of  the 
two  most  important  areas  in  which  AI  is 
currently  applied.  The  other  important 
area  is  expert  systems,  in  which  logic 
programming  plays  an  important  part.  Tt 
has  already  been  mentioned  that  the 
Prolog  language  had  its  origin  in 
France — and  in  the  UK.  This  is  the  fore¬ 
most  logic  programming  language  in  use 
today,  and  it  is  basic  in  the  Japanese 
Fifth  Generation  Computer  Program. 

Conclusion 

The  French  program  is  comprehen¬ 
sive.  Like  the  British  Alvey  Program  it 
is  supposed  to  be  complementary  to 
ESPRIT.  However,  when  compared  to  the 
British  program  it  suffers  from  lack  of 
centralized  coordination  and  control. 
The  program  is  multifaceted  and  the 
lines  of  control  are  unclear.  For 
example,  the  Agence  dc  1 '  Informatique 
gets  direction  from  at  least  three 
agencies:  CNRS,  Direction  des  Affaires 
Industrielles  et  Internationales,  and 
Direction  des  Industries  Electroniques 
et  Informatiques. 

A  comprehensive  technical  evalua¬ 
tion  of  the  program  is  not  possible  now. 


6 


This  may  be  possible  in  1985  when  more 
detail  about  the  specific  projects  is 
available.  One  thing  seems  to  be  missing 
In  the  program.  Except  for  the  Ministry 
of  Defense  project  on  a  supercomputer, 
about  which  little  is  known,  there  is  no 
project  on  computer  architecture  in  the 
program.  However,  there  is  work  on  par¬ 
allel  computer  architecture  at  Grenoble 
University  under  Professor  F.  Anceau  and 
at  Lille  University  under  Professor  V. 
Cordonnier.  This  work  has  been  describ¬ 
ed  in  ONR,  London,  report  C-2-84  (19 
July  1984). 

Details  on  financial  support  for 
the  program  are  not  complete.  The 
following  are  the  yearly  estimates  for 
several  parts  of  the  national  projects: 
VLSI/CAD,  F14  million;  CAD/CAM,  F6  mil¬ 
lion;  software  engineering,  F18  million; 
computer-aided  instruction,  F10  million. 

Estimated  support  for  basic  re¬ 
search  in  the  Joint  Research  Projects  is 
as  follows: 

1.  Programming  theory  (functional, 
logical,  LISP)  and  man-machine  interface 


(speech,  natural  language,  and  pattern 
recognition)  will  receive  F10  million 
per  year. 

2.  Communication  concurrency  and 
cooperation,  database  management  sys¬ 
tems,  and  submicron  VLSI  technology  will 
receive  F4  million  per  year.  These  fig¬ 
ures  include  only  a  part  of  the  program 
but  they  amount  to  only  about  $6  million 
per  year. 

Based  on  what  is  known  about  the 
program,  it  appears  to  be  considerably 
less  impressive  than  the  British  Alvey 
Program.  However,  one  impressive  point 
is  that  the  work  on  VLSI  technology  is 
at  the  submicron  level.  Also  the  French 
work  in  robotics  theory  is  among  the 
best  in  Europe.  Since  the  French  were 
one  of  the  originators  of  Prolog,  it 
seems  likely  that  they  will  use  it 
effectively  for  fifth  generation  compu¬ 
ting  systems.  Nonetheless,  it  appears 
now  that  it  will  be  many  years  before 
fifth  generation  computer  systems  emerge 
from  the  French  industry. 


