DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 281 184 es 008 798 

AUTHOR Scha, Ri 3. H. ; And Others 

TITLE Discourse Understanding. Technical Report No. 39i. 

INSTITUTION Bolt, Beranek and Newman, Irie . , Cambridge , Mass . ; 

Illinois Univ., Urbana. Center for the Study of 

Reading. 

SPONS _ AGENCY National Inst, of Education (ED) , Washington, DC. 

PUB_DATE Oct 86 

CONTRACT 400-81-0030 

NOTE 58p. 

PUB TYPE Information Analyses (070) 



EDRS PRICE MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS *Artificial Intelligence ; Comprehension ; Computer 

Software; Context Clues; *Piseourse Analysis; 
Pragmatics; Reading Comprehension; Reading Research; 
Semantics; ^Sentences; Speech Acts; Speech 
Communication 

IDENTIFIERS *Commun i cat ions Research; Discburse Organization; 



Natural Language; ^Natural Language Processing; Text 
Factors ; Text Structure 

ABSTRACT 

Artificial intelligence research on natural language 
understanding is discussed in this report using the notions that (1) 
natural language understanding systems must "see" sentences as 
elements whose significance resides in the contribution they make to 
the larger whole, and (2) a natural language understanding computer 
system must interpret each sentence with respect to both the 
linguistic context established by preceding sentences and the 
real-world setting. The first section provides an introduction to the 
term "discourse understanding" on natural language 

understanding systems. The second section discusses modeling 
discourse structure , recent directions in this area ( including 
discourse coherence, discourse structure and pronoun resolution, and 
context space theory)^ and the discourse structures theory, 
particularly the^ dynamic discourse model. Focusing on the meanings of 
the text, the third section considers truth conditions for sentence 
and text, consequences for logical formalisms , discourse anaphora, 
background knowledge and plausible inference , and summarizing 
stories. The fourth section addresses plan recognition, including 
speech acts , speech events , dialogue systems^ and pragmatic 
perspective oh discourse. The final section discusses modes of 
natural language. (Eight pages of references are included. ) (JE>) 



********************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document; 
************************************** 



CENTER FOR THE ST^py OF READING 



CD 



Technical ReP°*t NcK 393. 
DISCOURSE UN?)EI^ TANDING 

R. J. H. Scha, B. C B *vice, 6 L. Polanyi 
Bolt Beranek and fcr ewman i nc , 
Cambridge, Mass^^^getts 

October 19§ 6 



University of Illinois 

at Urb ana-Champaign 
51 Gerty Drive 
Champaign, Illinois 61820 



Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. 

10 Moulton Street 

Cambridge, Mas sachusetus 02238 



U.S. DEPAfTTM^T Op £OUC AT10N 

pHice of Educaliona'-" - a »»rpn and improvement 
EDUCATIONAL ^9H^ E S INFORMATION 

Si This document . ha » b* e A reproduced as 
J* received from ' ne ^on or organization 
' originating it 

D Minor changes "J* 6 made to tmprove 
^r^oduction q^^^^ 

T^ointsot view ^^'Ohs stated m th.s_ docu- 
ment do not-neC«^ t( represent official 
OERI position or POH Cy 



O 



ERIC 



The work upon which this publication t s based was performed pursuant to 
Contract No. 400-81-0030 of the Natio nal institute of Education. It 
does not, however, necessarily refl ec t the views of this agency. A 
version of this paper is to appear as a n entry in S. Shapiro (Ed.) , 
The Encyclopedia of Artificial Int gj^gence. New York: Wiley. 



Discourse Understanding - 2 

Abstract 

Research on natural language understanding has often focused on 
the problem of analyzing the structure and meaning of isolated 
sentences. To understand whole texts or dialogues, these 
sentences must be seen as elements whose significance resides in 
the contribution they make to the larger whole. A computer 
natural language understanding system must interpret each 
sentence with respect to both the linguistic context established 
by preceding sentences and the real-world setting. This paper 
reviews work on these issues, examining theories of the structure 
of discourse, the semantics of discourse, speech acts and 
pragmatics, and different communication modalities. 



Discourse Understanding - 3 
Discourse Understanding 

1 . introduction 

The term Discourse Understanding refers to all processes of 
Natural Language Understanding that attempt to understand a text 
or dialogue. For such processes, the sentences of natural 
language are elements whose significance resides in the 
contribution they make to the development of a larger whole, 
rather than being independent, isolated units of meaning. To 
understand discourse, one must track the structure of an 
unfolding text or dialogue and interpret every new utterance with 
respect to the proper context - - taking into account the real-world 
setting of the utterance, as well as the linguistic context built 
up by the utterances preceding it. The problems of Discourse 
Understanding are thus closely related to those dealt with in the 
linguistic discipline of Pragmatics which studies the context 
dependence of utterance meanings. 

Research on natural language understanding systems has often 
focused on the problem of analyzing the structure and meaning of 
isolated sentences. To deal with discourse instead, a system 
must have all the Capabilities necessary for sentence 
understanding, but, in addition, it must be able to apply rules of 
discourse structure , which specify how sentences may be combined 
to form texts or dialogues. 

Even with such discourse -level extensions, however, a purely 
linguistic approach can Only construct the meaning of a text 
insofar as it follows from the meaning of its constituent 
utterances and the explicitly stated relations between them. In 



Discourse Understanding - A 



Artificial Intelligence one tends to take a broader perspective, 
which emphasizes the role of world knowledge in discourse 
understanding: By taking into account common sense knowledge 
about the world, a system may derive semantic relations between 
constituents of the text that are not stated explicitly, but that 
may be plausibly assumed. By invoking scripts and fram es, a 
system may analyze a text against the background of default 
assumptions about "normal" situations and "normal" courses of 
events, thereby filling in information left implicit in the text, 
and also noticing when something deviates from the usual pattern 
and is therefore worthy of special attention. In this way, a 
more complete understanding of the intended meaning of the text 
may be created. 

A discourse understanding system worthy of that name should 
not only deal correctly with what is true or false in the world 
according to its input text, but should, at the same time, be 
able to distinguish between more and less important information-- 
between what Is crucial and what is mere background. With this 
capacity, a system would be able to generate adequate summaries 
of Its input texts. A further level of understanding would 
involve the ability to infer what the "point" of a story or 
description is- -to discover the more abstract, culturally 
relevant message which is instantiated by the text. 

Much of the AI research on discourse understanding is 
oriented towards developing systems to exhibit reasonable and 
cooperative behavior in a goal^directed interaction with a human 
dialogue -partner. Such systems would do more than understand the 



Discourse Understanding - 5, 



literal meanings of the utterances of theii ir terlocutor; they 
would have to be able to assess, to some extent, the intentions 
and purposes behind these utterances. Methods to achieve this 
are usually based on the theory of Speech Acts: The system 
recognizes the goals which are conventionally associated with 
various types of utterances, such as assertions, questions, 
commands, and requests. Understanding an utterance at a deeper 
level is then viewed as establishing what goal the speaker wanted 
to achieve by performing the speech act, and what role the speech 
act plays in achieving that goal. Often, the goal can be seen as 
a sub goal which plays a role in achieving a higher level goal, 
and so on. By invoking plausible hypotheses about the goals the 
speaker may have, and about the methods she may employ to achieve 
them, a system may infer the intention behind a speech act. 

Empirical studies of human discourse usually deal with real- 
time oral communication or with written texts. Discourse- 
understanding computer programs, however, will usually employ a 
video display terminal to communicate with their users in real 
time. They will thus use a new natural language interaction-mode 
which did not exist before. It is therefore of some interest to 
study how the properties of discourse depend on the interaction 
mode --e.g., on the amount of shared environment between the 
participants and on the sensory modality of the communication 
medium. 



6 



Discourse Understanding - 6 

Each of the main topics mentioned above will be discussed 
below in some detail: 

• the structure of discburse 

• the semantics of discourse 

• speech acts and pragmatics 

• different I/O modalities 

2 . The Structure of Discourse 

2 . 1 Introduction 

To understand a text or dialogue, one must understand the 
relations between its parts. Clearly, these parts are not just 
the individual sentences; sentences are joined together to form 
larger units, which in their turn may be the building blocks of 
yet larger units. Discourse understanding must thus be based on 
some characterization of the way "in which a discourse is built up 
out of constituent units. 

Unlike the smooth, steady development of a central idea which 
characterizes the texts we read in books, journals and 
newspapers, everyday spoken discourse is characterized by 
interruptions, resumptions, backtracking and jumping ahead of 
oneself. Somehow, despite the apparent "disfluency" of everyday 
disccurse, speakers and hearers manage to follow what is going on 
and to produce responses to one another which are situationally 
appropriate and which demonstrate an understanding of all of the 
"underspecified" items of meaning which are found in sentences. 
They understand who is beirg referred to by words such as "he" 
and "it," can recover the referent of phrases like "the one over 
there" or "the one we were just talking about," and manage to 



Discourse Understanding - 7 

orient themselves in "discourse time and space" by correctly 
assigning temporal and spatial referents to words like "now" and 
"here," whose meaning is totally context dependent. 

2.1.1 Modeling discourse structure: The complexity of the 
problem. Faced with transcripts of natural interactions, 
analysts experience serious difficulties locating the 
"descriptions," "explanations," "stories," "plans" or other 
structural units which they may know have been "there" when the 
interaction was happening. With the move to the analysis phase, 
structural units become lost in all the "talk." 

In order to illustrate the problem of locating a coherent 
discourse semantic unit in natural talk, let us take the 
following example modified from a corpus of Spatial Planning 
dialogues. There are five people involved: two primary 
speakers, A and B, who are jointly planning a journey in Europe 
in connection with a trip simulation in an experimental setting. 
C and D are researchers conducting the experiment, and E is a 
secretary who came by. 

A. We are in Spain, o.k. So, let's go to France next. 

I love France anyway. We had a great time there last 
year. And then Italy I tell you about the little 

restaurant we went to in Florence? 

B. Yeah. I think you did. It was better than the place in 
Rome we ate at before we took the plane. But, 
anyway, no. Let's go to Belgium next. Then 

C. Could you move closer to the camera, please. 

D. You're but of range 

A. O.K. yeah.. But not if we have to go through 
Antwerp 

B. Then Holland 



8 



Discourse Understanding - 8 



A. 



When do we do Italy then? We can't miss it? 



B. On the way back to 



E. 



Sorry. I was looking for Dave 



C. He's not here.. We're running an experiment I'll 
talk to you later. You are still out of camera 
range, by the way 



Good 



B. Anyway. I saw the tulips last year. What about 
Italy? 

A. On the way bade to Spain. You taking a vacation 
this year? Or loafing at work as usual? 

B. Haven't decided, you? 

A. Might go to Spain again. Then Germany's next, 
right? 

Competent language users would intuitively segment this 
discourse into sections in which A and B are planning- -actually 
developing their plan- -and other sections, where they arr> 
commenting on places they have been, making small talk, or 
conversing with the researchers. In one exchange, neither A nor 
B are talking at all, but are listening in while G exchanges some 
quick words with the secretary who is looking for someone who is 
not there. In order to make it somewhat easier to find the 
"planning," we have arranged the text graphically as an outline, 
showing the "planning talk" in leftmost position and moving 
further to the right to represent the embedded or secondary 
status of the comments and other interruptions to the development 
of the plan. It should be noted that when other types of talk are 
completed, A and B return to developing their plan, which is the 
focus of their attention throughout this excerpt. 



9 



Discourse Understanding - 9 



A. We aire in Spain > o.k. 

So, let's go to France next; 
I love France anyway. 

We had a great time there last year. 

And then Italy 

did I tell you about the little restaurant we 
went to in Florence? 

B • Yeah . 

I think you did. 
It was better than the place in Rome we ate at 
before we took the plane . . 
(But , anyway , no . ) 
Let's go to Belgium next. 
Then 

C - Could you move closer to the camera, please. 



D. 



You're out of range 



ERLC 



A. O.K. yeah. 

But not if we have to go through Antwerp 

B. Then Holland. 

A. When do we do Italy then? 

We can't miss it? 

B . On the way back to 

E- Sorry. _ 

I was looking for Dave 

C. He's not here. 

We're running an experiment 
I'll talk to you later 

You are still out of camera range, by the way 

B . ( Anyway . ) 

I saw the tulips last year. 
What about Italy? 

A. On the way back to Spain. 

You taking a vacation this year? 
Or loafing at work as usual? 

B- Haven't decided, you? 

A - Might go to Spain for a few days. 

Then Germany's next, right? . 

Although this outlining procedure may make it easier to see 

at a glance which clauses encode propositions which can be 



10 



Discourse Understanding - 10 



ERIC 



interpreted as proposals relating to the sequence of actI6ns to 
be taken in some future time "Plan Execution World," not all 
leftmost clauses represent proposals which were taken into the 
final plan decided upon. Some proposals were made and then 
accepted- -like A's suggestion to visit "France" after "Spain" 
which was accepted by B without comment- -while other suggestions, 
such as A's next proposal to visit "Italy" next, were not 
accepted and were not included in the final agreed-upon plan. 

The plan at the point in the game we are considering, as 
finally agreed upon, consisted of a hypothetical itinerary which 
would take A and B to: 

Spain, France, Belgium, Holland, Germany . . 
( Italy (Spain)) 

in this sequence. 

It is important to notice how many different parameters must 
be monitored in order to recover this itinerary: 

• Temporal reference points must be maintained and, if 
necessary, updated (to understand "when" in conceptual 
time an event would take place). 

• Spatial reference points must be maintained and, if 
necessary, updated (to understand the speakers' 
orientation in conceptual space) 

• The identity of the speaker and hearer must 

be available (to be able to recover the intended 
referents of "I" and You) 

• The specific "world" in which events are to take place 
(or have taken place) must be known (in order to 
interpret a spatial location or temporal reference 
point in the "Game" world or in the "real" world i.e., 
A is planning to vacation in Sgig "this year" in the' 
"real" world; A had a great time in Fra nce "last year" 
in the "real" world. "A" and "B" tokens in the "Game" 
world are in Spain and "planning a trip' 1 from Spain , to 
France, Belgium etc.) 



11 



Discourse Understanding - 11 

In addition, it must be pointed out that correctly 
interpreting this discourse involves understanding the form and 
function of a number of linguistic and rhetorical structures, 
including: 

• Narrative syntax- mechanisms, encoding update of 
reference points 

• Sentential syntax and semantics 

• Question/answer sequences 



• Discourse "operators" such as "o.k.," "yes," "no," 
"well," "anyway" which do not add independent 
information but which either (1) affirm or deny 
information available elsewhere (2) indicate a 
digression or a "return" to another topic 

• Joking conventions (such as insulting a hard worker by 
accusing him of "loafing on the job.") 

• Discourse embedding and return conventions 
2.2 Recent Directions In Modeling Discourse Structure 

Recent advances in understanding the structure of natural 
language discourse make it possible to segment complex talk and 
recover the integrity of "discourse units," despite the 
complexity of the actual talk in which they occur. An important 
research focus within the past five years has been to capture the 
semantic or "coherence" relations among clauses and segments 
making up a text in which all of the constituent elements 
function together to communicate a set of mutually interconnected 
ideas (Halliday & Hasan, 1977; Hobbs, 1979; Hobbs, 1985; Mann & 
Thompson, 1983; and Polanyi, 1905). A second research focus has 
been to .understand the structural relations obtaining even in 
discourses which are not coherent, but which are characterized by 
interruptions and resumptions, and even by hesitations and other 



Discourse Understanding - 12 

types of complex phenomena arising from the social and processing 
constraints on actual talk (Reichman, 1981; Polanyi & Scha, 1984; 
Grosz & Sidner, 1986; and Hinrichs & Polanyi, 1986). 

Section 2.2.1 below reviews some discussions of coherence 
relations in discourse. Sections 2.2.2-2.2.6 discuss some 
frameworks which attempt to characterize the structure of 
discourse- -accounting for coherence, while also allowing for 
digressions and interruptions. 

2.2.1 Discourse coherence. It has been observed many times 
that not every sequence of sentences makes up a "text." In a 
well- formed text the sentences are perceived as working together 
to build up a unified whole, by expressing propositions which are 
related to each other in a limited number of specific ways. 

A number of coherence relations which may obtain among the 
constituents of a well-formed tex^ have been identified, for 
instance, by Hobbs (1979, 1985). He describes how a semantic 
structure for a whole discourse may be built up recursively by 
recognizing coherence relations between adjacent segments of a 
text. He addresses himself initially to why it is that we find 
discourses coherent at all- -what are the so* of discourse 

coherence? Not surprisingly, one source of discourse coherence 
lies in the coherence of the world or object described. We can 
find a text coherent if it tells us about a set of objects or 
states or events which we know to be coherent. Thus, even a 
gasped out, highly- interrupted narrative of a disaster may appear 
"coherent" and be "understandable" when we bring to the text bur 
belief that the disaster formed a coherent set of events, related 



13 



Discourse Understanding - 13 

causally to one another and affecting in various ways the people, 
objects, and situations described. This relates closely to 
another source of discourse coherence: When we find that one 
assertion details the cause for the situation described by the 
next assertion, wis view the sequence as coherent. We will also 
find a sequence of two sentences, two stories, or, ge^erali/ 
speaking, two discourse constituents to be coherently related to 
one another if one tells us more detail about the other, offers 
an explanation, or otherwise gives more information about the 
proposition expressed by the other. 

Hobbs provides a method for allowing the coherence relations 
in a discourse to emerge. He suggests segmenting the discourse 
"intuitively" and then labelling the various naturally occurring 
segments with the coherence relation(s) which tie them to 
immediately preceding constituents. There will be two types of 
relations: coordination and subordination relations. Coordinate 
coherence relations include parallel constructions and 
elaborations in which one discovers a common proposition as the 
assertion of the composite segment. Subordination relations 
obtain when one constituent provides background or explanatory 
information with respect to another. Hobbs' ideas of "coherence" 
allow us to see how even the subsequent moves in a conversation, 
which may appear incoherent to an outside observer, may be 
appropriate conversational moves for the participants- -entirely 
coherent and describable with the relations which he has outlined 
(Hobbs & Evans, 1980; and Hobbs & Agar, 1985). 



Discourse Understanding - 14 

Mann and Thompson's work on rhetorical relations focuses 
exclusively on the relations which obtain within a coherent text 
(Mann 6c Thompson, 1983). They assign a phrase structure 
analysis to texts, in which two subsequent constituents can be 
related through each of a number of specific relations. Their 
inventory of coherence relations is more detailed than that 
provided by Hobbs. The relations they list are solutionhood , 
evidence, justification, motivation, reason, sequence, 
enablement, elaboration, restatement, condition, circumstance, 
cause, concession, background, and thesis-antithesis. 

2.2.2 Discourse structure and p ronou n resolution . In early 
work on the structure of Task Oriented Dialogues, Grosz (1974) 
provided an important demonstration of the hierarchical structure 
of natural texts. In the analysis of talk between an apprentice 
and an expert dismantling a water pump, she showed that the 
discourse could be represented as a tree or outline in which the 
relationships among the clauses could be chunked in a way which 
replicated the goal/subgoal structure of the original task. 
Perhaps not surprisingly, in taking apart one part of the pump, 
the talk would focus on that operation; when the apprentice had 
finished dealing with that aspect of the job, and moved on to the 
next subtask, the talk would move a^ong, reflecting in its 
structure what was going on in the joint endeavor. What was 
surprising, and most significant, however, was that the choice of 
possible referents for pronouns in the text reflected the 
structure of the task as well. In discussing a part of the 
object involved in the task at hand, one could refer to it with a 



15 



Discourse Understanding - 15 

pronoun; similarly, one could refer ^ Q ^ he entire higher level 
unit with a pronoun, or even to the ^ um p as a w hol e . it was not 
possible to use a pronoun to refer t Q the objects and subtasks 
involved in a part of the task which h ad already been completed. 
In the tree of the discourse task/suh task elements one was 
blocked from referring to a task ele^ ent in a branch to the left 
of the branch currently being devel 0 j, ed Grosz's discovery, 
therefore, was that discourse has a structure i n which the 
placement and semantic relations ° b t^ in ing among the clauses 
making up the discourse plays a deci SiVe role in thg 
interpretation of given elements i n that discourse. 

Sidner (1983) has shown that a s truc turally analogous 
account of auaphora resolution also ^plies at a linguistic level 
of discburse structure which is impendent of task structure. 
In her model, the candidates for azotic reference are stored in 
a stack. An incoming discourse const itUent w hich is treated as 
embedded PUSHes new focused elements lnto this list, while the 
resumption of a suspended discourse c ons tituent POPs the 
intervening focus elements off the s t^ c k. 

in the next section we shall g±v e brief overviews of three 
frameworks which build on this seining Work and provide more 
comprehensive accounts of the issues inVolve d in understanding 
both "coherent" and "interrupted" dis CoUrse: Reichman's Contest 
Space Theory (Reichnian, 1981), Discourse structures Theory 
developed by Grosz and Sidner (1986), and Po i anyi and Scha 's 
Dynamic Discourse Model (Poianyi & s ch a , 1984; Poianyi, 1985; and 
Hinrichs, & Poianyi, 1986). 



IB 



Discourse Understanding - 16 

2.2.3 Contex t space theory . Reichman' s context space 
theory deals with the structure of conversation (Reichman, 1981). 
It associates with each topic of discussion a context space — a 
schematic structure with a number of slots. These slots held the 
following information: 

• a propositional representation of the set of 
functionally related utterances said to lie in 
this context space; 

• the communicative function served by the utterances in 
this context space; 

• a marker reflecting the foreground-background status of 
this context space at any given point in the 
conversation; 

• focus level assignments to the discourse elements in 
this context space; 

• links to preceding context spaces in relation to 
which this context space was developed; and 

• specification of the relations involved. 

The utterances that constitute the discourse are analyzed as 
"conversational moves" which affect the content of the various 
context spaces. Reichman has paid special attention to the 
conversational structures involved in arguments. Among the 
conversational moves she identifies, for instance, are assertion 
of a claim, explanation, illustration, support, challenge, 
interruption, and further development. 

An important and influential part of Reichman's theory is 
her treatment of clue-words - -devices which speakers use to 
indicate when their discourse shifts from one structural level to 
another. Glue-words are commonly divided into PUSH- markers and 
POP-markers, PUSH- markers are linguistic signals that indicate 
the initiation of a new embedded discourse constituent. Examples 



Discourse Understanding - 17 

are "l^e f " "by the way," "for instance." POP-markeis have the 
complementary function. They close off the currently active 
embedded unit and signal a return to a higher level of structure. 
Examples are : "Well , " "so , " "anyway, " "CK. " 

An extensive study of clue vords in spoken French is 
presented by Guelich (1970). Schiffrin (1982) did an extensive 
study for English. Merritt (1978) discusses the use of "OK" in 
service encounters. Cohen (1984) studied clue words from a 
computational perspective. She draws two important conclusions: 

• clue words decrease the amount of processing needed 
to Understand coherent discourse, 

• clue words allow_ the understanding of discourse that 
would otherwise be incomprehensible, 

While Reichman's work provided much important insight into 
the functioning of discourse, her Context Space formalism fails 
to distinguish between those cases in which one can return to a 
previous topic by use of a simple POP, for example, and those 
cases in which such a simple, purely structural, return is not 
possible and one must re- Introduce the topic in order to continue 
talking about it, Reichman's Context Spaces are never "closed 
off" and inaccessible because one can always say anything one 
wishes, and continuing to talk about a matter dropped earlier is 
certainly possible. Discourse structural relations, in her 
account, are thus finally obscured by discourse semantic 
relations obtaining among the topics of talk in the various 
units . 

The work of both Grosz and Sidner (1986) and Polanyi and 
Scha (1984; Polanyi, 1985; Hinrichs 6c Polanyi, 1986), 



18 



Discourse Understanding - 18 



incorporates elements of Reichman's work- -particularly her 
treatment of clue words- -while separating structural and semantic 
relations between clauses. This separation allows for a 
treatment of "interruptions" and "resumptions" which is based on 
structural properties of the discourse, rather than being 
dependent on semantic relationships .unong topics of talk. These 
two frameworks generalize upon Grosz's early work by providing an 
account of discourse structure which is not task dependent. 
2.3 The Discourse Structures Theory 

In the view of Grosz and Sidner (1985), cha structure of a 
discourse results from three interacting components: a 
linguistic structure , an intentional structure, and an 
attentional state . These three components deal with different 
aspects of the utterances in a discourse. Grosz and Sidner have 
particularly focused on the intentional and the attentional 
aspects of discourse. 

The intentional structure is a hierarchical structure which 
describes relations between the purpose of the discourse and the 
purpose of discourse segments. These purposes (such as "Intend 
that a particular agent perform a particular talk" or "Intend 
that a particular agent believe a particular fact") are linked by 
relations of dominance (between a goal and a subgoal) or ordering 
(between two goals which must be achieved in a specific order). 

The attentional state is an abstraction of the participants 1 
focus of attention as their discourse unfolds. The attention 
state is a property of discourse, not of discourse participants. 
It is inherently dynamic, recording the object, properties, and 



19 



Discourse Understanding - 19 



relations that are salient at each point in the discourse. The 
attentional state is represented by a stack of focus spaces . 
Changes in attentional state are modeled by a set of transition 
rules that specify the conditions for adding and deleting spaces. 

A focus space is associated with each discourse segment; 
this space contains those entities that are salient- -either 
becau5;e they have been mentioned explicitly in the segment, or 
because they became salient in the process of producing or 
comprehending the utterances in the segment (as in Grosz's, 1974, 
original work on focusing). The focus space also includes the 
discourse segment purpose; this reflects the fact that the 
discourse participants are focused not only on what they are 
talking about, but also on why they are talking about it. 

Discourse Structures Theory provides a unified account of 
both the intentional and attentional dimensions of discourse 
understanding and makes explicit important links between the two. 
The Dynamic Discourse Model, on the other hand, is more limited 
in its scope. It provides an account of the discourse 
segmentation process on an utterance -by-utterance basis and is 
thus a more developed theory of the strictly linguistic aspects 
of the discourse understanding process. 

2.3.1 Itie- dynamic discourse model . The Dynamic Discourse 
Model (DDM) (Folanyi & Scha, 1984; Polanyi, 1985; and Hinrichs & 
Polanyi, 1986) is a formal theory of discourse syntactic and 
semantic structure which accounts for how a semantic and 
pragmatic interpretation of a discourse may be incrementally 
built up from its constituent clauses. 

20 _ . . 



Discourse Understanding - 20 



The DDM is presented as a discourse parser. The parser 
segments the discourse into linguistically and socially relevant 
units on a clause-by- clause basis by proceeding through the 
discourse, examining the syntactic encoding form of each clause, 
its prepositional content, and its situation of utterance. 

The Model consists of a set of discourse grammars which 
specify the constituents of possible discourse units, a set of 
recursive rules of discourse formation which specify how units 
may relate to one anothor, and a set of semantic interpretation 
rules which assign a semantic and pragmatic interpretation to 
each clause and to the discourse as a whole. 

Each discourse is viewed as composed of discourse units 
which can be of many different types: jokes, stories, plans, 
question/answer sequences, lists, "narratives' 1 (temporally 
ordered lists), and Speech Events, socially situated occasions of 
talk such as doctor/patient interactions, and everyday 
conversations (see Section 4.4 below). In the DDM every possible 
discourse unit type is associated with its own grammar which 
specifies its characteristic constituent structure and is 
interpreted according to specific rules of semantic 
interpretation . 

The basic unit of discourse formation is the discourse 
constituent unit. For the purpose of joining with other clauses 
to create a complex discourse, each clause is considered an 
elementary discburse constituent unit (dcu). Dcu's are of three 
types: list structures (including narratives, which are 
sequentially ordered lists of events), expant^on str uctures , in 

21 



Discourse Understanding - 21 



which one unit gives more detail of some sort about some aspect 
of a preceding unit, and binary structures such as "if /the," 
"and," "or," "but"- -relations in which there is a logical 
connective connecting the constituents. 

Discourse Units (DU's) such as stories and descriptions, 
arguments and plans are composed of dcu's which encode the 
propositions which, taken together, and properly interpreted, 
communicate elaborate semantic structures. 

Dcu's and DU's in their turn, are the means of realization 
of the information exchange which is so basic in Speech Events , 
which are constituents of Interactions . 

The DDM provides an account of the coherence relations in 
texts by means of an explicit mechanism for computing the 
semantic congruence and structural appropriateness of strings of 
clauses (Polanyi, 1985; Hinrichs & Polanyi, 1986). 
Simultaneously, it provides an account of the complexities of 
interrupted or highly attenuated discourse by providing a uniform 
treatment of all phenomena which can interrupt the completion of 
an ongoing discourse unit: elaborations on a point just made, 
digressions to discuss something else, interruptions of one 
Speech Event by another or one ongoing Interaction by another. 
All of these phenomena are treated as subordinated or embedded 
relative to activities w"hich continue the development of an 
ongoing unit- -whether it be a list of some sort, a story, or a 
Speech Event or Interaction. 

The structure which results from the recursive embedding and 
sequencing of discourse units with respect to one another has the 



22 



Discourse Understanding - 22 



form of a tree. This Discourse History Parse Tree contains, for 
any moment in the discourse, a record of which units of what 
types have been completed, and which, having been interrupted 
before completion, remain to be completed . 

In determining whether an incoming clause is to be 
coordinated, subordinated, or superordinated to the last clause 
added to the Tree, the first step is to assign a set of contexts 
of interpretation to the clause specifying to which Interaction, 
Speech Event and Discourse Unit (if any) it belongs. The 
propositional content of the clause is then parsed into a 
semantic frame with slots for recording the temporal, spatial, 
and participant parameters of the clause's interpretation, as 
well as other important information. 

The process of discourse segmentation with the DDM is a 
process of clause parsing, assignment to contexts of 
interpretation and search of only the rightmost Tree nodes for a 
suitable partner. If a suitable partner is found, either a node 
exists which permits the two to be joined, or if no suitable node 
exists, a new node is created and labelled with the values of the 
label of the node computed. The resultant Tree is therefore an 
incremental description of the developing discourse which 
reflects the surface structure relations, if any, between the 
constituents, interruptions are accommodated in the tree as 
discourse embedding in a way not dissimilar to their treatment 
in the Discourse Structures Theory. However, in order to 
accommodate the fact that what may be an interruption to one 
participant — or from the point of view of one Interaction- -may be 

23 



Discourse Understanding - 23 



the ongoing discourse from another perspective; each participant 
in a discburse is associated with a unique Discourse History 
Parse Tree representing the individual's incremental analysis of 
the history of the discourse. The degree to which participants 1 
trees are identical determines their ability to understand each 
other's references to underdeteriuinsd elements in the discourse 
rich as pronomiais , deictics, or definite noun phrases. 

The structural aspects of the DDM just discussed are related 
to the enterprise of developing an adequate discourse semantics-- 
one which would allow the meaning of a discourse to be built up 
on a left-to-right basis, along with the structural analysis of 
the discourse. Developing such a compositional sJmariti.es for 
discburse presupposes adequate ways of representing the semantics 
of both sentences and discourse, as well as effective ways of 
dealing with the context dependence of utterance meanings. 
These issues are discussed in Section 3. 

3* The Meaning? of the Text 
3.1 Truth Conditions for Sentence and Text 

Semantic studies in philosophical logic have focused on one 
important aspect of the meaning of indicative sentences: The 
truth conditions of the sentence, i.e., a characterization of 
what must be the case in the world for the sentence to be seen as 
true rather than false . ' The truth conditions of a sentence can 
be mathematically described as a function from states of affairs 
to truth values. Logical languages, such as First Order 
Predicate Calculus or Intensional Logic, provide formulas for 
expressing such functions. (In an extensional logic, states of 



24 



Discourse Understanding - 24 



affairs are represented by "models" of the logical language; in 
au intentional logic, they are represented by elementary 
entities, called "possible worlds.") 

This logical perspective on sentence meaning has had 
considerable influence in linguistics and AI. Many theories and 
systems account for the way in which the truth cc iditions of a 
sentence depend on its surface form, by providing a definition or 
procedure which translates a sentence into a formula of a logical 
language. The same paradigm can be applied to texts consisting 
Of more than one sentence, since a report or description may also 
be said to be "understood" (though in a limited sense) by someone 
who knows what state of affairs in the world would make it 
"true. " 

Carrying over the logical perspective oh meaning from the 
sentence level to the text level raises the question of how to 
build up a logical representation for the truth conditions of a 
text out of the logical representations of the truth conditions 
of its constituent utterances. To do this, a text understanding 
program must be able to recognize the structure of a text, and to 
apply the semantic operations which build meanings at the levels 
above the sentence. It must also deal correctly with the 
sentence -level text constituents. Instead of analyzing the 
meaning of isolated, independent sentences, it must determine the 
meaning of particular utterances of sentences, taking into 
account the context which has been set up by the previous 
discourse . 



25 



Discourse Understanding - 25 

Processing an individual utterance ir t a discourse thus 
entails three distinct operations: 

• determining the utterance meaning in the applicable 
context ; 

e integrating the utterance meaning with the meaning of 
the text as procassed 3b fair; and 

• updating thi context setting which will be used to 
interpret jfie next utterance. 

The context -dependence of utterance interpretation is shown 
by several difficult phenomena. For instance, temporal, locative 
or conditional interpretive frameworks may be introduced in the 
first .sentence of a discourse segment and have scope over all 
other constituents of that segment. The reference time in a 
narrative moves on as the narrative proceeds (Kamp, 1979; 
Hinrichs, 1986; and Polanyi & Scha, 1984). Anaphoric expressions 
may refer from a subordinate constituent to entities introduced 
by its superordinate constituent, or from a constituent of a 
coordinate paragraph to certain entities introduced by an earlier 
constituent of that same paragraph. 
3.2 Consequences for Logical Formalisms 

Context - dependence. The context -dependence of utterance- 
meanings in discourse can be dealt with by translating a sentence 
not directly into a proposition, but into a function from 
contexts to propositions, where by "context" one means a data 
structure that contains all the relevant information that may 
influence sentence interpretation: speaker, addressee, speech 
time, speech location, reference time, candidates for anaphoric 
reference, topic, etc. Formally, contexts are very similar to 
indices as employed in Montague's systems (Montague, 1968; 

26 



Discourse Understanding - 26 



Bennett, 1978). The meaning of a particular utterance of a 
sentence is then constructed by evaluating the sentence meaning 
with respect to the proper context. 

In processing an utterance, a discourse understanding system 
must therefore determine what its proper context is- -and also how 
this utterance may create a new context, or modify existing ones, 
for the interpretation of subsequent utterances. Polanyi and 
Scha (1984) propose to use Woods 1 (1970) Augmented Transition 
Network formalism to formulate a recursive definition of 
discourse constituent structure which is coupled with semantic 
rules that build up meaning representations for discourse 
constituent units; the register mechanism of the ATN's is used to 
keep track of the correct contexts in this process. 
3.3 Discourse Anaphora 

Beyond adopting a Montague -style context mechanism, some 
other departures from standard logical practice may be necessary 
to build up meaning representations for texts from meaning 
representations for sentences. 

Observations on anaphoric reference in discourse have 
motivated some proposals for significant innovations in 
representational formalisms, especially concerning the 
representation of the denotation of indefinite noun phrases. 
Several authors (including Karttunen, 1976) have argued that 
indefinite noun phrases should be translated into "indefinite 
entities" of some sort, as opposed to existential quantifiers. 



27 



Discourse Understanding - 27 

For instance, 

"John loves a woman." 
would not be represented as 

E x: Woman (x) and Love (J, x) 
but rather as 

Woman (u) and Love ( J , u) 
where u is a Skolem-constant- -a constant whose denotation is 
undetermined, therefore behaving, for all practical purposes, 
like a variable which is implicitly existentially quantified. 
Leaving the existential quantifier implicit has an advantage when 
one deals with discourse anaphora. 

"John loves a woman. Her name is Mary." 
can be treated simply by conjoining the formula for "Her name is 
Mary," with the one for "John loves a woman," while resolving the 
pronoun "her" to corefer with the constant for "a woman:" 
(Woman (u) and Love (J, u) ) and name (u) - "Mary." 
This procedure does not work if indefinite noun phrases are 
represented by existential quantifiers: 

(E x: Woman (x) and Love (J, x) ) and name (x) - "Mary" 
is infelicitous because a variable is used outside the scope of 
its defining occurrence. 

The perspective just sketched has been pushed furthest in a 
formalism devised by Hans Kamp (1979). The formulas used in this 
formalism are called Discourse Representation Structures (DRS's). 
They serve the role of logical formulas, representing the meaning 
of the text so far, as well as the role of contexts which set up 



28 



Discourse Understanding - 28 

the right reference times and anaphoric reference candidates for 
the interpretation of next utterances. 

DRS's differ from ordinary logical formulas in the way 
variables are used. A DRS is defined to be true if it is 
embeddable in a model which corresponds to the actual world. 
Embeddability of DRSs is recursively defined on the structure of 
the formulas. 

An alternative approach to the problem of discourse anaphora 
is described by Webber, where the representation of sentence 
meanings is separated from the representation of "evoked 
entities" (Webber, 1982). 

3.4 Background knowledge and Plausible Inferences . 

Understanding a text involves much more than understanding 
the literal meanings of its constituent utterances, and their 
explicitly stated relations. The message of a text is rarely 
completely explicit; the author relies on the fact that the 
hearer/reader will integrate the meanings of the utterances with 
an independently given set of background assumptions about the 
domain and about the author. All implications which follow in a 
simple and direct way from the combination of the explicit 
utterances and the presupposed background knowledge are 
considered to be implicit in the text. 

For a system to be capable of discourse understanding in this 
more extended sense, its mechanisms must be augmented with a 
representation of the required background knowledge, and with a 
system that performs inferences on the basis of explicit text 
meanings and background knowledge, generating representations of 



29 



ERLC 



Discourse Understanding - 29 

infoiination that was implicit in the text. Different kinds of 
background information play a role. Ideally, a discourse 
understanding system should have a rather rich, encyclopedic 
knowledge base or, at least, a knowledge base comparable to the 
user's for the pertinent domain, and it should have particularly 
good coverage in knowledge which people consider "common sense." 
How to model common sense domains has therefore become a research 
area in itself (Charniak, 1977; and Hobbs & Moore, 1985). 

An important set of background assumptions which has 
received a lot of attention concerns the characters in stories; 
unless told otherwise, story- recipients must assume the 
characters to be "normal," rational, purposeful people, and they 
must bring these assumptions to bear on the text in order to make 
sense of it. Various systems have been built which embody some 
knowledge of this sort and bring it to bear on the discourse - 
understanding process. 

SAM (Cullingford, 1978, 1981; and Schank & Abelson, 1977), 
for instance, is a system for understanding narratives, which is 
based on the notion of a script . A script is a knowledge 
structure which represents a stereotypical sequence of events, 
such as taking a bus, going to a movie theatre, or going to a 
restaurant for dinner. SAM's representation of a script consists 
of a set of simple actions described as conceptual dependency 
structures, together with the causal connections between those 
actions. The actions in a script are further organized into a 
sequence of scenes, which, in the case of the restaurant script, 
includes entering the restaurant, ordering food, eating, paying, 



30 



Discourse Understanding - 30 

and leaving. Each script also has a set of roles and props 
characterizing the people and objects that are expected to appear 
in the sequence of events. 

In processing a narrative about eating in a restaurant, SAM 
first has to recognize that the restaurant script is the relevant 
context for interpreting the narrative. Once the script is 
chosen, SAM will try to interpret each new sentence as part of 
that script. It does this by matching the conceptual 
representation of the new sentence against the actions 
represented in the script. When it finds a match, it 
incorporates the sentence meaning into its representation of the 
narrative. It also fills in the script actions preceding the one 
matched. By this process, SAM infers actions that are implicit 
in the narrative it is reading. Thus, when it reads the 
narrative : 

John went to the Fisherman's Grotto for dinner. 
He ordered lobster. The bill was outrageous. 

it includes in its representation that John actually ate his 

lobster, that he received a large bill, and that he paid it. 

A later system, FRUMP (DeJong, 1979a, 1979b), pushes the 

idea of expectation- driven understanding a little further and 

dispenses with script- independent meaning representations 

altogether; it parses its input text directly into script-slots, 

and anything which does not fit is ignored. (FRUMP is presented 

as a model of human text skimming.) IPP (Levin & Moore, 1977; 

and Sidner & Israel, 1981), in its turn modifies the FRUMP 

approach by mixing script-based text skimming with a somewhat 

more careful semantic analysis of selected parts of the text. 



31 



Discourse Understanding - 3i 

Its meaning representations contain not only scripts with f illed- 
in slots, but also representations of "unexpected events:" 

In a realistic application of the script approach, the 
scripts to be invoked must be selected from thousands of 
candidates; SAM chose from only three or four. Furthermore, one 
will have to drop SAM's assumption that each script contains one 
event that is always explicitly mentioned in the text in order to 
invoke the script. The task of finding which of the many 
candidate scripts matches the input sequence best thus presents 
computational problems which deserve further study. 

The idea of a "script" is usually associated with the 
description of predefined sequences rf events which constitute 
the "building blocks" of everyday life. Almost by definition, 
scripts are not sufficient to understand interesting stories. 
Real stories tend to involve somewhat more complex plots, arising 
from conflicts between the perceptions, ideas, and goals of the 
different characters. A program that interprets its input 
reports in terms of the goals and subgoals of the protagonist is 
PAM (Plan Applier Mechanism), designed by Wilensky (1981). 

Later work derives plot structure from "interacting plans," 
that is, plans involving two or more participants in cooperative 
or competitive interaction. Such plans differ from single 
participant plans in several ways (see Bruce, 1986); the most 
significant being that they are produced, interpreted, and 
executed in a belief context, i.e., what participants believe 
about the interaction is significant, rather than any putative 
objective account of the events. 



32 



Discourse Understanding - 32 



Thus, for example, in order for a system to make sense of a 
children's story such as "Hansel and Gretel," it must monitor the 
evolution of the children's, the parents', and the witch's 
beliefs about events as well as the events themselves (Bruce & 
Newman, 1978). When the parents tell the children that the 
family is going to "fetch wood," the system must note that the 
actions the parents subsequently take are designed to be 
interpretable by the children as simple wood fetching, but are 
simultaneously effecting the abandonment of Hansel and Gretel. 
Moreover, it must be able to compute embedded beliefs, e.g., the 
parents do not know that Hansel has overheard their plan and, 
hence, that he believes that they intend him to believe the 
actions contribute to wood fetching, but, in fact, are intended 
to lead to his and Gretel's death. Central to this belief 
monitoring is the computation of mutual belief (Allen, 1979; 
Bruce & Newman, 1978; and Cohen, 1984) i.e., those beliefs fully 
shared and known to be shared among the participants. 

Mechanisms for interacting plans calculations have been 
outlined in some detail (Bruce & Newman, 1978), but not fully 
implemented in any current systems. Analyses in terms of 
interacting plans have proved useful in studies of conversations 
(Bruce, 1986), classroom interactions, skits (Newman & Bruce, 
1986), and written stories (Bruce & Newman, 1978; Bruce, 1980a, 
1980b) . 

3 . 5 Summarizing Stories 

Understanding a story as a communicative object requires 
more than dealing with its explicit content and the associated 



33 



Discourse Understanding - 33 



plausible inferences. When someone tells a story, not all the 
information reported is equally important. Truly understanding 
the story would mean, among other things, being able to see the 
distinctions between more important and less important 
information. Evidence of this kind of understanding would be a 
system's capability to generate adequate summaries of input 
texts . 

Many approaches to the story understanding problem have been 
proposed. Four of them are discussed below; they are based, 
respectively, on surface text phenomena, on lot structure, on 
affective dynamics, and on the author -reader relationship. 

The first approach implements the ideas formulated by 
Polanyi concerning the way in which human storytellers encode 
their information. She maintains that people explicitly mark the 
relative salience of different pieces of information in a text; 
they make sure that an important piece of information "stands 
out" against the surrounding information. They do this by means 
of meta-comments, of various evaluative devices : explicit 
markers, repetition, and the use of encoding forms which deviate 
from the "local norm" in the text (long versus short sentences, 
direct discourse versus narrated events, colloquial versus formal 
register, etc. ) (Polanyi, 1985) . 

Based on these ideas, a system was developed that simply 
counts the number of evaluative devices used to highlight each 
proposition in a story and then puts the most highly evaluated 
states and the most highly evaluated events together in a summary 
of the input story. The system thus manages to construct a 



34 



Discourse Understanding - 34 



reasonable summary on the basis of the surface appeaiartce of the 
story, without understanding it in any sense; it shows that we 
must be careful in ascribing "understanding" capabilities to a 
system which performs a specific task. 

The relevant work on plot structure originates with Propp 
(1968) and Rumelhart (1975). Lehnert (1981; Lehnert, Black, & 
Reiser, 1981; Lehnert, 1983; and Lehnert & Loiselle, 1985) 
developed a summarization algorithm based on the causal relations 
between uhe events and states reported in a story. By inspecting 
the network of causal connections, it concludes that certain 
events play a crucial role in the development of narratives, by 
moving the plot from one place to an essentially different place. 

Closely related to Lehnert's work is Dyer's (1981, 1983) 
system, called BORIS, which attempts "in-depth understanding" of 
narratives. Such understanding should include being able to 
summarize the point or moral thac the author intended the 
narrative to represent. This work moves beyond earlier work on 
plan-based understanding, such as Wilencky's (1981), by 
abstracting the communicative intent . 

BORIS embodies thematic patterns, called Thematic 
Abstraction Units (TAUs). For example, TAU- DIRE -STRAITS encodes 
the pactern: x has a crisis goal; x can't resolve the criiis 
alone; x seeks a friend y to help out. TAUs arise from errors in 
planning or plan execution. They refer to a plan used, its 
intended effect, why it failed, and what can be done about the 
failure. As such, they allow BORIS to organize the narratives at 



Discourse Understanding - 35 

an intentional level, which leads naturally to an appropriate 
summarization or even drawing of a moral. 

A contrasting approach is that of Brewer and Lichtenstein 
(1981, 1982). fhey argue that stories are a subclass of 
narratives whose purpose is to entertain. Thus, plan-based 
analyses ultimately miss the point of a story if they are not 
augmented by an effective component, one that shows how 
structural elements of the text influence the reader. For 
example, suspense is created when the author reveals that a 
negative outcome is in store for a central character and that the 
character is unaware of his or her fate. Thus, relations among 
the author's, the reader's, and the characters' belief states 
become essential to understanding, or being affected by, the 
st cry . 

In the line of the Brewer and Lichtenstein approach, Bruce 
(1980b) outlines a central model of the author- reader 
relationship. The model uakes explicit not only the author and 
the reader as participants in the communicative act, but also a 
constellation of other implied participants. For instance, in an 
ironic text, the author establishes an apparent speaker with 
beliefs and intentions which conflict in some respects with her 
own. 

It is noteworthy that to date attempts such as those of 
Brewer, Lichtenstein, and Bruce have been purely theoretical; no 
working system addresses the interactions of author's and 
reader's goals at that level. 



36 



Discourse Understanding - 36 

Plan Recognition 
4.1 Tne Pragmatic Perspective on Discourse 

Language, especially written language, is o^ten viewed as a 
code for packaging and transmitting information from one 
individual to another. Under this view, a linguistic message is 
fully represented by the words and sentences it comprises; texts 
are thus objects that can be studied in isolation. By taking 
such a stance, one is led naturally, for instance, to regard 
words as referring back to other words. Concepts like coherence, 
relevance, and topic are then regarded as properties of texts, 
leading researchers to confine their search for these properties 
to words and sentences . 

A contrasting view, proposed by Strawson (1950), Austin 
(1962), Searle (1969), and others is that speakers or writers use 
words to do things, for instance, to refer to things, or to get a 
hearer or reader to believe or do something. They are produced 
by a person, who is attempting to use them to produce certain 
effects on an audience (perhaps an imagined audience). According 
to this view, utterances a:-e tools used in social interaction and 
should be studied in that light. 

Morgan and Sellner (1980) suggest that properties like 
coherence, relevance, and text structure are likely to be 
obtained from a theory of plans and goals appropriately extended 
to linguistic actions. Properties like "relevance" would be 
epiphenomenal byproducts of the appropriate structuring of 
actions. 



Discourse Understanding - 37 

Pragmatics is the study of communication as it is situated 
relative to a particular set of communication demands, speakers, 
hearers, times, places, joint surroundings, linguistic 
conventions, and cultural practices. Including language in a 
theory of action, this suggests that "pragmatics" is just the 
application to verbal problems of general abilities for 
interpreting the everyday world (see Morgan, 1978, for fuller 
discussion). People tend to interpret the behavior of other 
humans in terms of the situation and the actor's intention and 
beliefs. Much of what has been discussed under the rubric 
pragmatics is most reasonably seen as the interpretation of 
linguistic behavior in similar terms. 

The pragmatic perspective on language has three important 
implications for discourse understanding research. The first is 
that the meaning of a linguistic message is only partly 
represented by its content; its meaning for a hearer also depends 
on the hearer's construal of the purpose that the speaker had for 
producing it. The second is that the attribution of intentions 
to a speaker must be an integral component of the listener's 
comprehension process. The third is that a theory of language 
comprehension should determine the extent to which the same 
strategies people use to arrive at satisfactory explanations of 
the physical behavior of others can be employed in their 
comprehension of speech acts. 

The way the meaning of a message is shaped by its producer's 
goals and beliefs is most obvious in a case such as propaganda, 
but it is no less critical for apparently straightforward 



38 



Discourse Understanding - 38 

utterances. For example, a colleague at the office might say, 
"I brought two egg salad sandwiches today." Although the 
referential meaning of this statement might be simple to compute, 
its full meaning depends on whether the speaker's intention was, 
for example, to offer one of the sandwiches, to decline a 
luncheon invitation, or to explain why the office smelled bad. 
Whatever the speaker's goals, the meaning conveyed by the 
statement depends on the hearer's correctly inferring what they 
are (Adams & Bruce, 1982). 

Thus, understanding discourse requires inferring the 
intentions and beliefs that led the speaker to produce the 
observed behavior. But as Grice (1957) points out, simply 
recognizing an actor's plan, as an unseen observer might do (cf. 
Schmidt, Sridharan, & Goodson, 1979; and, Wilensky, 1981), is 
insufficient as a basis for communication. Instead, hearers 
should attribute to speakers intentions that the speakers intend 
for them to infer. To ensure successful communication, speakers 
attempt to maximize the likelihood that hearers will make the 
inferences they were supposed to make by relying on what Lewis 
(1969) terms "conventions." Conventions are solutions to 
coordination problem s- -where any participant's actions depend on 
the actions of others- -and themselves rely on "mutual knowledge" 
held amongst the parties involved. Mutual knowledge (see also 
Schiffer, 1972) occurs when two people know that a proposition P 
holds, that the other person knows as well that P holds, that the 
second knows that the first knows that P holds, and so on. In 
ordinary conversation, participants make assumptions about mutual 



Discourse Understanding - 39 

knowledge, signal their assumptions through the pragmatic 
presuppositions (Stalnaker, 1974) of their utterances, and 
negotiate misunderstanding of the developing mutual knowledge. 
4.2 Speech Acts 

From a pragmatic perspective, the goal of discourse 
understanding should not be to merely assess the truth conditions 
of one's interlocutor's utterances; Instead, one should be 
concerned with the goal which is being pursued through these 
utterances, and with the way in which every utterance contributes 
to that goal. From this perspective, every language utterance is 
viewed as a social act; it changes, be it perhaps on a small 
scale, the social relation between the speaker and his 
interlocutor. A simple assertion puts me under the obligation to 
defend it if challenged. A question creates for my interlocutor 
the obligation to answer it or to be prepared to justify his lack 
of an inclination to do so. And vows, promises and threats 
clearly extend beyond the micro- sociology of the interactional 
situation, creating commitments in the social world at large. 
The social acts performed by means of linguistic utterances aie 
called Speech Acts (Searle, 1969). 

The Speech Act types which play a role in current 
experimental dialogue systems are: 

• Requests, typically formulated as questions of the form 
"Could you do X" 

• Commands, directly expressed as imperative sentences. 
("Do X") Notice that for most programs, which slavishly 
try to satisfy every whim of their human dialogue 
partner, there is no distinction between a request and 
a command. The program takes no responsibility for its 
actions . 



40 



Discourse Understanding - 40 

•Assertions, directly expressed as indicative sentences. 
Assertions are usually interpreted as commands to store 
and/or evaluate the asserted information. 

•Questions, directly expressed as interrogative 
sentence. A question is usually interpreted as a 
command to provide the answer. 

4.3 Flan Recognition 

If a system analyzes its input utterances as speech acts and 
has at its disposal a repertoire of plausible goals that its 
dialogue partner may pursue, it may be able to understand the 
purpose behind its input utterances by using a method which is 
reminiscent of the way in which a system like PAM (Wilensky, 
1981) understands reports about goal-oriented behavior; it tries 
to guess the more encompassing goal that the speaker may be 
trying to accomplish by executing a plan which has the surface 
speech act as one of its subgoals. 

A system that tries to derive the deeper intentions behind 
surface speech acts in exactly this way was developed by Allen 
(1979). His system exploits knowledge about what constitutes a 
rational plan, as well as beliefs about what goals the speaker is 
likely to have. 

The plan inference process is specified as a set of 

inference rules and a control strategy. Rules are all of the 

form "If agent S believes agent A has a goal X, then agent S may 

infer that age^t A has a goal Y. " Examples of such rules are: 

If_S believes A has a goal of executing action 
ACT, and ACT has an effect E, then S may believe 
that A has a goal of achieving E. 

If S believes A has a goal of knowing whether a 
proposition P is true, then S may believe that A 
has a goal of achieving P. 



41 



Discourse Understanding - 41 

Of course^ given the conditions in the second rule, S might 

alternatively infer that A has a goal of achieving not P; this is 

treated as a separate rule. Which of these rules applies in a 

given setting is determined by control heuristics, as follows. 

The plan inference process can be viewed as a search through 

a set of partial plans . Each partial plan consists of two parts: 

one part is constructed using the plan inference rules from the 

observed action, and the other is constructed using the plan 

construction rules on an expected goal. When mutually exclusive 

rules can be applied to one of these partial plans, the plan is 

copied and one rule is applied in each copy. Each of these 

partial plans is then rated as to how probable it is to be the 

correct plan. The highest rated partial plan is always selected 

for further expansion using the inference rules. The rating is 

determined using a set of heuristics that fall into two classes: 

those that evaluate how well -formed the plan is in the given 

context and those that evaluate how well the plan fits the 

expectations. An example of a heuristic is: 

Decrease the rating of a partial plan if it contains a 
goal that is already true in the present context. 

Allen argues that whenever the intended plan can be derived 

from mutual knowledge, i.e., from knowledge which is knowingly 

shared between speaker and hearer, the hearer is assumed to 

perceive the intended plan, and is expected to react to that 

plan, rather than to the surface speech act. The paradigm 

examples of such situations are known as indirect speech acts 

(Perrault 6c Allen, 1980): sentences like: 



42 



Discourse Understanding - 42 

"Can you pass the salt?" 

or 

"Is the salt near you?" 
uttered at the dinner table where the simple answer "Yes," 
without an accompanying action, would be experienced as a joke or 
an insult. 

The idea also applies, however, to cases that are normally 
not classified as indirect speech acts. For instance, when at 
the information counter of a train station someone asks: 

"Does the 4:20 train go to Toronto?" 
the answer "No" is less helpful than the answer 

"No, but the 5:10 train does." 
which responds to the speaker's perceived goal of going to 
Toronto . 

Allen's plan recognition paradigm has been Developed in work 
by Sidner (Sidner & Israel, 1981; Sidner, 1983, 1985). 
Pollack (1986) has refined it to deal with situations where 
speaker and hearer have conflicting ideas about how certain goals 
may be achieved. Litman (1986; Litman & Allen, 1984), has 
introduced meta-plans which allow for clarification subdialogues 
and plan corrections; she also integrates an awareness of the 
surface structure of discourse, as discussed in section 2 above, 
into the plan-recognition process. 
4.4 Speech Events 

An "unframed" interaction between "uninterpreted" people is 
a rare event. People use a refined system of subcategorization 
to classify the social situations they engage in. These 



43 



Discourse Understanding - 43 

subcategories, called Speech Eveftt types (Hymes, 1967* 1972), 
often assign a specific purpose to the interaction, specify roles 
for the participants, constrain discourse topics and 
conversational registers, and, in many cases, specify a 
conventional sequence of component activities. 

An awareness of what kind of Speech Event one is engaged in, 
thus helps the plan recognition process; the overall goals of the 
interaction, and ofcen the steps to achieve them, are snared 
knowledge among the participants. 

The most precisely circumscribed kinds of Speech Events are 
formal rituals. Speech Event types characterized by grammars 
which are less explicit and less detailed include service 
encounters (Merritt, 1978), dortoi -patient interactions (Byrne & 
Long, 1976), and casual conversations. Schegloff (Schegloff & 
Sacks, 1973) has shown that the process of terminating a 
telephone conversation is a jointly constructed ending sequence 
unit with a predictable course of development. 

The structure of talk which is exchanged in order to perform 
a task may follow the structure of some goal/subgoal analysis of 
this task (Allen, 1979). In Speech Event types which involve a 
more or less fixed goal, this often leads to a fixed grammar of 
subsequent steps taken to attain it. For instance, as described 
by Polanyi and Seha (1984), transcripts of the activities in 
Dutch butcher shops consistently display the following sequential 
structure in the interaction between the butcher and a customer: 



44 



Discourse Understanding - 44 

1. It is established that it is this customer's turn. 

2. The first desired item is ordered, and the order is 
dealt with, . . . * then the desired 

item is ordered and the order is dealt with. 

3. It is established that the sequence of orders is 
finished. 

4. The bill is processed. 

5. The interaction is concluded. 

Each of these steps is filled in in a large variety of 
ways — either of the parties may take the initiative at each step, 
question/answer sequences about the available meat, the right way 
to prepare it, or the exact wishes of the customer may all be 
embedded in the stage 2 steps, and clarification dialogs of 
various sorts may occur. In other words, we find the whole 
repertoire of possibilities admitted by the discourse grammar. 

An important Speech Event type with characteristics slightly 
different from the types mentiont-d so far, is the casual 
conversation. In a casual conversation, all participants have 
the same role: to be "equals;" no purposes are pre-established; 
and the range of possible topics is open-ended, although 
conventionally constrained. 
4.5 Dialogue Systems 

Many dialogue systems have been designed to partake in 
specific types of speech events, in which the computer system and 
its human interlocutor each play a well-defined role. The 
assumption that every dialogue must fall within the patterns 
allowed by the speech event type makes it possible to resolve 
ambiguities in its input (anaphora, ellipsis) and to react to the 
intentions behind it, also when these are not explicitly stated. 

45 



Discourse Understanding - 45 

Most systems of this sort play the role of the "professional" in 
a consultation interaction of some sort. Examples are: 

•a system that teaches an assembly task (Hobbs, 1979) 
•an information system at a train station (Allen, 1979) 

• a travel budget manager (Bruce, 1980) 

• a Rogerian psychotherapist 

Such speech event types involve the participants cooperating 
towards a common goal. In doing this, they decompose the common 
task into subtasks, and, eventually, into elementary subtasks 
that can be executed by one or both of the participants without 
requiring further dialogue. For instance, as discussed earlier 
(Section 2.2.2), Grosz' s original investigation of dialogues 
between a human instructor and an apprentice who was being told 
how to assemble a water pump, showed that the structure of such 
dialogues corresponds closely to the structure of the task 
(Grosz, 1974). 

One should notice, however, that the description of the task 
structure does not predict one fixed tree structure (Grosz, 
1974). A task may involve subtasks that must all be done, but 
can be done in any order. It is not difficult to imagine further 
complexities: alternatives, preconditions, etc. When a task 
does specify one fixed sequence of subtasks, the task structure 
degenerates into a script (cf. section 3.4). 

5 . Modes of Natural Language 
We tend to think of language coining to us in one of two 
forms: oral or written. Thus, AI research on Discourse 
Understanding is conveniently divided between research on 



Discourse Understanding - 46 

understanding" text and research on participating in interactive 
dialogues, which, although most often written rather than spoken, 
are thought of as analogous to oral conversations. That this 
division is inadequate and at times misleading, is shown by Rubin 
(1980), who postulates eight dimensions of variation among 
n language experiences ; " 

The eight dimensions: (1) oral versus written modality, (2) 
interactiveness, (3) spatial commonality, (4) temporal 
commonality, (5) possibility of para- linguistic communication, 
(6) concreteness of referents, (7) audience specificity, and (8) 
separability of participants, define a range of communication 
modalities out of which AI research has focused on only a few, 
albeit significant ones. 

Most AI research (notable exceptions being speech 
understanding work and some efforts at modeling real 
conversations (Reichman, 1981; Hobbs & Evans, 1980; Hobbs & Agar, 
1985; Levin & Moore, 1977; and Hinrichs & Polanyi, 1986) has 
focused on written language and is thus clustered on one pole of 
Rubin's first dimension. What distinguishes the AI dialogue work 
from the AI text work then is that the former is interactive , and 
usually implies spatial and j^mporal commonality. On the other 
hanJ neither of the two modes of language use includes para- 
linguistic comm unication , such as gestures, facial expressions, 
or body position cues. In some of the dialogue work, but not the 
text work, there are concrete referents , in the sense that 
objects are perceptually present to the user and the machine. The 
same holds for audience specificity; some of the dialogue work 



47 



Discourse Understanding - 47 

assumes fairly detailed speaker models of the hearer; Neither of 
the modalities typically allows separability of participants . 
Indeed, most of the communication is one to one. 

From the perspective of this dimensional analysis, the 
research directed at the implementation of interactive computer 
programs that display reasonable behavior in conducting a 
dialogue with a person amounts to the development of a r.ew mode 
of natural language, rather than the analysis of an existing one: 
real-time alphanumeric interaction, usually without shared 
awareness of physical context. Other AI research has focused on 
text understanding, usually assuming a non-specific audience. 
(In contrast, note the mary existing forms of text understanding, 
such as dealing with letters, memos, persuasive essys, etc., 
which do assume specific audience beliefs and plans). 

Some studies (Cohen, Fertig, & Starr, 1982; Cohen, 1984; 
and Tierney, LaZansky, Raphael, & Cohen, 1983) have been devoted 
to the linguistic consequences of the use of different 
communication media. Cohen (1984), for example, used & plan- 
based model of communication to analyze dialogues in five 
modalities: face-to-face, telephone, linked CRT's, (non- 
interactive) audio tape, and (non- interactive) written text. He 
found that speakers in the face -to -face situation, for example, 
attempted to achieve more detailed goals in giving instructions 
than did users of keyboards. More specifically, requests that 
the hearer identify the referent of a noun phrase dominated 
spoken instruction giving discourse, but were rare in the 
keyboard dialogues. 



48 



Discourse Understanding - 48 

These studies suggest that it is important to understand the 
constraints of the communication system as well as the texts per 
se when an AI system is being designed. Moreover, they imply a 
need for caution in interpreting results of AI research. Any 
form of language use is valid to examine and can be illuminating 
in a general way, but specifics of language processing must be 
interpreted in light of the communication modality in which they 
arise . 



49 



Discourse Understanding - 49 

References 

Adams, M. J., & Bruce, B. C. (1982). Background knowledge and 
reading comprehension. In J. Langer & M. T. Smith-Burke 
(Eds.), Reader meets author /bridging the gap^ A 

psychotinguistic and sociolinguistjLe perspective (pp. 2-25). 

Newark, DEr International Reading Association. 
Aliens J. F. (1979). A plan-based approach to speech act 

recognition (Tech. Rep. No. 131). Toronto, Canada- 
University of Toronto, Department of Computer Science. 
Austin, J. L. (1962). Hov to do things with words. London: 

Oxford University Press. 
Bennett, M. (1978). Demonstratives and indexicais in Montague 

grammar. Synthese , 39 , 1-80. 
Brewer, W. F., & Lichtenstein, E. H. (1981). Event schemas, story 

schemas, and story grammars. In J. D. Long & A. D. Baddeley 

(Eds.), Attention and performance IX (pp. 363-379). 

Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Brewer, W. F., & Lichtenstein, E. H. (1982). Stories ati to 

entertain: A structural -affect theory of stories. J ournal 

of Pragmatics 6, 473-486. 
Bruce, B. C, & Newman, D. (1978). Interacting plans. Cognitive 

Science 2, 195-233. 
Bruce, B. C. (1980). Analysis of interacting plans as a guide to 

the understanding of story structure. Poetics 9, 295-311. 



50 



Discourse Understanding - 50 

Bruce, B. C. (1980). Plans and social actions. In R. Spiro, 
B. C. Bruce, & W. Brewer (Eds.), Theoretical issues in 
reading comprehension (pp. 367-384). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 

Bruce, B. G. (1986). Robot plans and human plans: Implications 
for models of communication. In I. & M. Gopnick (Eds.), 
From models to modules ± Studies in cognitive sciences from 
the McGill workshops (pp. 97-114). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Byrne, P. S., & Long, B. E. L. (1976). D actors talking to 
patien ts. London: Her Majesty's Stationary Office. 

Charniak, E. (1977). A framed PAINTING: The representation of a 
commonsfcmse knowledge fragment. Cognitive Science, 1(4), 
355-394. 

Cohen, P. R. , Fertig, S., & Starr, K. (1982). Dependencies of 
discburse structure on the modality of communication: 
Telephone vs. teletype. In Proceedings of The 20th Annual 
Meeting; of the Association of Computational Linguistics 
(pp. 28-35). ACL. 
Cohen, P. R. (1984). The pragmatics of referring and the modality 

of communication. Computational Linguistics , 10 , 97-146. 
Cullingford, R. E. (1978). Script application: Computer 

understanding of newspaper stories . Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Yale University. 
Cullingford, R. E. (1981). SAM. In R. C. Schank, & C. K. 
Riesbeck (Eds.), Xnside computer understanding: Five 
programs plus miniatures (pp. 75-119). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 



51 



Discourse Understanding - 51 

DeJong, G. F. (1979). Prediction and substantiation: A new 

approach to natural language processing. Cognitive Seience , 
3, 251-273. 

DeJong, G. F. (1979). Skimming stories iS real time: An 

experiment in integrated understanding . Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Yale University. 

Dyer, M. G. (1981). The role of TAUs in narratives. In 

Proceedings of the Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive 
Science Society (pp. 225-227). Berkeley, CA: Cognitive 
Science Society. 

Dyer, M. G. (1983). In-depth und erstan ding : A computer model of 
integrated processing and memory for narrative 
comprehension . Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute 
Technology Press. 
Grice, H. P. (1957). Meaning. Philosophical Review, 66, 377-388. 
Grosz, B. [Deutsch] (1974). The structure of task oriented 
dialogs. In IEEE Symposium on Speech Recognition: 
Contributed Papers (pp. 250-253). Pittsburgh, PA: IEEE, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Computer Science. 
Grosz, B. J., & Sidner, C. L. (1986). The structures of discourse 
structure. In L. Polanyi (Ed.), Discourse Structure. 
Norwood, NJ : Ablex. 
Guelich, E. (1970). Makrosyntax der Gliederungssignale im 

Gesprochenen Franzoesisch . Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag. 
Halliday, M., & Hasan, R. (1977). Cohesion in English. London: 
Longmans . 



52 



Discourse Understanding - 52 

Hinrichs, E; (1986). Temporal anaphora in discourse of English. 

Linguistics and Philosophy . 9(1), 63-82. 
Hinrichs, E. , & Polanyi, L. (1986). A unified account of a 
referential gesture. In Proceedings Parasession on 
Pragmatics . Chicago, IL: Chicago Linguistics Society. 
Hobbs, J. (1979). Coherence and co-references. Cognitive 

Science , 3(1), 67-82. 
Hobbs, J. R. (1985). On the coherence and structure of discourse 

(Tech. Rep. No. CSLI-85-37). Stanford, CA: Center for the 

Study of Language and Information. 
Hobbs, J. R. , & Agar, M. H. (1985). the coherence of incoherent 

discourse. Language and Social Psychology . 4, 213-232. 
Hobbs, J., & Evans, D. (1980). Conversation as planned behavior. 

Cognitive Science , 4(4), 349-377. 
Hobbs, J. R., & Moore, R. C. (1985). Formal theories of the 

com fit onr,ense world. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Hy.nes, D. (1967). Models of the interaction of language and 

social setting. Journal of So cial Issues , 23(2), 8-28. 
Hymes, D. (1972). Models of the interaction of language and 

social life. In J. Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.), Directions in 

sociolinguistics (pp. 35-71). New York: Holt, Rinehart and 

Winston. 

Kamp, H. (1979). Events, instants and temporal reference. In 

U. Egli & A. van Stechow (Eds.), Semantics from a m ultiple 
Point of view (pp. 376-471). de Gruyter, Berlin. 

Karttunen, L. (1976). Discourse referents. In J. McCawley (Ed.), 
Syntax and Semantic s. (Vol. 7). New York: Academic Press. 



53 



Discourse Understanding - 53 

Lehnert, W. G. (1981). Plot units and narrative summarization. 

Cognitive Science , 5(4), 293-331. 
Lehnert, W. G. , Black, J. B. , & Reiser, B. J. (1981). 

Summarizing narratives. In Proceedings of the Seventh 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(pp. 184-189). Vancouver, B.C.: IJCAI. 
Lehnert, W. G. (1983). An in-depth understander of narratives. 

Artificial Intelligence 20(1), 15-62. 
Lehnert, W., & Loiselle, C. (1985). Plot unit recognition for 
narratives. In G. Tonfoni (Ed.), Artificial intelligence 
a*"* te xc - un derstanding : Plot units and summarization 
procedures (pp. 9-47). Ed. Zara, Parma, Italy. 
Levin, J. A., & Moore, J. A. (1977). Dialogue games: 

Metacommunication structures for natural language 
interaction. Cognitive Science , 1(4), 395-420. 
Lewis, D. K. (1969). Convention: A philosophical study . 

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Litman, D. J., & Allen, J. F. (1984). A plan recognition model 

for subdialogues in conversations (Tech. Rep. No. TR 141). 
New York: University of Rochester, Department of Computer 
Science . 

Litman, D. J. (1986). Linguistic coherence: A plan-based 

alternative. In 24th Annual M eeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (pp. 215-223). New York: ACL. 

Mann, W. C, & Thompson, S. A. (1983). Relational propositions in 
discourse (Tech. Rep. No. RR-83-115). Marina del Rey, CA: 
Information Sciences Institute. 



54 



Discourse Understanding - 54 

Merritt, H. (1978). On the use of o.k. in service encounters. 

Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Lab, Texas 

Working Papers in Sociolinguistics 42. 
Montague, R. (1968). Pragmatics. In R. Klibansky (Ed.), 

Contemporary philosophy: A survey (pp. 102-22). Florence, 

Italy: La Nuova Italia Editrice. 
Morgan, J. L. (1978). Two types of convention in indirect speech 

acts. In P. Cole (Ed.), Syntax and semantics, (Vol. 9: 

Pragmatics (pp. 261-280). New York: Academic Press. 
Morgan, J. L., & Sellner, M. (1980). Discourse and linguistic 

theory. In R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce, & W. F. Brewer (EH-.), 

Theoretical issues in reading comprehension (pp. 165-200). 

New York: Erlbaum. 
Newman, D. , & Bruce, B. C. (1986). Interpretation and 

manipulation in human plans. Discourse Processes , 9, 167- 

195. 

Perrault, C. R. , & Allen, J. F. (1980). A plan-based analysis of 
indirect speech acts. American Journal of Computational 
Linguistics, 6(3), 167-182. 

Polanyi, L. (1985). A theory of discourse structure and discourse 
coherence. In 21st Regional Meeting of the Chicago 
Linguistic Society (pp. 306-322). Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago, Chicago Linguistic Society. 

Polanyi, L. (1985). Telling the American story . Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex. 



55 



Discourse Understanding - 55 

Polanyi, L. , & Scha, R. (1984). A syntactic approach to discourse 

semantics. In Proceedi ngs of International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics (pp. 413-419). Stanford, CA: 

Stanford University. 
Pollack, M. E. (1986). A model of plan inference that 

distinguishes between the beliefs of actors and observers. 

In 24th Annual M eeting of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics (pp. 207-214). New York: ACL. 
Propp, B. (1968). Morphology of the folktale . Austin, TX: 

University of Texas Press. 
Reichmari, R. (1981). Plain-speaking: A theory and grammar of 

spontaneous discourse . Cambridge, MA: Doctoral Thesis, 

Harvard University, Department of Computer Science. 
Rubin, A. D. (1980). A theoretical taxonomy of the differences 

between oral and written language. In R. J. Spiro, B. C: 

Bruce, & W. F. Brewer (Eds.), Theoretical issues in reading 

comprehension (pp. 411-438). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Rumelhart, D. E. (1975). Notes on a schema for stories. In D. G. 

Bobrow f. A. Coll ins (Eds.) , Representation and understanding 

(pp. 211-236). New York: Academic Press. 
Schank, R. C, & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and 

understanding. Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum. 
Schegloff ; E., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. 

Semiotica VIII, 4, 289-327. 
Schiffer, S. (1972). Meaning. London: Oxford University Press. 



Discourse Understanding - 56 

Schiffrin, D. (1982). Di scourse marker s: Semantic resource for 
tn€ > construction of conve rsation . Unpublished Doctoral 
Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. 

Schmidt, D. F. , Sridharan.. N. S., & Goodson, J. L. (1979). The 
plan recognition problem: An intersection of artificial 
intelligence and psychology. Artificial Intelligence , 10, 
45-83. 

Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of 
language. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 

Sidner, C. L. , & Israel, D. J. (1981). Recognizing intended 
meaning and speaker's plans. In Proceedings of the 
International Joint Conference in Artificial Intelligence 
(pp. 203-208). Vancouver, BC: IJCAI. 

Sidner, C. L. (1983). What the speaker means: The recognition of 
speakers' plans in discburse. International Journal of 
Com puters and Mathematics, Special Issue in Com putational 
Ling uistics , 9(1), 71-82. 

Sidner, C. L. (1985). Plan parsing for intended response 

recognition in discourse. Computational Intelligence , 1(1), 
1-10. 

Stalnaker, R. C. (1974). Pragmatic presuppositions. In M. K. 

Munitz, & P. K. Unger (Eds.), Semantics and philosophy . New 

York: New York University Press. 
Strawson, P. F. (1950). On referring. Mind , 59, 320-344. 



57 



Discourse Understanding - 57 

Tierney, R. J., LaZansky, J., Raphael, T., & Cohen, P. R. (1983). 

Author's intentions and readers' interpretations. lit R. J. 

Tierney, P. Anders, & J. N. Mitchell (Eds.), Understanding 

readers' understandings . Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Webber, B. L. (1982). So what can we talk about now. In M. Brady 

( Ed 0, Computational approaches to discourse . Cambridge, 

MA: MIT Press. 

Wilensky, R. (1981). PAM. In R. C. Schank & C. K. Riesbeck 

(Eds.), Insid e computer understanding: Five programs plus 
m iniatures (pp. 136-179). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Woods, W. A. (1970). Transition network grammars for natural 
language analysis. CACM , 13(10), 591- 6Co. 



58 



Discourse Understanding - 54 

Merritt, M. (1978). On the use of o.k; in service encounters. 

Austin, TX: Southwest Educational Development Lab, Texas 

Working Papers in Sociolinguistics 42. 
Montague, R. (1968). Pragmatics. In R. Klibansky (Ed.), 

Contemporary philosophy: A survey (pp. 102-22). Florence, 

Italy: La Nuova Italia Editrice. 
Morgan, J. L. (1978). Two types of convention in indirect speech 

acts. In P. Cole (Ed.), Syntax and semantics, (Vol. 9: 

Pragmatics (pp. 261-280). New York: Academic Press. 
Morgan, J. L., & Sellner, M. (1980). Discourse and linguistic 

theory. In R. J. Spiro, B. C. Bruce, & W. F. Brewer (EH-.), 

Theoretical issues in reading comprehension (pp. 165-200). 

New York: Erlbaum. 
Newman, D. , 6c Bruce, B. C. (1986). Interpretation and 

manipulation in human plans. Discourse Processes , 9, 167- 

195. 

Perrault, C. R. , 6c Allen, J. F. (1980). A plan-based analysis of 
indirect speech acts. American Journal of Computational 
Linguistics, 6(3), 167-182. 

Polanyi, L. (1985). A theory of discourse structure and discourse 
coherence. In 21st Regional Meeting of the Chicago 
Linguistic Society (pp. 306-322). Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago, Chicago Linguistic Society. 

Polanyi, L. (1985). Telling the American story . Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex. 



55 



Discourse Understanding - 55 

Polanyi, L. , & Scha, R. (1984). A syntactic approach to discourse 

semantics. In Proceedi ngs of International Conference on 

Computational Linguistics (pp. 413-419). Stanford, CA: 

Stanford University. 
Pollack, M. E. (1986). A model of plan inference that 

distinguishes between the beliefs of actors and observers. 

In 24th Annual M eeting of the Association for Computational 

Linguistics (pp. 207-214). New York: ACL. 
Propp, B. (1968). Morphology of the folktale . Austin, TX: 

University of Texas Press. 
Reichmari, R. (1981). Plain-speaking: A theory and grammar of 

spontaneous discourse . Cambridge, MA: Doctoral Thesis, 

Harvard University, Department of Computer Science. 
Rubin, A. D. (1980). A theoretical taxonomy of the differences 

between oral arid written language. In R. J. Spiro, B. C: 

Bruce, & W. F. Brewer (Eds.), Theoretical issues in reading 

comprehension (pp. 411-438). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Rumelhart, D. E. (1975). Notes on a schema for stories. In D. G. 

Bobrow f. A. Coll ins (Eds.) , Representation and understanding 

(pp. 211-236). New York: Academic Press. 
Schank, R. C, & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and 

understand ing. Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum. 
Schegloff ; E., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. 

Semiotica VIII, 4, 289-327. 
Schiffer, S. (1972). Meaning. London: Oxford University Press. 



Discourse Understanding - 56 

Schiffrin, D. (1982). Di scourse marker s: Semantic resource for 
the construction of conve rsation . Unpublished Doctoral 
Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania. 

Schmidt, D. F. , Sridharan.. N. S., & Goodson, J. L. (1979). The 
plan recognition problem: An intersection of artificial 
intelligence and psychology. Artificial Intelligence , 10, 
45-83. 

Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of 
language. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 

Sidner, C. L. , & Israel, D. J. (1981). Recognizing intended 
meaning and speaker's plans. In Proceedings of the 
International Joint Conference in Artificial Intelligence 
(pp. 203-208). Vancouver, BC: IJCAI. 

Sidner, C. L. (1983). What the speaker means: The recognition of 
speakers' plans in discburse. International Journal of 
Com puters and Mathematics, Special Issue in Com putational 
Ling uistics , 9(1), 71-82. 

Sidner, C. L. (1985). Plan parsing for intended response 

recognition in discourse. Computational Intelligence, 1(1), 
1-10. 

Stalnaker, R. C. (1974). Pragmatic presuppositions. In M. K. 

Munitz, & P. K. Unger (Eds.), Semantics and philosophy . New 

York: New York University Press. 
Strawson, P. F. (1950) . On referring. Mind, 59, 320-344. 



57 



Discourse Understanding - 57 

Tierney, R. J., LaZansky, J., Raphael, T., & Cohen, P. R. (1983). 

Author's intentions and readers' interpretations. In R. J. 

Tierney, P. Anders, & J. N. Mitchell (Eds.), Understanding 

readers' understandings . Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Webber, B. L. (1982). So what can we talk about now. In M. Brady 

( Ed 0, Computational approaches to discourse . Cambridge, 

MA: MIT Press. 

Wilensky, R. (1981). PAM. In R. C. Schank & C. K. Riesbeck 

(Eds.), Insid e computer understanding: Five programs plus 
m iniatures (pp. 136-179). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Woods, W. A. (1976). Transition network grammars for natural 
language analysis. CACM , 13(10), 591- 6Co. 



