MAO 30 748 


l 


MASSACHUSETTS  INSTITUTE  OF  TECHNOLOGY 
ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  LABORATORY 


A.I.  Memo  364 


June  1976 


COOPERATIVE  COMPUTATION  OF  STBRBO  DISPARITY 


by 


D.  Marr  and  T.  Poggio* 


Abstract:  The  extraction  of  stereo  disparity  information  from  two  images  depends  upon 
establishing  a correspondence  between  them.  This  article  analyzes  the  nature  of  the 
correspondence  computation,  and  derives  a cooperative  algorithm  that  implements  it  WeX-f- 
show  that  this  algorithm  successfully  extracts  information  from  random-dot  stereograms, 
and  its  implications  for  the  psychophysics  and  neurophysiology  of  the  visual  system  are 
briefly  discussed.*. 

\ 

This  report  describes  research  done  at  the  Artificial  Intelligence  laboratory  of  the 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  Support  for  the  Laboratory’s  artificial  intelligence 
research  is  provided  in  part  by  the  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  of  the  Department 
of  Defense  under  Office  of  Naval  Research  contract  N00014-75-C-0643. 


« Permanent  address:  Max-Planck  Institut  fur  Biologische  Kybemetik,  ^ 
74  Tubingen  1,  Spemannstrasse  38,  Germany.  r 


9 


OCT 


Marr  & Pogglo 


2 


I 

STEREO  DISPARITY 


Introduction 

Perhaps  one  of  the  most  striking  differences  between  a brain  and  today's 
computers  is  the  amount  of  wiring.  In  a digital  computer,  the  ratio  of  connexions  to 
components  is  about  three,  whereas  for  the  mammalian  cortex  it  lies  between  10  and  10,000 

(I). 

Although  this  fact  points  to  a clear  structural  difference  between  the  two, 
it  is  important  to  realise  that  this  distinction  is  not  fundamental  to  the  nature  of  the 
information  processing  that  each  accomplishes,  merely  to  the  particulars  of  how  it  does  it. 
In  Chomsky's  terms  (2),  it  affects  theories  of  performance  but  not  theories  of  competence, 
because  the  nature  of  a computation  that  is  carried  out  by  a machine  or  a nervous  system 
depends  only  on  the  problem  to  be  solved,  not  on  the  available  hardware  (3).  Nevertheless 
one  can  expect  a nervous  system  and  a digital  computer  to  use  different  types  of  algorithm, 
even  when  performing  the  same  underlying  computation.  Algorithms  with  a parallel 
structure,  requiring  many  simultaneous  local  operations  on  large  data  arrays,  are  expensive 
for  today's  computers  but  probably  welt-suited  to  the  highly  interactive  organization  of 
nervous  systems. 

The  class  of  parallel  algorithms  includes  an  interesting  and  not  precisely 
definable  subclass  which  we  may  call  cooperative  algorithms  (3).  Such  algorithms  operate  on 
many  “input''  elements  and  reach  a global  organisation  via  local,  interactive  constraints.  The 
term  "cooperative"  refers  to  the  way  in  which  local  operations  appear  to  cooperate  in 
forming  global  order  in  a well-regulated  manner.  Cooperative  phenomena  are  well-known 
in  physics  (4.  5),  and  it  has  recently  been  proposed  that  they  may  play  an  important  role  in 
biological  systems  as  well  (4,  6,  7,  8,  9, 10).  One  of  the  earliest  suggestions  along  these  lines  is 
due  to  Julesz  (II),  who  maintains  that  stereoscopic  fusion  is  a cooperative  process.  His  spring 
and  dipoles  model  represents  a suggestive  metaphor  for  this  idea  Besides  its  biological 
relevance,  the  extraction  of  stereoscopic  Information  is  an  important  and  yet  unsolved 
problentin  visual  information  processing  (12)  For  this  reason  --  and  also  as  a case-in-point 
--  it  seems  interesting  to  describe  a cooperative  algorithm  for  this  computation. 

In  this  article,  we  shall  (a)  analyse  the  computational  structure  of  the 
stereo-disparity  problem,  stating  the  goal  of  the  computation  and  characterising  the 
associated  local  constraints;  (b)  describe  a cooperative  algorithm  that  implements  this 
computation;  and  (c)  exhibit  its  performance  on  random-dot  stereograms.  Although  the 
problem  addressed  here  is  not  directly  related  to  the  question  of  how  the  brain  extracts 
disparity  information,  we  shall  briefly  mention  some  questions  and  implications  for 
psychophysics  and  neurophysiology. 


Computational  Struoturo  of  tho  Stereo-disparity  Problem 

Because  of  the  way  our  eyes  are  positioned  and  controlled,  our  brains 
usually  receive  similar  images  of  a scene  taken  from  two  nearby  points  at  the  same 
horizontal  level.  If  two  objects  are  separated  in  depth  from  the  viewer,  the  relative  positions 
of  their  images  will  differ  in  the  two  eyes.  Our  brains  are  capable  of  measuring  this 
— disparity  and  using  it  to  estimate  depth. 

Three  steps  are  involved  in  measuring  stereo  disparity:  (SI)  a particular 


Marr  & Poggio 


3 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


location  on  a surface  in  the  scene  must  be  selected  from  one  image;  (52)  that  same  location 
must  be  identified  in  the  other  image;  and  (S3)  the  disparity  in  the  two  corresponding 
image  points  must  be  measured. 

If  one  could  identify  a location  beyond  doubt  in  the  two  images,  for 
example  by  illuminating  it  with  a spot  of  light,  steps  SI  and  52  could  be  avoided  and  the 
problem  would  be  easy.  In  practise  one  cannot  do  this  (see  figure  I),  and  the  difficult  part 
of  the  computation  is  solving  the  correspondence  problem.  Julesz  found  that  we  are  able  to 
interpret  random-dot  stereograms,  which  are  stereo  pairs  that  consist  of  random  dots  when 
viewed  monocularly,  but  which  fuse  when  viewed  stereoscopically  to  yield  patterns  separated 
in  depth.  This  might  be  thought  surprising  because  when  one  tries  to  set  up  a 
correspondence  between  two  arrays  of  random  dots,  false  targets  arise  in  profusion  (see 
f igure  I).  Yet  we  are  able  to  determine  the  correct  correspondence.  We  need  no  other  cues. 

In  order  to  formulate  the  correspondence  computation  precisely,  we  have 
to  examine  its  basis  in  the  physical  world.  Two  constraints  of  importance  may  be  identified 
(13):  (Cl)  A given  point  on  a physical  surface  has  a unique  position  in  space  at  any  one 
time,  (C2)  Matter  is  cohesive,  it  is  separated  into  objects,  and  the  surfaces  of  objects  are 
generally  smooth  compared  with  their  distance  from  the  viewer. 

These  constraints  apply  to  locations  on  a physical  surface.  Therefore 
when  we  translate  them  into  conditions  on  a computation  we  must  ensure  that  the  items  to 
which  they  apply  there  are  in  (1-1)  correspondence  with 

well-defined  locations  on  a physical  surface.  To  do  this,  one  must  use  surface  markings, 
normal  surface  discontinuities,  shadows  etc.,  which  in  turn  means  using  predicates  that 
correspond  to  changes  in  intensity.  One  solution  is  to  obtain  a primitive  description  (like 
the  primal  sketch  (15))  of  the  intensity  changes  present  in  each  image,  and  then  to  match 
these  descriptions.  Line  and  edge  segments,  blobs,  termination  points,  and  tokens  obtained 
from  these  by  grouping,  usually  correspond  to  items  that  have  a physical  existence  on  a 
surface. 

The  stereo  problem  may  thus  be  reduced  to  that  of  matching  two 
primitive  descriptions,  one  from  each  eye.  One  can  think  of  the  elements  of  these 
descriptions  as  carrying  only  position  information,  like  the  black  squares  in  a random-dot 
stereogram,  although  in  practise  there  will  exist  rules  about  which  matches  between 
descriptive  elements  are  possible,  and  which  are  not.  The  two  physical  constraints  Cl  and 
C2  can  now  be  translated  into  two  rules  for  how  the  left  and  right  descriptions  are 
combined: 

(Rl)  Uniqueness.  Each  item  from  each  image  may  be  assigned  at  most  one  disparity  value. 
This  condition  relies  on  the  assumption  that  an  item  corresponds  to  something  that  has  a 
unique  physical  position. 

(R2)  Continuity.  Disparity  varies  smoothly  almost  everywhere.  This  condition  is  a 
consequence  of  the  cohesiveness  of  matter,  and  it  states  that  only  a small  fraction  of  the  area 
of  an  image  is  composed  of  boundaries  that  are  discontinuous,  in  depth. 

It  is  important  to  stress  that  in  real  life,  Rl  cannot  be  applied  simply  to 
grey-level  points  in  an  image.  The  simplest  counter-example  is  that  of  a goldfish  swimming 
in  a bowl,  because  many  points  in  the  image  receive  contributions  from  the  bowl  and  from 


■ • .*«?* 


Marr  Sc  Poggio 


4 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


FIGURE  1.  There  is  ambiguity  in  the  correspondence  between  the  two  retinal  projections. 
In  this  figure,  each  of  the  four  points  in  one  eye’s  view  could  match  any  of  the  four 
projections  in  the  other  eye’s  view.  Of  the  16  possible  matchings  only  four  are  correct  (filled 
circles),  while  the  remaining  12  are  ‘false  targets"  (open  circles).  It  is  assumed  here  that  the 
targets  (filled  squares)  correspond  to  "matchable’  descriptive  elements  obtained  from  the  left 
and  right  images.  Without  further  constraints  based  on  global  considerations,  such 
ambiguities  cannot  be  resolved.  Redrawn  after  Julesi  (ref.  12  figure  4.5-1). 


"y1*  . 4*r  -i  H-%3j%^U  *.• 


FIGURE  1 


Marr  Je  Poggio 


6 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


FIGURE  2.  Figure  2a  shows  the  explicit  structure  of  the  two  rules  Rl  and  R2  for  the  case 
of  a one-dimensional  image,  and  it  also  represents  the  structure  of  a network  for 
implementing  the  algorithm  described  by  equation  2.  Solid  lines  represent  "inhibitory" 
interactions,  and  dotted  lines  represent  "excitatory"  ones.  2b  gives  the  local  structure  at  each 
node  of  the  network  2a.  This  algorithm  may  be  extended  to  two-dimensional  images,  in 
which  case  each  node  in  the  corresponding  network  has  the  local  structure  shown  in  2c. 
Such  a network  was  used  to  solve  the  stereograms  exhibited  in  figures  3 - 6. 


> 


Marr  & Poggio 


8 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


the  goldfish.  Here,  and  in  general,  a grey-level  point  is  in  only  implicit  correspondence  with 
a physical  location,  and  it  is  therefore  impossible  to  ensure  that  grey-level  points  in  the  two 
images  correspond  to  exactly  the  same  physical  position.  Sharp  changes  in  intensity  are 
usually  due  either  to  the  goldfish,  or  to  the  bowl,  or  to  a reflexion,  and  therefore  define  a 
single  physical  position  precisely. 


A Cooperative  Algorithm 

By  constructing  an  explicit  representation  of  the  two  rules,  we  can  derive 
a cooperative  algorithm  for  the  computation.  Figure  2a  exhibits  their  geometry  in  the 
simple  case  of  a one-dimensional  image.  Lx  and  Ly  represent  the  positions  of  descriptive 
elements  on  the  left  and  right  images.  The  thick  vertical  and  horizontal  lines  represent  lines 
of  sight  from  the  left  and  right  eyes,  and  their  intersection  points  correspond  to  possible 
disparity  values.  The  dotted  diagonal  lines  connect  points  of  constant  disparity. 

The  uniqueness  rule  Rl  states  that  only  one  disparity  value  may  be 
assigned  to  each  descriptive  element.  If  we  now  think  of  the  lines  in  figure  2a  as  a network, 
with  a node  at  each  intersection,  this  means  that  only  one  node  may  be  switched  on  along 
each  horizontal  or  vertical  line. 

The  continuity  rule  R2  states  that  disparity  values  vary  smoothly  almost 
everywhere.  That  is,  solutions  tend  to  spread  along  the  dotted  diagonals. 

If  we  now  place  a "cell"  at  each  node  (figure  2b),  and  connect  it  so  that  it 
inhibits  cells  along  the  thick  lines  in  the  figure,  and  excites  cells  along  the  dotted  lines,  then 
provided  the  parameters  are  appropriate  the  stable  states  of  such  a network  will  be  precisely 
those  in  which  the  two  rules  are  obeyed.  It  remains  only  to  show  that  such  a network  will 
converge  to  a stable  state,  and  we  were  able  to  carry  out  a combinatorial  analysis  (as  in  ref s. 
9 8c  15)  which  established  its  convergence  for  random-dot  stereograms  (16). 

This  idea  may  be  extended  to  two-dimensional  images  simply  by  making 
the  local  excitatory  neighbourhood  two-dimensional.  The  structure  of  each  node  in  the 
network  for  two-dimensional  images  is  shown  in  figure  2c. 

A simple  form  of  the  resulting  algorithm  (3)  is  given  by  the  following  set 
of  difference  equations: 

(1)  c'h4’11  =-  trlH(C(n))  4-C<0,l  , i.e. 


(2) 


r(n  > I) 
xyd 


a 


( £ I 

x’y’d *«  O(xyd) 


where  C represents  the  state  of  the  node  or  cell  at  position  (x,  y)  with  disparity  d at 
iteration  n,  3 is  the  linear  operator  that  embeds  the  local  constraints  (5  and  O are  the 
circular  and  thick  line  neighborhoods  of  the  cell  xyd  in  figure  2c),  and  e is  the  "inhibition" 
constant.  9 Is  a sigmoid  function  with  range  [0,  11  The  state  CXy^^  of  the  corresponding 
node  at  time  (n*l)  is  thus  determined  by  a nonlinear  operator  on  the  output  of  a linear 
transformation  of  the  states  of  neighbouring  cells  at  time  n. 

The  desired  final  state  of  the  computation  is  clearly  a fixed  point  of  this 
algorithm,  and  moreover  any  state  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  two  rules  is  not  a stable  fixed 
point.  Our  combinatorial  analysis  of  this  algorithm  shows  that,  when  9 is  a simple 


1 


> 


f 


Marr  & Poggio 


9 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


threshold  function,  the  process  converges  for  a rather  wide  range  of  parameter  values  (16). 
The  specific  form  of  the  operator  is  apparently  not  very  critical. 

Non-iterative  local  operations  cannot  solve  the  stereo  problem  in  a 
satisfactory  way  (II).  Recurrence  and  non-linearity  are  necessary  to  create  a truly  cooperative 
algorithm  that  cannot  be  decomposed  into  the  superposition  of  local  operations  (17).  General 
results  concerning  such  algorithms  seem  to  be  rather  difficult  to  obtain,  although  we  believe 
that  one  can  usually  establish  convergence  in  probability  for  specific  forms  of  them. 

Examples  of  Applying  the  Algorithm 

Random-dot  stereograms  offer  an  ideal  input  for  testing  the  performance 
of  the  algorithm,  since  they  enable  one  to  bypass  the  costly  and  delicate  process  of 
transforming  the  intensity  array  received  by  each  eye  into  a primitive  description  (14). 
When  we  ourselves  view  a random-dot  stereogram,  we  probably  compute  a description 
couched  in  terms  of  edges  rather  than  squares,  whereas  the  inputs  to  our  algorithm  are  the 
positions  of  the  black  squares.  Figures  3,  4,  5 and  6 show  some  examples  in  which  the 
iterative  algorithm  successfully  solves  the  correspondence  problem,  thus  allowing  disparity 
values  to  be  assigned  to  items  in  each  image.  Presently,  its  technical  applications  are  limited 
only  by  the  preprocessing  problem. 

This  algorithm  can  of  course  be  realised  by  various  mechanisms,  but 
parallel,  recurrent,  nonlinear  interactions,  both  excitatory  and  inhibitory,  seem  the  most 
natural.  The  difference  equations  set  out  above  would  then  represent  an  approximation  to 
the  differential  equations  that  describe  the  dynamics  of  the  network. 

Implications  for  Biology 

We  have  hitherto  refrained  from  discussing  the  biological  problem  of 
how  stereopsis  is  achieved  in  the  mammalian  brain.  Our  analyses  of  the  computation,  and 
of  the  cooperative  algorithm  that  Implements  it,  raise  several  precise  questions  for 
psychophysics  and  physiology.  An  important  preliminary  point  concerns  the  relative 
importance  of  neural  fusion  and  of  eye-movements  for  stereopsis.  The  underlying  question 
is,  are  there  many  disparity  "layers"  (as  our  algorithm  requires),  or  are  there  Just  three 
"pools"  (18)  - crossed,  uncrossed  and  zero  disparity.  Most  physiologists  and  psychologists 
seem  to  accept  the  existence  of  numerous,  sharply  tuned  binocular  "disparity  detectors", 
whose  peak  sensitivities  cover  a wide  range  of  disparity  values  (19,  20).  We  do  not  feel  that 
the  available  evidence  is  decisive  (21),  but  an  answer  is  critical  to  the  biological  relevance  of 
our  analysis.  If  for  example  there  were  only  three  pools  or  layers  with  a narrow  range  of 
disparity  sensitivities,  the  problem  of  false  targets  is  virtually  removed,  but  at  the  expense  of 
having  to  pass  the  convergence  plane  of  the  eyes  across  a surface  in  order  to  achieve  fusion. 
Psychophysical  experiments  are  presently  under  way  to  gain  some  Insight  Into  this  problem, 
but  we  believe  that  only  physiology  is  capable  of  providing  a clear-cut  answer. 

If  this  preliminary  question  is  settled  in  favour  of  a "multi-layer" 
cooperative  algorithm,  there  are  several  obvious  implications  of  the  network  (figure  2)  at  the 
physiological  level:  (a)  the  existence  of  many  sharply  tuned  disparity  units,  that  are  rather 
insensitive  to  the  nature  of  the  descriptive  element  to  which  they  may  refer;  (b)  their 


Marr  & Poggio 


10 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


FIGURE  3.  This  and  the  following  figures  show  the  results  of  applying  the  algorithm 
defined  by  equation  2 to  two  random-dot  stereograms.  The  initial  state  of  the  network  C is 
defined  by  the  input  such  that  a node  takes  the  value  l if  it  occurs  at  the  intersection  of  a I 
in  the  left  and  right  eyes  (see  figure  2),  and  it  has  value  0 otherwise.  The  network  iterates 
on  this  initial  state,  and  the  parameters  used  here,  as  suggested  by  the  combinatorial 
analysis,  were 

9 - 3.0.  « - 2.0  and  M - 5,  where  9 is  the  threshold  and  M is  the  diameter  of  the  "excitatory" 
neighborhood  illustrated  in  figure  2c.  The  stereograms  themselves  are  labelled  LEFT  and 
RIGHT,  the  initial  state  of  the  network  as  0,  and  the  state  after  n iterations  is  marked  as 
such.  To  understand  how  the  figures  represent  states  of  the  network,  imagine  looking  at  it 
from  above.  The  different  disparity  layers  in  the  network  lie  in  parallel  planes  spread  out 
horizontally,  so  that  the  viewer  is  looking  down  through  them.  In  each  plane,  some  nodes 
are  on  and  some  are  off.  Each  of  the  seven  layers  in  the  network  has  been  assigned  a 
different  gray  level,  so  that  a node  that  is  switched  on  in  the  top  layer  (corresponding  to  a 
disparity  of  *3  pixels)  contributes  a dark  point  to  the  image,  and  one  that  is  switched  on  in 
the  lowest  layer  (disparity  - -3)  contributes  a lighter  point.  Initially  (iteration  0)  the  the 
network  is  disorganized,  but  in  the  final  state,  stable  order  has  been  achieved  (iteration  14), 
and  the  inverted  wedding-cake  structure  has  been  found.  The  density  of  this  stereogram  is 
501. 


FIGURE  3 


Marr  Sc  Poggio 


12 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


FIGURE  4.  The  algorithm  of  equation  2,  with  parameter  values  given  in  the  legend  to 
figure  3,  is  capable  of  solving  random-dot  stereograms  with  densities  from  507.  down  to  less 
than  107.  For  this  and  smaller  densities,  the  algorithm  converges  increasingly  slowly  If  a 
simple  homeostatic  mechanism  is  allowed  to  control  the  threshold  9 as  a function  of  the 
average  activity  (number  of  "on"  cells)  at  each  iteration  (compare  ref.  15),  the  algorithm  can 
solve  stereograms  whose  density  is  very  low.  In  this  example,  the  density  is  57  and  the 
central  square  has  a disparity  of  +2  relative  to  the  background.  The  algorithm  "fills  in" 
those  areas  where  no  dots  are  present,  but  it  takes  several  more  iterations  to  arrive  near  the 
solution  than  in  cases  where  the  density  is  507.  When  we  look  at  a sparse  stereogram,  we 
perceive  the  shapes  in  it  as  cleaner  than  those  found  by  the  algorithm.  This,  seems  to  be 
due  to  subjective  contours  that  arise  between  dots  that  lie  on  shape  boundaries.- 


FIGURE  4 


Marr  & Poggio 


14 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


FIGURE  5.  The  disparity  boundaries  found  by  the  algorithm  do  not  depend  on  their 
shapes.  In  figures  a,  b and  c we  give  examples  of  a circle,  an  octagon  (notice  how  well  the 
difference  between  them  is  preserved)  and  a triangle.  The  fourth  example  (d)  shows  a 
square  in  which  the  correlation  is  100*  at  the  boundary,  but  diminishes  to  0*  in  the  center. 
When  one  views  this  stereogram,  the  center  appears  to  shimmer  in  a peculiar  way.  In  the 
network,  the  center  is  unstable. 


FIGURE  5 


Marr  k Poggio 


16 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


FICURE  6.  The  width  of  the  minimal  resolvable  area  increases  with  disparity.  In  all  four 
stereograms  the  pattern  is  the  same,  and  consists  of  five  circles  with  diameters  3,  5,  7,  9 and 
13  dots.  The  disparity  values  exhibited  here  are  *1,  *2,  *3  and  *6,  and  for  each  pattern,  we 
show  the  state  of  network  after  10  iterations.  As  far  as  the  network  is  concerned,  the  last 
pair  (disparity  *6)  is  uncorrelated,  since  only  disparities  from  -3  to  *3  are  present  in  our 
implementation.  After  10  iterations,  information  about  the  lack  of  correlation  is  preserved  in 
the  two  largest  areas. 


>• 


FIGURE  6 


Marr  & Poggio 


18 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


organisation  into  disparity  layers  (or  stripes  or  columns);  (c)  the  presence  of  reciprocal 
excitation  within  each  layer;  (d)  the  presence  of  reciprocal  inhibition  between  layers  along 
the  two  lines  of  sight.  Ideally,  the  inhibition  should  exhibit  the  characteristic  “orthogonal" 
geometry  of  the  thick  lines  in  figure  2,  but  slight  deviations  may  be  permissible  (16). 

At  the  psychophysical  level,  several  experiments  (under  stabilized  image 
conditions)  could  provide  critical  evidence  for  or  against  the  network:  (a)  results  about  the 
size  of  Panum’s  area  and  the  number  of  disparity  “layers*  (b)  results  about  "pulling"  effects 
in  stereopsis  (20);  (c)  results  about  the  relationship  between  disparity  and  the  minimum 
f usable  pattern  size  (see  fig.  6). 

Discussion 

Our  algorithm  performs  a computation  that  finds  a correspondence 
function  between  two  descriptions,  subject  to  the  two  constraints  of  uniqueness  and 
continuity.  More  generally,  if  one  has  a situation  where  "allowable"  solutions  are  those  that 
satisfy  certain  local  constraints,  a cooperative  algorithm  can  often  be  constructed  so  as  to 
find  the  “nearest"  allowable  state  to  an  initial  one.  Provided  that  the  constraints  are  local, 
use  of  a cooperative  algorithm  allows  the  representation  of  global  order,  to  which  the 
algorithm  converges,  to  remain  implicit  in  the  network’s  structure. 

The  interesting  difference  between  this  stereo  algorithm  and  standard 
correlation  techniques  is  that  one  is  not  required  to  specify  minimum  or  maximum 
correlation  areas,  to  which  the  analysis  is  subsequently  restricted.  Previous  attempts  at 
implementing  automatic  stereocomparison  through  local  correlation  measurement  have  failed 
in  part  because  no  single  neighbourhood  size  is  always  correct  (12).  The  absence  of  a 
"characteristic  scale"  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  properties  of  this  algorithm,  and  it  is  a 
central  feature  of  several  cooperative  phenomena  (22).  We  conjecture  that  the  matching 
operation  implemented  by  the  algorithm  represents  in  some  sense  a generalised  form  of 
correlation,  subject  to  the  a priori  requirements  imposed  by  the  constraints.  The  idea  is 
easily  generalisable  to  different  constraints  and  to  other  forms  of  equations  (1)  or  (2),  and  it 
is  technically  quite  appealing. 

Cooperative  algorithms  may  have  many  useful  applications,  (for  example 
to  best-match  associative  retrieval  problems  (15)),  but  their  relevance  to  early  processing  of 
information  by  the  brain  remains  an  open  question  (23).  Although  a range  of  early  visual 
processing  problems  might  yield  to  a cooperative  approach  ("filling-in"  phenomena, 
subjective  contours  (24),  grouping,  figurai  reinforcement,  texture  "fields",  the  correspondence 
problem  for  motion),  it  is  important  to  emphasize  that  in  problems  of  biological  information 
processing,  the  first  important  and  difficult  task  is  to  formulate  the  underlying  computation 
precisely  (3).  After  that,  one  can  study  good  algorithms  for  it.  In  any  case,  we  feel  that  an 
experimental  answer  to  the  question  of  whether  depth  perception  is  actually  a cooperative 
process  is  a critical  prerequisite  to  further  attempts  at  analysing  other  perceptual  processes  in 
terms  of  similar  algorithms. 


Marr  & Poggio 


19 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


References  and  Notes 

1.  D.  A.  Shod,  The  Organisation  of  the  Cerebral  Cortex  (Methuen,  London,  1956).  The 
comparison  depends  of  course  on  what  is  meant  by  a component.  We  refer  here  to  the  level 
of  a gate  and  of  a neuron,  respectively. 

2.  A.  N.  Chomsky.  Aspects  of  the  Theory  of  Syntax.  (M  I T.  Press,  Cambridge  Mass.,  1965). 

3.  D.  Marr  and  T.  Poggio,  in  The  Visual  Field:  Psychophysics  and  Neurophysiology. 
Neurosctences  Research  Program  Bulletin,  E.  Poeppel  et  al,  Eds.  (in  the  press).  Also 
available  as  M.  1.  T.  A.  I.  Lab.  Memo  357. 

4.  H.  Haken,  Ed.  Synergetics-Cooperative  Phenomena  tn  Multicomponent  Systems.  (Teuber, 
Stuttgart.  1973). 

5.  H.  Haken.  Rev.  of  Mod.  Phys.  47,  67  (1975). 

6.  J.  D.  Cowan,  The  problem  of  organismic  reliability,  in  Progress  in  Brain  Research,  N. 
Wiener  & J.  P.  Schade  Eds.,  vol.  17.  Amsterdam,  Elsevter  (1965). 

7.  H.  R.  Wilson  and  J.  D.  Cowan,  Kybernettk  13,  55  (1973). 

8.  M.  Eigen,  N aturwtssenschaften  58,  465  (1971). 

9.  P.  H.  Richter.  Die  P henomenologle  der  Immune  Antuort.  (Contribution  to  a competition  of 
the  Bavarian  Academy  of  Science,  Max-Planck-Institut  fur  Biophys.  Chemie,  1974). 

10.  A.  Cierer  and  H.  Meinhardt,  Kybernettk  12, 30  (1972). 

11.  B.  Julesz,  Foundations  of  Cyclopean  Perception  (Univ.  of  Chicago  Press,  Chicago,  1971). 

12.  K.  Mori.  M.  Kidode  and  H.  Asada,  Comp.  Graphics  and  Image  Processing  2.  393  (1973). 

13  D Marr.  M.  I.  T A.  I.  Lab.  Memo  327  (1974). 

14-  D.  Marr,  Early  processing  of  visual  information,  Phil.  Trans.  Rey.  Soc.  B.  (in  the 
press). 

15.  D.  Marr,  Phil.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  B 252, 23  (1971).  See  especially  section  3.1.2. 

16.  D.  Marr  and  T.  Poggio,  in  preparation. 

17.  T.  Poggio  and  W.  Reichardt,  Visual  control  of  orientation  behaviour  of  the  fly,  part  II. 
Quarterly  Rev.  tn  Biophysics,  (in  the  press). 

18.  W.  Richards.  J.  Opt.  Sx.  Amer.  62.  410  (1971). 

19.  H.  B Barlow,  C.  Blakemore  and  J.  D.  Pettigrew,  /.  Physiol.  (Lend.)  193,  327  (I967>,  J. 
D.  Pettigrew,  T.  Nikara  and  P.  O.  Bishop,  Exp.  Brain  Res.  6,  391  (1968),  C Blakemore,  J. 
Physiol.  (Land.)  209,155(1970). 

20.  B.  Julesz  and  J-J.  Chang,  Bto.  Cybernetics  22, 107  (1976). 

21.  D.  H.  Hubei  and  T.  N.  Wlesel,  Nature  225,  41  (1970). 

22.  K.  G.  Wilson,  Rev.  of  Modern  Physics  47,  773  (1975). 

23.  Julesz  (II),  Cowan  (6),  and  Wilson  6c  Cowan  (7)  were  the  first  to  discuss  explicitly  the 
cooperative  aspect  of  visual  information  processing.  A large  literature  has  recently  been 
accumulating  on  possible  cooperative  processes  in  nervous  systems,  ranging  from  the 
“catastrophe"  literature  (E.  C.  Zeeman,  Scientific  American  234,  65,  April  1976)  to  various 
attempts  of  more  doubtful  credibility.  There  has  hitherto  been  no  careful  study  of  a 
cooperative  algorithm  in  the  context  of  a carefully  defined  computational  problem  (but  see 
ref.  15),  although  algorithms  that  may  be  interpreted  as  cooperative  were  discussed,  for 
instance,  by  P.  Dev,  Int.  J.  Man-Machine  Studies  7,  511  (1975),  and  by  A.  Rosenfeld,  R.  A. 
Hummel  and  S.  W.  Zucker,  IEEE  Trans.  SMC -6,  420  (1976).  In  particular  neither  Dev  nor 


Marr  Sc  Poggio 


20 


STEREO  DISPARITY 


J.  I.  Nelson,  J.  tkeor.  Biol.  49, 1 (1975)  formulated  the  computational  structure  of  the  stereo- 
disparity problem.  As  a consequence,  the  resulting  geometry  of  the  inhibition  between  their 
disparity  detectors  does  not  correspond  to  ours  (see  figure  2c)  and  apparently  fails  to  provide 
a satisfactory  algorithm. 

24.  S.  Ullmann,  M.  /.  T.  A.  I.  Lob.  Mmo  HI  (1976). 

25.  We  thank  Whitman  Richards  for  valuable  discussions,  Henry  Lieberman  for  making  it 
easy  to  create  stereograms,  and  Karen  Prendergast  for  preparing  the  figures.  T.  P. 
acknowledges  the  support  of  the  Max-Planck-Cesellschaft  during  his  visit  to  M.I.T. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  RASE  r»» IMi  Dim  EniaraO) 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 


RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 


S.  TYRE  OF  REPORT  A PERIOD  COVERED 


FORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  ANO  ADDRESS  / 

Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory  v 
545  Technology  Square 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts  02139 


II  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
1400  Wilson  Blvd 
Arlington,  Virginia  22209 


• . DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  ra/ R«par(j 

Distribution  of  this  document  is  unlimited. 


14.  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  • ADDRESVff  dlllarant  ham  Contralllng  Olllea) 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
Information  Systems 
Arlington,  Virginia  22217 


NUMBER  OF  PAOES 

20  pages 


II.  SECURITY  CLASS.  Col  (hi*  rap on) 

UNCLASSIFIED 


IT.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (at  tba  abstract  an  land  In  Maak  20,  II  lllaranl  ham  Haparr) 


It.  KEY  WOROS  (Canllnua  an  raaaraa  iMi  II  naaaaaary  m4  tpontlty  bp  blah  n ylarj 

Stereo  computation 
cooperative  phenomena 
parallel  computation 

physiology  and  psychophysics  of  stereoscopy 


to.  ABSTRACT  ( Cantina  an  t an  am  alba  II  naaaaaary  mP  I pant  tty  Bp  blaab  nmmbarj 

The  extraction  of  stereo (disparity Information  from  two  Images  depends 
upon  establishing  a correspondence  between  them.  This  article  analyzes 
the  nature  of  the  correspondence  computation,  and  derives  a cooperative 
algorithm  that  Implements  It.  We  show  that  this  algorithm  successfully 
extracts  Information  from  random-dot  stereograms,  and  Its  Implications 
for  the  psychophysics  and  neurophysiology  of  the  visual  system  are 
briefly  discussed. 


EDITION  OF  I NOV  Bl  IE  OBSOLETE 
t/n  0103-014- 4401  I 


UNCLASSIFIED  VO'J 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  RAO 


