DEDUCTIVE  SYSTEM  FOR  INTELLIGENCE  ANALYSIS 


Auerbach  Associates  Inc. 


Approved  for  public  release; 
distribution  unlimited. 


ROME  AIR  DEVELOPMENT  CENTER 
AIR  FORCE  SYSTEMS  COMMAND 
6RIFFISS  AIR  FORCE  BASE,  NEW  YORK  13441 


D D C 


This  report  has  been  reviewed  by  the  RADC  Information  Office  (01)  and  Is 
releasable  to  the  National  Technical  Information  Service  (NTIS).  At  NTIS  It 
will  be  releasable  to  the  general  public  Including  foreign  nations. 

This  report  has  been  reviewed  and  Is  approved  for  publication. 


Amom>!  iQJU,- 

ROBERT  N.  ROBERTI 
Project  Engineer 

APPROVED!  fo'tSV'J? 

HOWARD  DAVIS 
Technical  Director 

Intelligence  & Reconnaissance  Division 


TOR  THE  COMMANDER:  . 'I  >' 

c^JOHN  P.  HTSS 

Acting  Chief,  Plans  Otfice 


Do  not  return  this  copy.  Retain  or  destroy 


UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY  CL*  SS'  FlC  AT  ION  OF  ThU  ®AOE  fW*t*n  Kata  Hr, fared) 

i f ) REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


RADC-rTR-76-199 


Dire  READ  INSTRUCTIONS 

r AOt- BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

|l  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO.  3 P E C?»'  FI  T ' c 1 T A L 00  NUMB  E R 


title  — ' ( i-^Vws  t.»  nuitiu  ern'ERED 

A DEDUCTIVE  SYSTEM  FOR  INTELLIGENCE  ANALYSIS.  ' Final  Technical  depart 
^ * ? > - June  *»74  -yAprig  *76^  ^ 

_l J *-«.  H«IH»»II|»I»8.  WgWUWT  WPWBtR 

--  -r-  „/A 


*~0  CONTRACT  AiMMBERf ) 

TSBJforirXTTfloldhirsh  E3/to02-74-C-025f*  h ^ — 

Richard/Carson  > 

9 PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  AOORESS  10  PPOGPAm"fl  EMENT.  PROJECT,  TASK 

APEA  A WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

Auerbach  Associates  Inc 

121  North  Broad  Street  31025F 

Philadelphia  PA  19107 IDHS0434 

II  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS  2 .1  I S^0r7*DAT6  j 

Rome  Air  Development  Center(IRDT)  ^ Jul^  I*>76 

Griffiss  AFB  NY  1 344 1 — — 

116 /V  ✓ ) 

TS  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  ft  ADDRESS^//  different  from  Controlling  Office)  15  SECURITY  CLASS.  fc>/  thj^t9port)  ** 

Same  UNCLASSIFIED  "" 


IT  auTmorTY) 


10.  PPOGPAM  ELEMENT.  PROJECT.  TASK 
APEA  A WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

31025F 

IPHS0434 


Tjul^  1*>76  I 


15a  DECLASSIFICATION  DOWNGRADING 
N/^chedule 


16  DISTRIBUTION  ST  A T EM  E N T <of  this  Report) 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


17  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (of  the  abstract  entarad  in  Block  20,  il  diffarent  from  Report) 


ia  supplementary  notes 

RADC  Project  Engineer:  Robert  N.  Ruherti  (TRDT) 


19  KEY  WOROS  (Continue  on  ravaraa  aide  il  necessary  and  identify  by  block  number) 

Deductive  Processing 
Intelligence  Data  Handling 
Artificial  Intelligence 

^ 

20^  ABSTRACT  fContinua  on  ravaraa  aide  II  nacaaaary  and  Identify  by  block  number) 

This  report  describes  concepts  and  a design  architecture  of  an  inference  syste 
in  a fact-base  supported  information  system.  The  architecture  is  specialized 
to  efficiently  handle  the  separate  functions  of  deduction  development,  fact 
search,  deduction  verification  (by  fact  vase  retrieval  and  or  inferred  infor- 
mation) and  user  dialogue.  Distinctive  features  of  the  design  include: 

(1)  deduction  development  strategies  based  on  performance  success  histories. 


DO  1 ja"M71  1473  EDITION  OF  1 NOV  SS  IS  OBSOLETE 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  of  THIS  PAGE  r*fcon  Omtm  Enffd) 


2 <7  / <96  / 


UNCLASSIFIED 

iECO»lT>  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGEfHTiAn  Omit  Enlmrma) 


(2)  operation  of  deduction  Instantiation  (by  real  or  Inferred  facts)  on  a 
scheduled  basis, 

(3)  special  Inference  system  management  of  acquired  facts  Including  determina- 
tion of  fact  retrieval  requests  that  minimize  search  time  and  retrieval 
volume,  and 

(4)  special  analyses  that  curtail  non-useful  deduction  development. 

A program  design  Is  presented  demonstrating  separation  of  function  (modularity), 

and  multi-user  real-time  capability. 


UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  of  This  P AGEfWTian  Data  Entarad) 


PREFACE 


The  work  covered  In  thla  report  was  accomplished  under  contract 
F30602-74-C-0250  to  develop  the  concepts  and  a design  of  an  Inference  system 
appropriate  to  an  information  system  within  an  intelligence  environment. 

The  report  was  prepared  hy  Isadore  L.  Goldhlrsh  and  Richard  Carson  of  the 
staff  of  AUERBACH  Associates,  Inc.  Grateful  acknowledgement  for  special 
consultation  is  given  to  Dr.  J.  Mlnker  of  the  University  of  Maryland,  to 
Dr.  Richard  LePalvre  of  Rutgers  University,  and  E.  Schernecke  if  the  Auerhach 
staff.  The  work  of  this  report  was  developed  upon  the  foundation  set  in  a 
prior  report  entitled  "Design  Concept  for  an  Augmented  Relational  Intelligence 
Analysis  System  (ARIAS)",  August  1R73,  by  Dr.  J.  Sable,  et  al.  Dr.  J.  Sable 
was  also  the  program  manager  for  this  report  and  provided  valuable  critical 
and  technical  assistance.  The  support  of  Rome  Air  Development  Center  and 
Mr.  Robert  Rubertl,  the  Technical  Monitor  is  gratefully  acknowledged. 


D 


l 


an  intelligence  information  system,  an  inferential  system  will  Improve 
analyst-data  base  interactive  capabilities,  i.e.  , augmenting  information 
retrieval,  reducing  data  storage  requirements,  providing  interactive  hypothesis 
testing.  Future  application  of  inferential  data  analysis  is  planned  for  the 
Scientific  and  Technical  Information  System  (STIS)  at  the  Foreign  Technology 
Division.  This  development  is  Included  as  part  of  TPO  #4,  Intelligence  Data 
Handling. 

AJ 

ROBERT  N.  ROBERT I 
Project  Engineer 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Pam  »oiu»m 


Title 


SECTION  I . INTRODUCTION 


Page 


SECTION  II.  INFERENCE  SYSTEM  CONCEPTS  AND  ARCHITECTURE 


2.1  PRELIMINARY  DISCUSSION  OF  RELATIONS,  LITERALS, 

DEDUCTIONS,  AND  QUERIES  2-7 

2.1.1  The  Literal  2-7 

2.1.2  Types  of  Literals  2-7 

2. 1.2.1  Type  of  Variable  Domains  2-8 

2. 1.2. 2 Range  of  Variable  Domains  2-8 

2.1.3  Types  of  Deductions  2-10 

2.1.4  Answers  to  Queries  2-11 

2.1.5  Interpretation  of  Formal  Implication  In  an 

Information  System  2-11 

2.2  DEDUCTION 2-12 

2.2.1  Unification 2-12 

2.2.2  Resolution 2-13 

2.2.3  Deduction  Nets,  Trees  and  Linear  Chains  2-13 

2.3  DEDUCTION  MECHANISM  2-14 

2.3.1  Ordered  Linear  OL-Deduction  Method  2-14 

2.3.2  OL-Deductlon  Compatible  with  Set  of  Support 

Strategy  2-17 

2.3.3  Selective  Negative  Linear  Resolution  (SNL) 2-18 

2.3.4  Paramodulation 2-18 

2.3.5  Deduction  Simplification  and  Elimination: 

Post  Processing  Operations  2-19 

2.4  FACT  DETERMINATION  2-21 

2.4.1  Summary  of  Sources  of  Facts  for  Deduction 

Evaluation 2-22 

2.4.2  Deduction  and  Verification:  A Two  Stage  Procedure..  2-22 

2.4.3  Effect  of  Actual  vs.  Statistical  Fact  Data  on 

Deduction  Development  2-25 

SECTION  III.  DEDUCTION  DEVELOPMENT  STRATEGY 

3.1  CONTEXT  SETS  3-1 

3.1.1  Context  Set  Formation 3-2 

3.1.2  Context  Set  Hierarchy  3-3 

3.1.3  Context  Set  Weights  and  Bridges  3-3 

3.1.4  Application  of  Context  Sets  3-4 


ill 


: 


IS}  to 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  (Continued) 


3.1.5  Deriving  Context  Weights  for  Literals  3-5 

3.2  DEDUCTION  ORDERING  AND  SELECTION  FOR  DEDUCTION 

DEVELOPMENT  3-5 

3.2.1  Literal  Ordering  3-5 

3. 2. 1.1  Least  Likelihood  of  Refutation  Criterion  for 

Literal  Ordering  in  a Deduction  3-7 

3. 2.1.2  Easiest  to  Refute  Criterion  for  Literal  Ordering 

in  a Deduction  3-8 

3. 2. 1.2.1  State  1,  Deduction  Development:  Literal 

Ordering  Criteria  3-8 

3. 2. 1.2. 2 State  2,  Fact  Determination:  Ordering  for  Fact 

Retrieval  and  Intersection  3-9 

3.2.2  Deduction  Selection  3-12 

3.2.3  Rule  Selection  for  Deduction  Development  3-13 

3.3  DEDUCTION  PRUNING  3-14 

SECTION  IV,  PROGRAM  DESIGN 

4.1  PROGRAM  MODULES  AND  INFORMATION  FLOW 4-1 

4.1.1  Query  Module 4-1 

4.1.2  Deduction  Tree  Management  Module  (DTMM)  4-5 

4.1.3  Deduction  Development  Module  (DDM)  4-5 

4.1.4  Deduction  Resolution  Module  4-8 

4.1.5  Fact  Search  Module 4-8 

4.1.6  Fact  Generation  Algorithms  4-11 

4.1.7  Other  Modules  4-11 

4.2  DEDUCTION  PROGRAM  DATA  DICTIONARY 4-11 

4.2.1  Deduction  (Tree)  Table  4-11 

4.2.2  System  Rules  Table  4-14 

4.2.3  Deduction  Development  Order  Table  4-14 

4.2.4  System  Literal  Table  4-14 

.5  Deduction  Merit  Ranking  Table  4-16 

.6  Deduction  Fact  File  Base  (DFFB)  4-16 

4.2.7  Performance  Information  Table  (Statistics)  4-17 

4.3  SOME  PROGRAMMING  DESIGN  TECHNIQUES  4-17 

4.3.1  Resolution  Unification  Mechanism  4-17 

4.3.2  Factoring  Mechanization  4-18 


iv 


■ 


SECTION  I . INTRODUCTION 

"An  Inference  system  derives  conclusions  (Inferences)  from  facts 
and  premises."  This  Webster  Dictionary  definition  is  interpreted  to  include 
inferences  that  are  new  facts,  not  heretofore  assembled,  and  existing  facts 
available  within  a body  of  preassembled  fact  data.  Much  of  inferential  logic 
in  current  literature  deals  with  former,  that  is  the  generation  of  new 
facts  implied  by  a body  of  fact  data  and  a set  of  premises.  This  is  evident  in 
the  areas  of  problem  solving  and  theorem  proving.  However,  in  the  arena  of  infor- 
mation systems,  emphasis  is  upon  the  latter,  that  is,  upon  finding  facts  that 
currently  exist  in  an  assembled  body  of  fact  data,  or  that  uiay  be  generated  upon 
request  by  specialized  fact  generators  (computer  programs).  The  facts  sought  are 
those  that  can  satisfy  an  information  query.  The  query  may  be  a primitive  direct 
request  as  "have  you  any  X,  Y and  Z facts?";  or  the  query  may  be  as  complex 
as  "what  facta  have  you  that  satisfy...  (and  a list  of  interrelated  conditions 
are  stated)?".  The  query  may  also  be  posed  with  conditions  on  the  number 
of  answers  desired  and  with  qualifications  on  the  answers  (e.g.,  precision, 
credibility) . 

If  the  fact  data  of  an  information  system  were  organized  to  be  expli- 
citly responsive  to  every  valid  query,  the  logical  (data  relational)  organization 


1-1 


and  the  efficiency  of  fact  base  storage,  in  reeard  to  redundancy  needs  and 
accessibility,  would  likely  aquire  a superstructure,  which  might  be  overwhelm- 
ing even  for  a relatively  small  information  system.  As  a practical  matter,  to 
circumscribe  such  overhead,  an  information  system  is  supplemented  by  rules  that 
reflect  data  relationships  among  facts  of  the  fact  base,  so  that  not  all  infor- 
mation need  be  explicit  in  the  fact  base.  The  rules  may  also  provide  repre- 
sentation of  fact  relationships  that  are  alternates  to  relationships  explicit 
in  the  fact  base,  to  afford  alternative,  less  costly,  accesses  to  facts. 


SECTION  XI.  INFERENCE  SYSTEM  CONCEPTS  AND  ARCHITECTURE 

An  Inference  system  Is  « subsystem  within  sn  information  system.  It 
lies  between  the  information  system  Dialogue  package  and  Fact  Base,  with  formal 
interfaces  as  shown  in  Figure  2-1.  The  primary  components  of  the  inference  system 
are: 

(1)  Query  Analyzer 

(2)  Deduction  Mechanism 

(3)  Deduction  Rules 

(4)  Fact  Search  Mechanism 

(5)  Answer  Responder. 

A Performance  History  Analyzer  component  is  included  as  a sixth  component  to 
support  the  inference  system  in  a learning  or  adaptive  mode  so  that  it  may 
cope  with  changing  operational  situations. 

The  Deduction  Rules  (or  just  Rules)  component  contains  (logical  re- 
lational descriptions  (expressed  in  this  report  by  the  Predicate  Calculus)  that: 


(1)  characterize  the  fact  base  and  its  inter-relationships, 

(2)  generate  special  data  seta,  and 

(3)  contain  assertions,  whose  fact  satisfiability  is  not 
necessarily  assured. 


2-1 


The  Rules  component  is  extendible  to  Include  rules  that  trans- 
late and  enable  alternate  versions  of  a query.  This  permits  the  same 
requirement  to  be  exppressed  differently  by  users,  and  may  properly  be 
regarded  as  providing  a query  language  translation  capability  within  the 
inference  system. 

The  inference  system  operates  as  follows.  A user  query  is  passed 
to  the  inference  system  by  the  information  systems  Dialogue.  The  query  is 
then  processed  by  the  Query  Analyzer,  which  prepares  it  in  the  proper  logical 
form  for  deduction  processing.  The  Deductive  Mechanisms  of  the  inference 
system  attempt  to  ascertain  the  satisfiability  of  the  query  by  farrs  exist- 
ing within  the  information  system  fact  base,  by  facts  generstsbl  y special 
generators,  or  by  some  of  the  Deduction  Rules. 

The  Deduction  Mechanism  generates  deductions  by  employing  logical 
inference  techniques,  that  are  well  established  in  the  literature;  see  References, 
in  Appendix  F.  The  different  approaches  cited  in  the  literature  are  generally 
equivalent  in  that  they  derive  the  same  results,  utilizing  the  logic  of  the 
predicate  calculus.  There  are  variations  among  approaches  designed  to  simplify 
operations  for  computer  computation;  and  we  have  chosen  and  adapted,  with  this 
purpose,  the  OL-Deductlon  approach  described  by  Chang  and  Lee,  Reference  1. 

Given  a workable  deduction  approach,  a principle  concern  has  been 
to  devise  a strategy  that  helps  to  narrow  the  almost  limitless  range  of  pos- 
sible deductions  that  may  be  generated  in  the  search  for  useful,  potentially 
satisfiable  deductions.  On  this  matter,  there  is  little  of  substance  in 
the  current  literature,  and  very  little  in  the  way  of  practical  experience, 
see  Reference  6.  Four  approaches,  however,  are  identified  and  to  various 
extents  practices.  They  are: 

(1)  Deduction  Expression  Characteristics.  Presume  success 
probabilities  (e.g.,  likelihood  of  a deduction  being 
satisfied  or  leading  to  another  satisfiable  deduction) 
by  correlating  success  probability  values  with  certain 
aspects  of  the  deduction  statement,  such  as,  the  number 
of  logical  expressions  in  the  statement,  Chang  and 
Lee,  for  example,  enumerate  14  such  content- independent 
characteristics  of  a deduction  statement. 


2-3 


This  approach  leaves  much  to  be  desired  since  It  presumes, 
in  effect,  that  the  satisfiability  of  a deduction  correlates 
with  the  expression  of  a deduction  rather  than  with  the 
"meaning"  of  the  deduction  In  the  context  of  an  information 
system.  It  suggests,  for  example,  that  short  deduction 
statements  are  more  likely  to  be  satisfied  than  long 
deduction  statements. 

(2)  Breadth  versus  Depth.  Most  deductive  systems  generate 
deduction  trees  in  which  each  node  of  the  tree  Is  a 
potential  deduction  resolved  from  its  parent  nodes  on 
the  tree.  The  deduction  tree  can  be  encouraged  to 
expand  depth-wise  or  breadth-wise,  arbitrarily.  Con- 
tentions arise  as  to  the  merit  of  developing  a tree 
along  its  breadth  prior  to  descending  ip  tree  depth, 
visa  versa,  or  the  myriad  of  in  betweens.  Deduction 
development  approaches  based  on  breadth/depth  con- 
siderations are  even  more  limited  than  (1)  above  in 
regard  to  reflecting  the  content  of  deductions,  and 
tend  to  wander  into  meaninglessness  as  the  deduction 
tree  expands. 

(3)  Success  History.  This  a probabilistic  approach  in 
which  the  likelihood  (probability)  of  a successful 
(i.e.,  satisfiable)  deduction  or  of  leading  to  a 
successful  deduction  is  estimated  on  the  basis  of  a 
deduction's  success  history.  The  approach  is,  in 
this  sense,  content  related.  This  approach  collects 
statisfical  performance  data  on  logical  expressions 
appearing  in  deductions,  to  compute  porbabilities. 

The  approach  is  presumed  to  work  well  in  a stable 
information  system,  that  is,  in  one  whose  fact 

base  and  rules  change  slowly  in  comparison  with 
usage. 

(4)  User  Interactions.  The  user  (inquirer)  is  engaged  in 
this  approach  in  directing  deduction  development.  An 
exchange  is  provided  via  the  Dialogue  of  the  information 
system.  For.  practical  operation,  this  approach  does  not 
necessarily  involve  the  user  in  evaluating  each  potential 
deduction  (since  thousands  of  potential  deductions  could 
be  generated  for  difficult  queries),  rather,  milestones 
or  conditions  are  set  as  criteria  for  engaging  the  uaers 
aid.  Considerations  relating  to  these  are: 

(a)  shall  a high  probability  deduction  be  pursued 
which  has  a predicted  heavy  computation  load 
compared  to  other  potential  deductions? 

(b)  shall  the  deduction  process  be  pursued  further, 
having  exceeded  a prescribed  computational  budget 
allotment? 


i 


! 


2-4 


t 


(c)  will  the  user  wish  to  restate  his  query  based  on 
partial  results  thus  far  achieved? 

This  approach  is  highly  effective  in  that  it  brings  the  user 
and  the  information  system  together,  in  a dialogue,  for 
answering  queries.  It  does  not,  however,  absolve  the 
inference  system  from  doing  its  part  to  automate  the  query 
answering  service. 

In  this  report  we  have  placed  our  emphasis  for  the  design  of  deduction 
development  upon  the  content  related  approaches,  namely,  the  Success  History 
and  User  Interaction  approaches,  putting  aside  as  lncidential  the  other  two. 

At  the  outset,  we  had  recognized  that  the  heaviest  computation  burden 
(use  of  resources)  and  processing  delays  lay  not  in  the  Deduction  Mechanism, 
but  rather  in  the  Fact  Search  Mechanism,  (refer  to  Figure  2-1).  Whereas,  the 
Deduction  Mechanism  might  generate  a large  quantity  of  deductions,  these  could 
be  computed  very  rapidly  by  high-speed  computer;  and,  assuming  low  cost  bulk 
storage  availability  and  an  overlay  storage  capability,  a low  cost  could  be 
expected  for  computer  storage  and  computing  resources  by  the  deduction  process. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Fact  Search  Mechanism,  which  generates  specific  facts 
and  collects  selected  fact  data  from  the  information  system  fact  base, 
entails  extensive  and  expensive  data  retrieval  and  data  manipulation  operations. 
Fact  retrieval  requests  transmitted  by  the  Fact  Search  Mechanism  to  the  in- 
formation systems  fact  base  initiate  large  data  search  and  retrieval  operations 
in  that  area  of  the  information  system,  along  with  substantial  delays  associated 
with  the  required  searches  through  the  fact  base.  For  these  reasons,  great 
attention  was  given  to  the  Fact  Search  Mechanism  of  the  inference  system,  to 
its  assigned  functions  and  to  its  design. 

The  Fact  Search  Mechanism  (FSM)  receives,  from  the  Deduction  Mechanism, 
potential  deductions  or  parts  of  deductions  which  may  be  satisfiable  by  facts 
contained  within,  or  generatable  by,  the  information  system.  The  FSM  acquires 
the  desired  facts  from  the  information  system,  via  formal  communications.  Re- 
trieval requests  are  optimally  organized  and  issued  by  the  FSM  to  the  information 
system  in  a manner  to  minimize  overall  search  and  communications  load.  Fact  data 
received  by  the  FSM  are  filtered  of  non- satisfying  facts  and  the  results  are 
assembled  for  query  answering. 


2-5 


It  should  be  noted  that.  In  much  of  the  literature 
by  both  retrieval  from  the  fact  base  and  through  deductive  generation  are  pro- 
cedurally  Intermixed,  There  are  two  practical  reasons  why  this  Is  a generally 
unworkable  procedure. 

(1)  Fact  data  derived  from  the  fact  base  or  from  special  fact 
generators  are  not  Immediately  available  for  deduction 
verification,  requiring  normally  a retrieval  time  inter- 
val. Such  delays  hold  up  deduction  development.  It  is 
generally  better  to  continue  deduction  development  (to 

a point!)  without  waiting  for  fact  verification,  even 
though  this  risks  generating  some  non-useful  deductions. 

(2)  Determining  facts  within  the  deduction  procedure,  by 
generating  a collection  of  deductions,  each  of  which 
is  a derived  fact,  is  inefficient  (expands  the  number 
of  deductions  and  complicates  the  fact  determination 
procedure)  compared  to  utilizing  specialized  fact  gener- 
ators (computer  programs)  or  compared  to  retrieving  the 
collection  of  facts,  in  batch  node,  from  tbs  Fact  Base. 

While  we  have  not  excluded  from  the  Deductive  Mechanism  the  capability 
of  performing  individual  fact  generation,  we  have  designed  the  FSM  to  strongly 
support  fact  determination  and  verification,  on  a batch  basis,  with  facts  derived 
from  the  information  systems  Fact  Base  and  from  specialized  fact  generators. 

A complement  component  to  the  Query  Analyzer  of  the  inference  system 
(see  Figure  2-1)  is  the  Answers  Responder.  This  component  has  two  functions: 

(1)  to  prepare  dialogues  with  users  and  convey  results,  via 
the  information  system  Dialogue, 

(2)  to  convey  information  to  the  Deduction  Mechanism  concerning 
the  satisfiability  of  deductions. 

With  regard  to  the  latter,  the  sooner  the  Deductive  Mechanism  can  learn  whether 
or  not  a deduction  is  satisfiable,  the  better  it  can  guide  deduction  develop- 
ment. 


The  final  major  component  of  the  inference  system  is  the  Performance 
History  Analyzer.  This  component  collects  success-failure  data,  processing 
resource  costs,  and  performance  speed,  and  generates  periodic  probability 
data,  needed  to  guide  the  Deduction  Mechanism  in  its  deduction  development. 


2-6 


2.1 


PRELIMINARY  DISCUSSION  OF  RELATIONS.  LITERALS.  DEDUCTIONS.  AND 
QUERIES 


2.1.1  The  Literal 

The  smallest  logical  unit  In  the  Inference  System  Is  the  simple  re- 
lational statement,  sometimes  called  an  atom.  A relational  statement  has  the 
form  R(a^,  . ..,  an) . We  may  say  that  the  symbol  R stands  for  an  n-ary  re- 

lation when  it  takes  n domain  elements  or  terms,  a^,  ...,  Sj, . For  example 
in  the  relational  statement  Location  (Smith,  Phila),  Location  expresses  a 
binary  relation  between  the  terms  Smith  and  Phila.  A literal  Li  is  either  a 
relational  statement  (atom)  or  its  negation,  and  hence  we  speak  of  positive 
or  negative  literals.  If  we  have  L^  = R(a,b)  and  *=  R(a,b),  then  L^  and 
are  complementary  literals.  It  Is  customary  to  refer  to  L^  as  a positive  and 
L^  (or  L^)  as  a negative  literal. 

In  the  inference  system  all  logical  statements  (propositions,  rules, 
queries,  etc.)  will  be  put  into  a disjunctive  normal  form  so  that  the  scope 
of  each  negation  is  a single  relational  statement  (atom).  Therefore,  we  can 
treat  all  statements  as  a disjunction  of  literals.  We  call  a disjunction  of 
literals  a clause  and  customarily  omit  the  logical  operators  in  clauses  so 
that  a statement  such  as 

A(x,y)  a B(y,z)  A(x,z) 

will  appear  as 

Axy  Byz  Axz 

in  clause  form.  This  stands  for  the  disjunctive  normal  form  A(x,y) vB(y,z) v 
A(x,z).  We  further  assume  that  all  term  variables  in  the  clause  are  univer- 
sally quantified,  that  is,  true  for  all  values  of  x,y,  and  z,  unless  other- 
wise delimited  by  the  deductive  system 

2.1.2  Types  of  Literals 

There  are  several  types  of  literals  in  the  Inference  system.  One 
type  identifies  classes  of  facts  in  the  fact  base,  and  are  denoted  as  fact 
literals.  These  literals  may  be  passed  directly  to  the  fact  base  for  immediate 


2-7 


fact  retrieval  without  further  logical  analysis  of  the  literal.  A second  type 
of  literal  is  used  primarily  to  inter-relate  other  literals,  and,  therefore, 
to  construct  inference  rules  and  queries.  This  type  of  literal  may  also  be 
used  to  infer  tacts  or  classes  of  facts  that  are  neither  available  in  the  fact 
base  nor  provided  by  the  fact  generators.  These  inferred  facts  are  not  verified 
by  the  information  system,  and  if  accepted,  are  accepted  on  faith.  This  is 
discussed  further  in  Section  2.1.3. 

Rule,  query,  and  deduction  clauses  may  contain  one  or  both  literal 
types.  A rule  containing  only  fact  literals  provides  a means  for  defining 
alternative  literals  for  fact  retrievals  - an  important  feature  of  an  inference 
system  concerned  with  optimal  fact  retrieval  performance.  The  set  of  fact 
literals  is  recognized  and  maintained  by  the  inference  system  as  "one-literal" 
rules.  Also  maintained  with  each  fact  literal  are  certain  statistical  data 
reflecting  the  fact  domain  of  the  literal,  the  cost  of  fact  retrieval  for 
the  literal,  and  other  information  useful  in  guiding  deduction  development; 
see  section  3,  Deduction  Development  Strategy. 

2. 1.2.1  Type  of  Variable  Domains 

The  variables  in  a clause  are  all  formally  universally  quantified,  that 
is,  the  proposition  expressed  by  the  clause  is  to  be  satisfied  for  all  values 
of  the  variables.  However,  the  type  of  entities,  objects,  etc,  in  the  domain 
of  a given  relation  which  make  it  semantically  meaningful  is  often  quite  re- 
stricted, and  may  be  a small  subset  of  all  entities  in  the  system.  The  Infer- 
ence System  will  use  this  information  to  restrict  the  number  of  tests  which 
must  be  made  to  verify  the  validity  of  a proposition.  For  example,  in  the 
rule  P(X,Y)  aP(X,Z)  ■ 1 X M(Y,Z)  (where  P means  parent  and  M means  mate),  people, 
animals  and  (some)  plants  may  be  substituted  for  the  X,  Y and  Z terms.  The 
meanings  (types  of  allowable  substitutes)  for  terms  of  each  relation  is  recog- 
nized and  controlled  by  the  inference  system. 

2. 1.2. 2 Range  of  Variable  Domains 

In  classic  logic,  the  use  of  the  quantifier  all  means  that  the  vari- 
ables are  unrestricted.  In  a real  Information  system,  the  meaning  of  the 


L 


2-8 


quantifier  ell  Is  restricted  to  those  entitles  available  within  the  Informa- 
tion system.  In  a practical  way,  "all"  Is  further  restricted  to  those  en- 
titles which  are  available  within  a budget  of  time  and  resources.  A working 
Information  system  oust  specify  (or  estimate)  the  domain  of  each  term  In  a 
relation.  In  particular  It  must  specify  (or  estimate)  the  number  of  entitles 
In  that  domain.  We  call  this  quantity  the  range  of  the  domain.  For  example, 

In  "all  parents  of  people",  the  range  of  the  domain  of  parents  to  a single 
child  could  be  specified  as  two.  The  number  of  parents  may  be  limited  to  a 
current  count  of  entries  In  a parent  fact  file,  or  a practical  range  limit 
of,  say,  10,000  may  be  set. 

In  a working  information  system,  facts  potentially  satisfying  queries 
take  time  to  derive,  and  may  come  forward  Irregularly  and  in  disorder,  as 
appropriate  fact  banks  are  searched.  If  the  query  is  satisfied  prior  to 
retrieving  all  facts,  search  may  be  terminated  before  being  fully  completed. 

This  is  Illustrated  by  the  following  query: 

Query : Find  two  workers  In  factory  F that  have  skill  In  electronics. 

(Sx)  (Works-at  (x,F)  ASklll  (x,  Electronics)) 

Range  (x)  » 2 
Type  (x)  ■ people 

Procedure:  We  might  proceed  to  first  find  and  generate  a file  of 

all  workers  Y in  factory  F,  and  then  to  select  from  this  file  a subfile 
of  all  workers  with  electronics  skills;  and  then  to  select  the  first  two  of 
this  subfile  for  the  answer  to  our  query.  We  might  instead,  however,  search 
the  factory  file  one  at  a time,  testing  for  an  entry  that  has  an  electronics 
skill,  and  continuing  until  two  are  found. 

It  should  be  noted  that  classical  logic  tends  to  express  itself  by 
the  first  of  these  two  procedures,  taking  advantage  of  the  elegance  of  ex- 
pression provided  by  the  "all"  concept.  The  second  procedure  may,  on  the 
other  hand,  be  more  economical  Involving  less  search  activity.  In  practice, 
the  best  method  will  sometimes  be  one  or  the  other,  depending  on  factors  of  fact 
logical  organization  and  physical  storage,  the  performance  of  fact  retrieval 


mechanization.  Interdependency  of  literals  of  a query  and  the  number  of  facts 
requested  by  the  query  in  relation  to  the  number  available  within  the  inform- 
ation system. 


2.1.3  Types  of  Deductions 

A deduction  is  a logical  statement  generated  by  the  inference  system, 
starting,  for  example,  with  a user  query  and  a set  of  rules.  There  are  two 
general  types  of  deductions.  Each  of  these  is  characterized  by  the  extent  to 
which  the  information  system  can  supply  information,  that  is  real  facts,  that 
satisfy  the  deduction. 

(1)  Verified  deductions.  These  are  deductions  for  which  the  in- 
formation system  supplies  information,  that  is,  concrete  facts 
that  support  the  deduction.  The  user  is  supplied  these  facts 
and  the  deduction,  as  a response  to  his  query.  It  is  clear 
that  in  ihis  type  of  deduction,  all  literals  of  the  deduction 
are  of  the  fact  literal  type. 

(2)  Inferred  deductions.  These  are  deductions  for  which  the 
inference  system  does  not  supply  facts  from  the  fact  base 
or  from  fact  generators,  to  support  the  deduction.  The 
deduction  is  taken  on  faith.  This  type  of  deduction  occurs, 
for  example,  when  a set  of  rules  that  are  applied  to  a query 
are  accepted  as  representing  "true"  relations.  As  an  illus- 
tration, an  lnferrence  might  be  that  "every  paid  employee 
has  performed  a measurable  service";  a verified  deduction 
would  require  examining  the  accounting  performance  summary 
files  of  paid  workers  in  the  information  system. 

Infered  deductions  are  called  inferences,  and  divide  into 
two  sub-types:  Those  inferences  that  are  verifiable  by 

facts  from  the  information  system,  but  have  not  been 
verified;  and  those  that  are  not  verifiable  within  the 
means  of  the  information  system.  This  division  is  use- 
ful because  a user  recognizing  the  costs  and  delays 
associated  with  fact  verification  may  feel  satisfied  with 
partially  verified  results. 

We  note  that  the  literals  of  non-verlf lable  inferred  de- 
ductions include  at  least  one  non-fact  literal.  The 
literals  of  verifiable  inferred  deductions  consist  of 
fact  literals  only. 


2-10 


2.1. A 


Answers  to  Queries 


The  Inference  system  generates  deductions  as  a means  of  answer- 
ing queries.  Deductions  may  be  classed  into  acceptable  deductions  and 
unacceptable  deductions.  Unacceptable  deductions  are  deductions  which 
are  either  not  meaningful  or  are  unacceptable  to  a user  as  a response  to 
his  query.  This  is  quite  general  and  can  even  apply  to  verified  deductions 
if  the  supporting  information  does  not  meet  "extra"  user  requirements  - which 
are  conveyable  to  the  inference  system  via  a dialogue.  Also,  an  acceptable 
deduction  may  not  necessarily  fully  satisfy  a query.  For  example,  if  a 
deduction  satisfies  a query  with  10  facts,  but  at  least  say  20  facts  are 
desired,  it  will  be  necessary  to  continue  the  development  of  deductions  in 
the  information  system  until  the  desired  quantity  of  facts  is  derived  - or 
the  search  is  aborted. 

2.1.5  Interpretation  of  Formal  Implication  in  an  Information  System 

In  our  information  system  every  logical  statement  is  expressed  as 
a clause;  that  is,  as  a disjunction  of  literals.  The  clause  may  be  equivalent 
to  an  implication;  for  example,  the  clause 

A(x)  V B(x,y)  V C(x,y) 
is  the  same  as  the  implication 

A(x)  A B (x,y)  ==>>.  C (x,y) • 

The  interpretation  of  the  clause  (and  therefore  of  the  implication)  in  our 
information  system  is  "find  all  values  of  x and  y which  satisfy  the  clause", 
rcavlt  will  be  n vectors: 

Si  = (Xi,  Yi),  i = 1,  2,  ....  n. 

where  the  Xi  and  Yi  are  constants  (entities)  in  the  domains  of 

variables  x and  y respectively. 

Each  vector  Si  provides  a single  answer  that  satisfies  the  clause,  and  its 
equivalent  implication  statement. 


The 


2-11 


In  regard  to  the  Implication  statement,  this  represents  a more 
general  interpretation  than  the  classic  "true  or  false"  interpretation, 
that  makes  no  distinction  as  to  possible  answers  within  subdomains.  Re- 
stating this  difference,  we  have  in  the  classic  logic  that,  assuming  univer- 
sally quantified  variables,  A(x)AB(x,y)  — C(x,y)  is  a true  statement  only 
if  it  hold  for  all  x and  y.  In  the  information  system,  A(x)a  B(x,y)  C (x,y) 

is  a statement  to  be  verified  as  true,  by  vectors  (Xi,  Yi)  that  can  be  dis- 
covered within  the  information  base  of  the  system  to  satisfy  the  implication.  It 

may  be  curious  to  some  logicians,  that  the  null  set  may  be,  for  some  cases,  the 
only  discovered  answer  to  a universally  quantified  statement.  More  likely,  some 
non-null  answers  will  be  found.  The  classic  conception  of  implication  can  be 
highly  effective  in  an  abstract  universe  where  immutable  laws  govern  the  inter- 
relationships of  all  objects.  It  can  be  appreciated,  however,  that  an  informa- 
tion system  is  not  an  abstract  universe.  In  an  information  system  immutable 
laws  governing  information  are  scarce  and  information  is  acquired  by  examinations 
of  a multitude  of  non-universal  rules  and  by  an  abundance  of  detailed  fact  search 
ing.  The  classic  implication  statement  is  not  sufficient,  therefore,  for  a "real 
information  system  and  must  give  way  to  the  more  effective  general  implication 
statement  interpretation  presented  here. 

2.2  DEDUCTION 

2.2.1  Unification 


Within  the  Deductive  System,  all  logical  statements  in  the  predicate 
calculus,  e.g.,  queries,  rules  and  deductions,  are  represented  by  "clauses". 
Symbolically,  a clause  C designates  a disjunction  of  literals  fL}  by,  C = L^Vl^ 
...VLtj,  where  L yL.  means  either  or  or  both.  The  literals  themselves 
are  expressions  involving  "terms".  Terms  need  not  be  logically  defined  to  the 
deduction  mechanism  beyond  their  uniqueness;  their  meaning,  however,  is  that 
they  specify  information  that  together  with  relational  clauses,  result  in  state- 
ments of  fact.  Thus,  for  L(X),  X are  all  terms  satisfying  the  assertion  L(X). 

A literal  L(X)  is  not  the  same  as  a literal  L(Y) , when  X and  Y refer  to  differ- 
ent sets  of  terms  (entities).  When  X and  Y are  not  disjoint,  a process  called 
"unification"  can  be  applied.  This  involves  a procedure  of  substitution  and 
occurs  a great  deal  in  deduction  mechanisms  because  the  terms  of  literals  in 


2-12 


the  rules  of  an  inference  system  tend  to  have  wide  domains.  When  the  domain 
of  a terra  is  universal,  that  is,  it  covers  all  facts,  then  the  term  may  be 
called  a universal  variable.  Generally,  this  is  not  the  case  and  the  domain 
of  each  (variable)  term  must  be  specified.  For  example,  in  L^(X,Y)  and 
(U,W),  if  YCU,  we  can  Identify  L^X.Y)  and  L2(Y,W)  as  two  literals  that 
have  been  unified.  This  unification  procedure  is  extendible  to  clauses  with 
common  domains,  and  as  we  shall  show,  is  appropriate  to  "resolution",  a pro- 
cedure for  generating  deductions  from  two  parent  clauses. 

2.2.2  Resolution 

Deductions  are  generated  in  our  inference  system  by  a method  called 
"Resolution",  illustrated  by  the  following: 

Given  two  clauses  (X)  \J  L2(Y)  and  L^Z)  \J  , if  2 is  a variable 

term  whose  domain  includes  X,  we  may  let  Z take  the  values  of  X.  We  can  then 
"resolve"  these  two  clauses  to  form  a deduction  (resolvent)  by 

[lx(X)  v b2(Y)j  A [Lt(X)  V L3(X)J  =^[l2(Y)  V L3(X)j 

In  discussing  resolution,  we  will  limit  ourselves  to  binary  resolu- 
tion, as  illustrated  in  the  preceeding  example,  and  we  will  refer  to  the  two 
starting  clauses  as  parents,  and  to  the  deduction  clause  as  the  resolvent 
clause.  We  also  make  reference  to  the  positive  form  of  the  literal  of  the 
parents  that  does  not  appear  in  the  resolvent,  as  the  "resolution  literal". 

In  the  preceeding  example,  L3(X)  is  the  resolution  literal.  We  will  frequently 
find  it  useful  to  retain  in'  a resolvent  clause  the  resolution  literals  associated 
with  it,  and  will  mark  the  resolution  literals  appropriately  to  distinguish  them 
from  other  literals  in  the  clause.  A deduction  that  is  the  result  of  a chain  of 
resolutions  can,  therefore,  display  a number  of  these  marked  resolution  literals, 
one  for  each  link  in  the  chain. 

2.2.3  Deduction  Nets,  Trees  and  Linear  Chains 

A deduction  lattice  network  can  be  generated  by  utilizing  starting 
"clauses"  (assertions  and  rule  clauses),  followed  by  resolvent  clauses  as  well  as 


I 


2-13 


starting  clauses  as  parents  of  new  resolvent  clauses.  A (partial)*  deduction 
tree  is  a deduction  net  in  which  at  least  one  of  the  parents  of  each  resolvent 
is  a non-resolvent  clause  (sometimes  called  an  input  clause).  A linear  chain 
deduction  is  a path  of  a tree  deduction.  These  are  illustrated  in  Figure 
2-2. 

2 . 3 DEDUCT ION  MECHANISM 

e have  adopted  for  our  Deduction  Mechanism  the  method  of  ordered 
linear  deduction  (OL-deduction)  described  by  Chang  and  Lee,  Reference  1, 
Appendix  V.  The  Ol.-deduct ion  method  operates  upon  a procedure  in  which  the 
negation  of  an  assertion  is  attempted  to  be  refuted,  when  the  negation  of 
an  assertion  is  successfully  refuted,  the  assertion  is,  thereby,  verified. 

The  refutation  procedure  initiates  with  a set  of  rules  and  an  assertion 
presented  in  negated  form  for  refutation. 

2.3.1  ’rdered  Linear  OL-Deduct ion  Method 

OL-deduction  is  a deduction  tree  development  procedure  containing 
certain  restrictions  on  the  construction  of  deductions  and  on  the  representation 
of  resolvent  and  resolver  deduction  clauses.  In  this  report,  OL-deduction 
ordering  restrictions  are  as  follows: 

(1)  Two  parent  clauses  are  used  to  generate,  by  the  procedure  of 
resolution,  a single  deduction — resolvent  clause.  In  OL- 
deduction,  a pair  of  parents  may  not  have  a common  ancestor, 
that  is,  the  deduction  graph  may  not  have  the  form  of  a 
general  lattice.  This  restriction,  in  effect,  means  that 
each  parent  pair  must  consist  of  one  input  clause  (rule  or 
query  clause)  and  one  resolvent  clause,  except  for  initial 
tree  deductions.  This  restriction  is  compensated  by  a 
later  operation  called  "reduction". 


We  shall  drop  the  term  "partial"  and  use  the  expression  "tree"  in  what  follows. 
The  partial  tree  is  really  a limited  lattice  since  an  input  clause  may  be 
parent  to  more  than  one  deduction  node  of  the  tree. 


2-14 


(2)  Parent  clause  pairs  have  their  resolution  literals  positioned 
at  opposite  ends  of  their  respective  clauses.  By  convention 

in  OL-deduction , the  resolvent  parent  clause  has  its  resolution 
literal  at  the  right-most  position  of  the  clause. 

(3)  The  resolution  literal  is  retained  in  the  generated  resolvent 
clause  and  marked  as  such  by  a frame  symbol,  for  post  pro- 
cessing, t.e.(L(X) | means  L(X)  is  a resolution  literal. 

(4)  The  relative  positions  of  the  resolution  literals  with  respect 
to  the  other  literals  are  preserved  in  the  resolvent  clause. 

Examp le , 


Next  Generation  Resolvent 
Clause  (deduction) 


In  this  example. 


__ 

_ 

L_ 

and  | 

L_ 

3 

5 

the  bottom  deduction. 


are  the  resolution  literals  in 


(5)  Resolution  literals  (i.e.  framed  literals)  in  resolvent 
clauses  are  utilized  in  two  ways. 

(a)  In  post  processing  of  a resolvent  deduction  to 
simplify  or  eliminate  redundant  deductions. 

(b)  To  identify  those  literals  In  a deduction  that  are 
to  be  fact  determined,  e.g.  for  which  facts  may  be 
searched  in  the  fact  base. 


(6)  When  all  literals  of  a deduction  are  resolution  literals 

(i.e.  framed)  the  deduction  is  fully  resolved  and,  therefore, 
fully  prepared  to  be  fact  determined.*  The  facts  to  be 
determined  are  those  that  refute  the  framed  literals.  (We 
must  always  remember  that  we  are  in  a refutation  procedure.) 


Fact  determination  may  be  initiated  upon  any  or  all  resolution  literals  of 
a deduction  at  any  time,  even  for  non  fully  resolved  deductions.  The  se- 
lection of  literals  for  fact  determination  is  guided  by  a strategy  that 
minimizes  fact  retrieval  costs  and  response  delay. 


The  mechanism  of  the  OL-deduction  procedure  is  such  that  all 
resolvents  reflect  their  ancestory  chain.  This  is  due  to  the  ordering 
of  literals  and  the  retention  of  resolution  literals  in  the  resolvent  clauses. 

As  a result,  as  long  as  all  framed  literals  are  retained  and  ordering  of  literals 
is  preserved,  one  can  reconstruct  from  each  resolvent  its  ancestral  deduction  chain. 


The  advantages  of  the  OL-deduction  procedure  are  two- fold. 

(1)  It  provides  a straight  forward  and  orderly  procedure  for 
generating  deductions,  limiting  the  deduction  procedure 

to  (partial)  tree  rather  than  a general  lattice  structure. 

(2)  It  facilitates  certain  operations  related  to  minimizing 
the  growth  of  non-useful  deductions  - these  will  be 
referred  to  subsequently  as  deduction  simplification 
and  elimination  operations. 

In  limiting  itself  to  the  above  tree  structure,  the  OL-deduction 
procedure  is  incomplete,  that  is,  not  all  possible  deductions  can  be  generated. 

The  completeness  of  the  OL-deduction  procedure,  however,  is  assured  by  a 

process  called  "reduction"  that  is  applied  to  resolvents, see  section  2.3. 5. "Reduction" 

in  effect  permits  a resolvent  to  be  created  of  two  parents  with  common  ancestry. 

2.3.2  OL-Deduction  Compatible  with  Set  of  Support  Strategy 

An  added  feature  of  OL-deduction  is  its  relation  to  the  set  of 
support  strategy,  which  tends  to  avoid  development  of  certain  classes  of 
useless  deductions. 

The  set  of  support  strategy  states  that  if  within  the  set  of  potentially 
unsatisfiable  clauses  (facts,  rules  and  negation  of  query)  there  exists  a subset 
which  is  known  to  be  satisfiable  (facts  and  rules),  in  each  resolution  select 
at  least  one  parent  clause  from  outside  this  satisfiable  subset. 


2-17 


In  OL-deduction , rule  clause  parents  generally  provide  a set  of 
support.  Clauses  taken  from  the  set  of  negated  query  clauses  are  external 
to  the  set  of  support  as  are  unsatisf isf iable  resolvent  clauses  since  if  at 
least  one  parent  of  a resolvent  clause  is  chosen  from  outside  the  satisfiable 
set,  then  the  resolvent  formed  is  also  from  outside  that  set. 

2.3.3  Selective  Negative  Linear  Resolution  (SNL) 

For  the  first  stage  of  implementation,  the  restrictions  of  SNL  can 
be  incorporated.  These  restrictions,  while  limiting  the  scope  of  deduction, 
also  eliminate  the  need  for  certain  post-processing  deduction  elimination 
operations.  SNL  restrictions  include  the  following: 

(1)  Input  rule  clauses  are  ordered  Horn  clauses.  A Horn 
clause  is  a clause  containing  at  most  one  positive 
literal.  An  ordered  Horn  clause  places  its  positive 
literal  at  an  end  (the  left-most)  position. 

(2)  The  top  (negated-query)  clause  of  an  OL-deduction  chain  is 
completely  negative,  i.e.,  all  literals  are  in  negative 
form. 

As  a result  of  these  restrictions,  all  resolvents  in  SNL  are  com- 
pletely negative.  Furthermore,  only  Horn  clauses  with  a (exactly  one)  positive 
literal  can  enter  the  derivation  since  purely  negative  input  clauses  cannot 
resolve  with  purely  negative  resolvents. 

2.3.4  Paramodulation 

Paramodulation  is  a specialized  form  of  resolution  which  accepts 
the  equality  literal  as  a special  argument.  When  paramodulation  is  in  effect, 
there  is  no  need  to  add  explicitly  the  axioms  of  transitivity  and  symmetry  of 
equality.  Furthermore,  resolution  with  paramodulation  is  more  efficient  than 
use  of  explicit  axioms.  The  following  examples  demonstrate  paramodulation. 


2) 


V 


(a»c) 


I a^b | (c^b) 

2.3.5  Deduction  Simplification  and  Elimination:  Post  Processing  Operations 


When  a resolvent  clause  has  been  created,  a series  of  operations  are 
performed  upon  it  to  complete  resolution,  to  remove  redundancies  and  to  eliminate 
the  clause  if  it  is  totally  redundant  or  subsumed  by  other  clauses  in  the 
deduction  tree.  These  operations  are  described  in  the  following: 

(1)  Factoring 

When  two  unframed  unifiable  literals  of  the  same  sign 
appear  in  a deduction  clause,  it  is  sufficient  to  refute 
the  less  general  of  the  two,  since  what  refutes  the  less 
general  literal  also  refutes  the  more  general  one.  Drop- 
ping the  less  general  literal  is  called  factoring,  and  is 
preceded  in  OL  by  unification. 


Example:  D3x  A3x  and  XC.Y  produces  D3x  A3x  §3x  C3x 

Factoring  should  always  be  applied  to  pairs  of  literals  which 
are  identical.  If  factoring  is  forced,  however,  by  fully 
exploiting  all  possible  unification  opportunities,  useless 
deductions  tend  to  be  generated. 

(2)  Reduction  without  Unification  (Not  applicable  under  SN1) 

Reduction  is  a process  by  which  an  unframed  literal  with- 
in a deduction  is  resolved  if  it  is  unifiable  with  a com- 
plementary (opposite  signed)  framed  literal  to  the  left 
of  it  in  the  same  deduction  clause.  Reduction  without 
unification  is  the  resolution  of  a literal  which  is  identi- 
cal to  the  framed  complementary  literal  in  the  clause. 

Reduction  is  in  effect  resolution  of  a deduction  with  another 
ancestrally-related  deduction  followed  by  factoring.  For 
example,  consider  the  clause  xficVKZ.  Reduction  will  reduce 
this  to  xfiyzlKl . This  can  be  justified  in  light  of  the 
structure,  of  the  given  clause  which  reveal-s  an  ancestor 
clause  XK.  Reduction  in  this  example  can  be  seen  as  a 
resolution  of  th'e  given  clause  with  the  ancestor  XK  as 
follows : 


2-19 


Example  of  Reduction  (Without  Unification) 

xIkIy  K Z X K „ . 

1 — ' . | Permissabl 

r~l  _ j of  literal 

x[kJY  Z K X 

xHy  Z 0 X 


Permissable  reordering 
of  literals 


C0Y  Z0 


Factor  X,  drop  right-most  X. 
We  have  thus  resolved  the 
literal  K. 


(3)  Tree  Path  Subsumption 

One  clause  subsumes  another  clause  if  it  is  more  general,  jf 
an  unframed  literal  is  identical  to  a framed  literal  to  its 
left  in  a deduction  clause  of  a deduction  tree,  it  can  be  con- 
cluded that  this  deduction  is  subsumed  by  a direct  ancestor  deduction. 

Consider  the  clause  X [Rj YKZ.  The  left  side  of  this  clause  shows 
a direct  ancestor  deduction  XK  that  is  more  general  than  the 
gi^ven  clause.  Since  XK  subsumes  xTrIyEZ  and  is  simpler  to  refute, 

XK  is  retained  and  XImYKZ  is  discarded. 

(4)  Tautology 

A tautology  is  a clause  containing  two  complementary  un- 
framed literals  (e.g.  PvP) , is  always  true  and,  therefore, 
cannot  be  refuted.  Further  applications  of  facts  and  rules 
can  only  lead  to  other  true  clauses  and  not  to  refutation, 
therefore,  tautological  deductions  are  discarded. 

(5)  Reduction  with  Unification  (Not  applicable  under  SNL) 


For  each  substitution  which  unifies  an  unframed  literal  and 
a previous  complementary  framed  literal  to  its  loft  in  the 
same  clause,  generate  a new  deduction  clause  by  making 
the  necessary  unification  substitution  and  deleting  the 
unframed  literal  ■ (The  given  clause  may  be  retained  for  other 
possible  resolution  operations.) 


Example: 

A.  0 B, 
13  lx 


A produces 


Another  form  of  reduction  which  can  be  performed  at  this 
point  comes  from  paramodulation  as  expressed  in  the  following 
examples : 


1) 


2) 


| a » bj  Fa  produces  I a ° b | 
f^a I (a  * b)  produce  s _F®. 


Fa 


Fb 


T]fb 


Though  reduction  is  defined  as  a post  processing  operation, 
it  is,  in  reality,  more  of  a resolution  operation  and, 
therefore,  should  be  executed  within  the  resolution  pro- 
cedure or  prior  to  other  post  processing  operations. 


(6)  Ordering 

Literals  to  the  right  of  the  right-most  framed  literal  are 
free  to  be  reordered.  Reordering  may  not  occur  across 
framed  literals  without  special  care. 


2.4  FACT  DETERMINATION 


OL-deduction , as  has  been  stated,  is  a refutation  procedure.  A 
questionable  assertion,  that  is,  a query,  is  presented  in  negated  form  to 
the  OL-deduction  mechanism.  Deductions  are  then  generated  and  are  sought 
to  be  refuted.  A refutable  deduction  implies  the  existence  of  a collection 
of  rules  and  facts  (possibly  a null  collection)  that  refutes  the  negated  query, 
and  consequently,  satisfies  the  assertion  of  the  query.  It  is  the  collection 
of  facts  that  is  the  answer  to  the  positive  query  and  that  is  provided  by  the 
inference  system. 

A resolved  deduction  is  a clause  consisting  of  only  resolution 
literals;  that  is,  it  is  a deduction  clause  that  has  been  fully  resolved. 

Each  resolution  (framed)  literal  in  a resolved  deduction  clause 
is  a literal  about  which  the  information  system  can  supply  facts  or  is  an 
acceptable  inferred  literal.  An  inferred  literal  will  often  be  a simple 
binary  proposition,  signifying  a yes  or  no;  true  or  false;  0 or  1 value.  In 
the  more  general  case,  where  the  framed  literal  is  a complex  predicate,  the 
literal  will  tend  to  be  a fact  literal  for  which  the  information  system  will 
supply  all  facts.  For  example,  given  1 L(X.5)  1 where  L(X,5)  means  "X"  is  a 
worker  in  factory  "5",  then  the  information  system  will  search  out  all  workers 
in  factory  number  5 and  supply  these  as  facts  satisfying  the  literal.  We  call 
this  procedure  "fact  determination"  When  fact  determination  is  applied  to 
all  of  the  fact  literals  of  a completely  resolved  deduction,  we  then  determine 
a largest  subset  of  these  facts  that  can  satisfy  the  deduction  as  an  entirety. 


The  size  of  this  subset  of  facts  is  dependent  on  the  way  in  which  the  resolution 
literals,  and  their  terms,  of  the  deduction  clause  are  interrelated. 


Example : 

^(X.5) 

l2(x) 

deduction  with  the  meanings 


are  two  interdependent  literals  in  a 


L^(X,5)  , X are  men  working  in  factory  5 
L7(X,<45),  X are  men  under  45  years  of  age 

The  set  of  facts  refuting  the  deduction  is  the  logical  inter- 
section of  the  sets  of  facts  refuting  the  two  framed  literals  independently. 


2.4.1  Summary  of  Sources  of  Facts  for  Deduction  Evaluation 

The  sources  of  facts  for  deduction  evaluation  are  as  follows: 

(1)  Fact  Base  of  the  information  system.  This  is  the  primary 
source  of  fact  data.  The  fact  base  consists  of  data  bases 
and  relational  data  sets. 

(2)  Fact  Generator  Algorithms,  Algorithms  that  generate  facts 
range  from  simple  to  complex.  Simple  algorithms  are  executed 
by  simple  computer  programs,  some  of  which  may  be  under 
direct  control  of  the  inference  system.  Such  algorithms 

may  perform  simple  range  filtering,  or  selection  tests  for 
some  specific  literals.  (Fact  Generator  Algorithms  are  an 
open  area  for  further  investigation  and  are  only  briefly 
touched  upon  in  this  report.) 

(3)  Users.  Users  via  dialogue  may  contribute  facts  to  facilitate 
the  inference  processing. 

(4)  Facts  generated  by  deduction.  These  are  inferred  facts,  not 
verifiable  (satisfiable)  by  the  information  system. 

2.4.2  Deduction  and  Verification:  A Two  Stage  Procedure 

The  deduction  verification  procedure  may  be  viewed  as  consisting  of 
two  parts,  a deduction  development  stage  called  Stage  1 and  a deduction  veri- 
fication or  fact  search  stage  called  Stage  2,  This  is  depicted  in  Figure 
2-3. 


2-22 


Stage  1 generates  deductions  by  resolving  parent  deductions,  queries, 
and  rules  from  the  rule  base.  Stage  2 acts  to  acquire  facts  that  will  satisfy 
the  resolved  literals  of  a deduction. 

The  first  stage  preserves  the  interdependence  of  literals  within 
deductions.  The  second  stage  takes  into  account  this  interdependence  by  a 
procedure  of  fact  "intersection".  For  example,  in  the  clause  AxBx  Cxy  Dyz, 
all  of  the  literals  are  inter-related  by  their  terms.  If  this  deduction 
is  in  a form  for  fact  base  instantiation,  then  it  proceeds  to  Stage  II  where 
fact  instances  (as  many  as  are  required)  are  sought  that  refute  it. 


The  intersection  operation  could  be  a lengthy,  costly  procedure, 
since  it  involves  information  retrieval  from  the  fact  base  and  set  inter- 
section operations.  To  minimize  the  work  involved  in  the  intersection  process 
and  to  reduce  the  processing  time,  optimal  intersection  strategies  may  be 
employed.  We  illustrate  these  two  stages  with  the  following  example. 

Example: 

(1)  State  1 passes  to  Stage  2 the  inter-related  literals  of  a 
deduction  Ax  Bx  Cxy  Dyz,  for  fact  retrieval  and  intersection. 

(2)  Stage  2 requests  and  receives  the  following  facts  in  data  files 

(Ax},  (Bx),  (Cxy)  and  (Dyz) 

(3)  Stage  2 computes  the  intersection  domains  x,  y and  z by 
the  following  (or  some  other  intersection)  procedure. 

}/\(Bx_}/\  fCx_}  ....  intersection  over  subscript  x only 

i*5 

1JZ) 

(4)  Stage  2 then  sends  the  domain  values  (Xi) , (Yij),  and  fZij} 
to  Stage  1 . 


(Dyz} 


intersection  over  subscript  y only 


[xi}tr  fAx 

(Y^j^fCx 

{Zij^foy 


a 


I 


. 


i 


2-23 


USER 


QUERIES 


RULES 


ANSWERS 
(DEDUCTIONS 
AND  FACTS) 


GENERATE  DEDUCTIONS 
(APPLY  DEDUCTION  DEVELOPMENT 
STRATEGY-DDS) 


INFORMATION  FOR 
DDS  USE 


CANDIDATE  DEDUCTIONS  FOR 
FACT  SEARCH 


STAGE  2 


ACQUIRE  FACTS 
(WHICH  REFUTE 
CANDIDATE  DEDUCTIONS,'' 


'ACT  RETRIEVAL  REQUESTS 


FACT  RETRIEVALS 


FACT  BASE 


Figure  2-3.  Deduction  and  Verification  Stage  1 - State  2 Procedure 


2.4.3 


Effect  of  Actual  vs.  Statistic*!  Fact  Data  on  Deduction  Development 


In  the  Stage  1 - Stage  2 operation,  Stage  2 Is  able  to  withhold  all 
fact  Information  from  Stage  1 until  the  final  returns  for  related  literals 
arrive  from  the  fact  base.  Stage  2 can  then  perform  Its  Intersection  data 
operations.  Delays  may  arise,  out  of  Stage  2's  control  due  to  fact  retrie- 
val delays.  As  a result.  Stage  1,  which  operates  very  rapidly,  may  have 
generated  a number  of  deductions  beyond  what  was  needed,  since,  had  Stage 
1 received  fact  data  earlier,  it  might  have  been  able  to  conclude  Its 
operations  earlier  with  possibly  a smaller  deduction  tree.  Also,  Stage  1 
does  not  require  actual  facts,  but  can  proceeu  simply  with  information  about 
the  existence  of  facts.  This  Information  may  precede  actual  arrival  of  facts 
from  the  Information  system,  or  may  be  available  to  the  inference  system 
as  locally  maintained  data. estimated  on  the  basis  of  past  system  performance. 
Thus,  Stage  1 could  proceed  with  little  or  no  actual  facts  from  Stage  2 for 
most  of  Its  tree  development.  This,  incidentally,  also  means  that  Stage  1, 
prior  to  receiving  actual  fact  data,  generates  the  same  deduction  tree  re- 
gardlesa  of  changes  In  the  fact  base,  so  long  as  the  Information  about  the 
facts  (e.g.,  domains  and  performance  statistics)  have  not  been  (substantially) 
changed  by  an  update.  When  Stage  1 receives  current  information  about  facts 
from  Stage  2,  it  will  develop  its  deduction  tree  using  historical  (performance 
statistics)  information.  The  extent  that  Stage  2 may  delay,  for  the  advantage 
of  efficient  fact  (batch)  retrieval  and  Intersections,  must  be  traded  against 
the  sluggishness  such  delay  causes  in  Stage  1 performance. 


2-25 


SECTION  III.  DEDUCTION  DEVELu:  1ENT  STRATEGY 

An  objective  of  the  Inference  System  is  to  minimize  the  likelihood 
of  generating  a large  number  of  deductions  in  the  search  for  a query  refutation. 
To  meet  this  objective,  the  following  operations  are  applied: 

(1)  Context  Set  Formation 

(2)  Deduction  Selection/Ordering  Strategy 

(3)  Deduction  Tree  Pruning 

3.1  CONTEXT  SETS 

A Context  Set  in  an  inference  system  is  a consistent  set  of  related 
axioms  (rules  and  facts)  and  queries.  The  axioms  of  an  inference  system  form 
one  or  more  independent  Base  Context  Sets.  When  a query  clause  is  added  to 
the  axioms  of  an  inference  system,  a new  context  is  formed  consisting  of  the 
query  clause  and  all  of  the  base  context  sets  to  which  the  query  clause  is 
related.  Clauses  are  related  when  they  have  common  literals. 


3-1 


Example : 


Base  Context  Sets  l 

BCsl  of  the  Inference 

System: 

— 

Axy  Bxz  Cz 

7 

Gxy  Hxy 

Kxy  Kxz  Kzy 

BCS 

Bxz  Cz 

BCSII 

Hxy  Ixy 

BCSIII 

Kxy  Lxy 

1 

Cz  Fz 

Ixy 

Lxy 

Fz 

(2)  Query:  Axy  Bxz  Gxy 

(3)  New  Context  Set:  Query  + BCS^  + BCS.^ 


When  a query  is  to  be  refuted,  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  the 
unrelated  base  context  sets  of  the  inference  system.  Our  motivation  in  the 
examination  of  context  sets  is  to  determine  how  to  minimize  the  size  of  con- 
text sets  (they  can  always  be  enlarged)  in  the  expectation  that  the  smaller 
context  sets  provide  a better  (quicker,  cheaper)  solution  to  an  inference 
problem. 

3.1.1  Context  Set  Formation 

A context  set  is  a set  of  axioms,  query  clauses  and  an  associated 
set  of  literals.  The  set  of  literals  includes  all  literals  in  the  axioms  and 
query  clauses  of  the  context  set.  Two  context  sets  are  independent  if  they 
do  not  have  literals  in  common.  We  define  "base  context  sets"  as  context 
sets  containing  axioms  only,  and  apply  the  broader  expression  "context  set" 
to  include  query  clauses.  A clause  is  understood  to  be  a disjunction  of  one 
or  more  literals. 

We  define  a Context  Set  formally  by: 

Context  Set  = where  for  each  L,  CL;  and,  A.  and  A,  CA,  j#k; 

i J* 

holds. 

where  L refers  to  literals  and  A refers  to  axioms  and  query  clauses. 

In  the  inference  system,  we  start  with  a set  of  axioms  and  generate 
a set  of  independent  base  context  sets.  When  a query  clause  is  entered  into 
the  inference  system,  an  independent  context  set  is  formed  by  combining  those 
basic  (independent)  context  sets  that  share  literals  with  the  query,  However, 


3-2 


since  the  deduction  mechanism  operates  on  one  query  literal  at  a time  (see 
OL-deduction  procedure),  the  deduction  procedure  will  actually  alternate  from 
one  base  context  set  to  another  base  context  set  according  to  the  context 
membership  of  the  query  literal  currently  being  resolved.  The  literals  of  a 
query  clause  can,  of  course,  be  arranged  in  groups  according  to  their  base 
context  set  membership  to  minimize  context  hopping. 

3.1.2  Context  Set  Hierarchy 

A context  set  may  be  further  subdivided  into  a collection  of  weakly 
related  context  sets,  in  such  a way  as  to  form  a hierarchy  of  related  context 
sets.  The  highest  rated  context  set  includes  the  query(s)  to  be  refuted;  the 
lower  rated  context  sets  of  the  hierarchy  contain  axioms  only. 

One  way  of  creating  a context  hierarchy  involves  ascertaining  and 
assigning  weight  values  to  the  literals  with  respect  to  any  particular  query. 

The  weight  values  are  best  determined  and  provided  by  the  inquirer  who  may 
have  external  knowledge  as  to  the  relative  importance  of  literals  toward  re- 
solving his  query.  A secondary  source  of  weights  may  be  supplied  by  the 
inference  system,  computed  on  the  basis  of  operational  statistics.  Determin- 
ation of  weights  for  context  formation  is  discussed  in  paragraph  3.1.5;  weighted 
context  sets  and  context  bridges  are  discussed  in  paragraph  3.1.3. 

3.1.3  Context  Set  Weights  and  Bridges 

When  weights  are  assigned  to  the  literals  of  a context  set,  they 
may  be  used  against  a set  of  threshold  values  to  subdivide  the  context  set 
into  a hierarchy  of  two  or  more  levels.  The  resulting  context  sets  in  the 
hierarchy  are  linked  by  axioms,  which  we  shall  call  axiom  bridges,  which 
contain  literals  in  more  than  one  of  the  hierachy's  context  sets.  The  follow- 
ing example  illustrates  the  formation  of  a hierarchy  of  context  sets. 


3-3 


Example:  Given  a Context  Set  with  the  following  literals, 

weights  and  axioms . 


Axioms  R1  = A B C D 

R2  = B C D F 

R3  = C E F 

R4  = D G 

R5  = E F A 

R6  = F A B 

R7  = G C F 


Literals 


A 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 


Weights  High 
High 
High 
High 
Medium 
High 
Low 


Using  the  three  weight  thresholds  - High,  Medium  and  Low  - we  generate  the 
three  context  set  divisions: 


Context  Sets  (Divisions) 

Literals 

Axioms 

Weight 

I 

A,B,C,D,F 

Rl,  R2 , R6 

High 

II 

E 

R3 , R5 

Medium 

III 

G 



R7 , R4 



Low 

In  this  example,  the  axioms  of  context  sets  II  and  III  include  literals  in 
context  set  I.  In  general,  each  context  set  in  the  hierarchy  bridges  up- 
wards, that  is,  the  set  of  axioms  of  any  level  (but  the  highest)  will  contain 
one  or  more  literals  of  one  or  more  context  sets  above  it.  A good  context 
set  hierarchy  construction  would  display  "narrow-weak"  bridges  ("narrow" 
suggests  few  upward  linking  literals  in  the  rules;  "weak"  suggests  that  link 
literals  have  low  weights). 


Note  also  that  each  literal  is  included  in  its  axiom  set  or  higher 
level  axiom  set  at  least  once  in  both  its  complemented  and  uncomplemented 
form. 

3.1.4  Application  of  Context  Sets 

When  literal  weights  are  available,  context  sets  can  be  narrowed  by 
subdividing  them  into  a hierarchy  of  context  set  levels.  The  highest  level 
context  set  is  applied  first,  and,  when  its  possibilities  have  been  exploited. 


3-4 


the  next  level  context  set  is  applied  and  so  on.  This  progression  expands 
the  context  set  from  its  top  level  to  successive  Inclusions  of  its  lower 
levels.  The  expectation  is  that  most  applications  will  be  satisfied  within 
the  higher  levels  of  the  hierarchy. 

3.1.5  Deriving  Context  Weights  for  Literals 

The  best  way  of  acquiring  literal  context  weights  is  by  having 
these  supplied  by  the  inquirer,  since  he  may  have  considerable  knowledge 
concerning  the  context  of  his  query  that  is  not  contained  in  the  inference 
system.  At  the  other  end,  the  system  can  maintain  statistical  data  for  com- 
puting probability  weights.  This  data  can  be  pre-computed  periodically,  based 
upon  actual  performance  results  and  upon  simulation  runs  designed  to  derive 
these  weights. 

A simple  and  straightforward  method  of  deriving  literal  weights  for 
a context  set  hierarchy  formation  is  to  tabulate  the  number  of  uses  of  each 
literal  of  the  context  set  over  a period  of  time.  A literal  "use"  can  be 
defined  as  an  instance  when  the  literal  was  involved  in  a success  path  in 
a deduction  tree.  An  example  is  presented  in  Table  3-1. 

3.2  DEDUCTION  ORDERING  AND  SELECTION  FOR  DEDUCTION  DEVELOPMENT 

In  this  section  we  discuss  the  criteria  used  for  deduction  development. 
We  begin  with  the  ordering  of  literals  within  a clause,  since,  in  01-deduction 
the  order  of  literals  in  a clause  determines  the  order  of  resolution  of  that 
clause  with  other  clauses  to  form  deductions.  We  then  discuss  the  order  of 
selecting  deduction  clauses  for  deduction  development. 

3.2.1  Literal  Ordering 

In  deduction  refutation,  all  of  the  literals  of  a deduction  clause  are 
to  be  refuted  if  the  refutation  procedure  is  to  terminate.  The  order  in  which 
these  literals  are  to  be  refuted  is  not  logically  constrained.  If  the  deduction 
is  not  refutable,  it  is  best  to  learn  this  as  soon  as  possible,  suggesting,  there- 
fore, as  a first  criterion,  that  the  literals  be  processed  in  the  order  of  their 
least  likelihood  of  refutation. 


3-5 


TABLE  3-1 


EXAMPLE  OF  LITERAL  WEIGHTS  DERIVATION 


Context  Set 
Literals 

Number  of 
Successes 

Thresholds 
low  < 10  < medium  < 

LI 

1 

Low 

L 2 

50 

Medium 

L3 

100 

High 

L4 

2 

Low 

L5 

30 

Medium 

L6 

20 

Medium 

L7 

100 

High 

L8 

50 

Medium 

L9 

79 

High 

L10 

5 

Context  Hierarchy 

Low 

Level 

Literals 

Weight 

1 

L3,  L7,  L9 

High 

2 

L2,L5,L6,L8 

Medium 

3 

LI,  L4,  L10 

Low 

50  < high 


3-6 


A second  criterion  for  literal  ordering  within  a deduction  for  de- 
duction refutation,  is  to  attempt  the  easiest  to  refute  literals  first.  This 
criterion,  following  the  first  criterion,  gives  the  best  (least  cost)  expecta- 
tion of  encountering  a non-refutable  literal. 

A third  criterion  is  to  process  literals  of  deduction  in  an  order 
that  minimizes  operations  and  computational  burdens.  As  will  be  seen,  this 
criterion  is  particularly  applicable  to  interdependent  literals. 

3. 2. 1.1  Least  Likelihood  of  Refutation  Criterion  for  Literal  Ordering  in 

a Deduction 

The  first  criterion  for  ordering  literals  in  a deduction  selected 
for  refutation,  is  to  attempt  the  least  likely  to  refute  literals  first. 

The  only  prior  knowledge  leading  to  a recognition  of  the  refuta- 
bility of  literals  in  a goal  is  probabilistic.  Thus,  probability  values 
can  be  assigned  to  each  literal  in  the  inference  system  that  indicates 
the  likelihood  of  its  refutability.  The  probability  values  could  be  user 
supplied  or  could  be  computed  on  the  basis  of  statistical  performance  data 
involving  the  literal,  over  a period  of  time.  The  performance  statistics 
collected  could  include: 

(A)  Number  of  occurrences  (uses)  of  the  literal  in  deductions, 

(B)  Number  of  failures  to  resolve  the  literal  in  deduction 
development, 

(C)  Number  of  failures  to  satisfy  the  literal  with  facts, 

(Cl)  Deduction  clause  characteristics:  Number  of  literals; 

Number  of  terms  (max,  avg), 

(C2)  Term  characteristics:  Constants;  variable  simple,  complex, 

A probability  formula  indicating  the  likelihood  of  refutability  of 
a literal  may  be  defined  by: 

\ - Bl  * CL  (C1*C2) 

P = - = Probability  of  Literal 

L L 

The  function  ci/ci*c2)  5 CL»  deP«lds  on  the  values  of  C^  and  C^. 

The  statistical  data  collection  is  a background  activity  and,  of 
course,  need  only  be  updated  periodically. 


3-7 


The  probability  formula  could  be  made  more  relevant  by  improving 
statistics  collected  to  show  relationships  among  literals,  for  example, 
replacing  (A)  and  (B)  by: 

(A)  Number  of  co-occurrences  of  La  and  Lb  (b  4 a)  in  a deduction 
when  La  and  Lb  are,  in  fact,  related  by  their  terms,  e.g., 

Lxy  Cy. 

/ / 

(B)  Number  of  failures  to  refute  La  under  condition  (A)  above. 

This  would  take  into  account, to  a greater  extent,  the  inter-dependency  among 
literals  in  a deduction. 

The  computed  probabilities  would  also  have  computed  confidence 
levels  that  would,  in  effect,  define  the  precision  of  the  probability  estimates. 
The  probability  values  would  then  be  utilized  as  the  first  criterion  for 
ordering  the  literals  of  a deduction.  The  effectiveness  of  this  criterion 
depends  upon  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the  statistical  data  and  the  storage 
cost  for  maintaining  it.  (The  off-line  processing  cost  should  be  a secondary 
consideration.) 

3. 2. 1.2  Easiest  to  Refute  Criterion  for  Literal  Ordering  in  a Deduction 

The  easiest  to  refute  criterion  for  ordering  the  literals  in  a 
deduction  for  refutation  focuses  on  the  work  required  to  refute  a literal. 

This  criterion  is  greatly  clarified  by  the  separation  of  the  deduction 
refutation  procedure  into  two  stages,  described  in  2.4.2.  The  first  stage 
deals  substantially  with  deduction  tree  development  and  the  second  stage 
deals  substantially  with  fact  determination. 

3. 2. 1.2.1  Stage  1.  Deduction  Development:  Literal  Ordering  Criteria 

(1)  Fact  Literals  - First  Criterion 

Literals  in  the  deduction  which  are  only  resolvable  by  the  fact 
base  are  given  the  highest  priority  since  there  is  nothing  that  has  to  be 
done  with  them  in  Stage  1.  Such  literals  are  passed  on  to  Stage  2. 


3-8 


1 ■PM 


(2)  PeduotXon  Development  Effort  - Second  Criterion 

Each  literal  In  the  system  can  have  determined  for  It  a merit 
value  representing  the  effort  statistically  associated  with  its  refutation. 

High  merit  literals  are  processed  before  literals  of  lower  merit.  A literal's 
merit  (effort)  value  can  be  determined  as  a function  of  the  average  deduction 
subtree  sice  statistically  generated  under  the  literal  (as  the  root  of  the 
subtree),  over  a period  of  time.  The  statistics  and  merit  values  can  be  com- 
puted as  a background  process. 

(3)  Independent  Literals  - Third  Criterion 

Here  ve  may  look  ahead  to  Stage  2,  and  organize  the  literals  accord- 
ing to  interdependent  sets.  The  set  of  literals  with  the  least  interdependence 
may  be  ordered  into  first  positions  on  the  presumption  that  where  there  is  the 
least  interdependence  we  will  have  the  least  work  in  Stage  2 for  instantiation. 

(4)  Projected  Fact  Search  - Fourth  Criterion 

An  estimate  can  be  made  of  the  fact  search  effort  associated  with  a 
literal,  based  upon  fact  base  statistics  for  the  literal.  This  requires 
maintaining  statistics  in  the  fact  base  on  literals  [L(x,y,z...))  such  as: 

(1)  Maximum  number  of  entries  in  the  domain  L(x,y,z ) 

(2)  Average  number  of  entries  in  the  lesser  domains 

h(-,y,z ) 

L(x,«,z ) 

L(x,y, -,...,) 

The  literals  with  the  smallest  range,  presumed  easiest  to  process, 
are  placed  first  in  the  remaining  ordering  of  literals  in  a deduction. 

(5)  Interdependent  Literals  - Fifth  Criterion 

Literals  with  the  least  dependence  in  an  interdependent  group  are 
placed  first.  For  example,  Axy  Bx3  rather  than  Bx3  Axy,  where  the  right-most 
is  the  first  position.  Also,  Xxy3  Bxy  Cz  rather  than  Cz  Bxy  Axy3  or  Bxy  Xz 
Axyz, 

3. 2. 1.2. 2 Stage  2.  Fact  Determination:,  Ordering  for  Fact  Retrieval  and  Intersection 

Stage  2 ordering  applies  to  the  "fact  determination  process"  of 
deduction  refutation.  Here  we  cure  concerned  with  determining  the  domain  of 

3-9 


M 


the  literals  available  in  the  fact  base,  and  their  intersection  for  inter- 
related literals  of  a deduction. 

A special  strategy  and  a general  approach  to  determining  the  best 
order  for  fact  retrieval  is  shown  in  Figure  3-2.  The  special  strategy 
chooses  the  literal,  of  a clause  of  interdependent  literals,  with  the  least 
cost  to  fact  retrieve.  This  might  well  be  the  literal  in  the  clause  with 
the  least  fact  range.  When  this  literal  is  fact  retrieved,  its  domain  will 
be  determined.  In  the  example  of  Figure  3-2,  Axy  is  the  first,  least  cost 
estimated  literal  chosen;  and  tne  domain  terms  x,  y are  determined.  This 
information  enables  us  to  recompute  more  finely  the  costs  for  fact  retrievals 
of  the  remaining  literals.  A least  cost  literal  is  now  chosen  from  each  of 
the  remaining  interdependent  sets  of  literals,  for  fact  retrieval.  In  this 
example,  the  literals  are  Bxz  and  Cy,  which  are  independent  of  each  other. 

The  process  is  repeated  until  all  of  the  literals  of  the  original  clause  have 
been  fact  retrieved.  In  this  strategy,  an  intersection  of  facts  is  auto- 
matically performed,  while  attempting  to  minimize  the  quantity  and  cost  of 
fact  retrieval.  This  strategy,  while  appealing,  is  not  optimal.  An  optimal 
procedure  involves  full  development  of  a decision  tree,  such  as  the  and-tree 
shown  in  Figure  3-2,  and  a cost  estimate  of  each  of  the  root  to  link  tree 
paths.  The  least  cost  path  is  the  best.  As  described  thus  far,  this  approach 
provides  a retrieval  ordering  plan  that,  of  course,  could  turn  out  to  be 

< 

suboptimal  since  it  depends  upon  estimates  of  performance  and  retrieval 
costs.  It  could  be  improved  by  recomputing  costs  over  the  remaining 
subdecision  tree  after  each  fact  retrieval  action;  or,  more  generally,  by 
restructuring,  after  each  fact  retrieval  action,  a full  decision  tree  for  the 
remaining  literals  including  using  updated  retrieval  costs. 

The  general  approach  would  be  costly  to  compute  for  very  large 
clauses  of  interdependent  literals,  but  not  very  costly  for  small  clauses 
(say  less  than  6 to  8 literals). 

When  Stage  2 receives  requests  from  Stage  1 for  literal  fact  re- 
trievals, it  may  receive  these  literals  one  or  more  at  a time.  Stage  2 will 
determine  the  way  in  which  these  retrieval  requests  will  be  passed  on  to  the 
fact  base  for  the  actual  retrieval.  Stage  2 may  issue  an  order  immediately 
or  wait  a fraction  of  a second  or  more,  in  which  time  Stage  2 may  receive 


3-10 


Example:  Retrieve  and  Intersect  Facts  to  Satisfy  Axy  Bxz  Cy  Dz 


Figure  3-2.  Methods  ®f  Fact  Retrieval  Ordering  and  Intersection 


from  Stage  1 yet  more  literals  some  of  which  may  come  from  the  same  deductions 
as  the  previous  literals.  In  these  latter  instances,  Stage  2 can  perform 
optimal  retrieval  strategies  for  related  literals  of  the  same  deduction. 

In  all  cases.  Stage  2 will  accept  from  the  fact  base  lists  of  fact 
data  retrieved,  and  will  retain  this  data  for  Stage  1,  but  will  report  to  Stage  1 
summary  information  on  the  data  received.  Should  Stage  2 receive  two  or  more 
lists  of  data  for  literals  of  the  same  deduction,  this  will  also  be  noted  and 
passed  on  to  Stage  1.  For  related  lists  of  data,  pertaining  to  related  literals 
of  the  same  deduction.  Stage  2 will  also  produce  an  intersection  list  which  it 
will  maintain  for  each  resolved  deduction  initiated  by  Stage  1. 

It  should  be  noted  that  Stage  2 may  elect  to  execute  any  one  of  the 
fact  retrieval  intersection  strategies  at  its  disposal.  The  decision  factor 
will  depend  upon  service  delays  by  the  fact  base,  Stage  1 urgency  indicators, 
indicators  expressing  Stage  l's  judgment  that  the  order  of  retrieval  should 
be  the  order  sent  by  Stage  1;  and,  estimates  by  Stage  2 of  the  cost  of  each 
strategy  - for  example,  the  general  approach  strategy  might  be  excluded  for 
large  clauses. 

It  may  be  noted  that  each  strategy  has  two  modes  of  execution, 

(1)  execute  the  defined  plan  based  only  upon  statistical  data 
available  at  the  start  of  the  plan's  execution, 

(2)  update  the  plan  at  succeeding  steps  based  on  current  data 
derived  from  retrieval. 

3.2.2  Deduction  Selection 


Starting  with  an  initial  deduction,  the  deduction  refutation  process 
produces  a collection  (e.g.  tree)  of  deductions  that  are  candidates  for  refutation. 
Since  alternatives  are  possible,  it  is  desirable  to  select  deductions  that  lead 
to  a refutation  in  the  shortest,  least  costly,  way.  To  guide  the  best 
selection,  a merit  function  is  computed  for  each  deduction  on  the  tree. 

The  merit  function  is  computed  to  reflect  the  likelihood  of  a successful 
refutation  and  expected  labor  (i.e.,  computational  cost)  associated  with 
refuting  the  deduction. 

In  previous  sections,  we  discussed  a probability  of  refutation, 
which  was  to  be  derived  for  each  literal  of  the  inference  system.  This  data 
could  yield  a refutation  probability  for  any  deduction,  i.e.,  the  deduction 

3-12 


refutation  probability  equals  the  product  of  the  refutation  probabilities  of 
lta  literals.  The  most  likely  to  succeed  deduction  (highest  refutation  prob- 
ability), would  be  considered  the  most  preferred  deduction  to  develop. 

Following  this  first  criterion,  deductions  would  be  chosen  on  the 
criterion  of  the  least  effort  to  process.  Also,  in  a previous  section,  we 
identified  a means  for  estimating  deduction  development  costs  based  on  tree 
development  and  projected  fact  search  costs  associated  with  literals.  We 
could  use  these  costs  to  determine  the  costs  of  processing  a deduction,  l.e,, 
expected  cost  of  a deduction  is  the  sum  of  the  expected  costs  of  processing 
its  constituent  literals. 

NOTE:  A budget  is  established  for  the  number  of  deductions  to  be 
processed  at  each  step  of  tree  development.  The  budget  is  based  upon  con- 
sideration of  computer  storage  and  processing  availability  at  the  time  of 
deduction  selection.  If  n deductions  are  budgeted,  then  the  first  n highest 
merit  deductions  are  selected  from  the  tree. 

3.2.3  Rule  Selection  for  Deduction  Development 

When  a clause  is  selected  for  a further  deductive  development,  it 
is  capable  of  spawning  a number  of  deductions.  The  number  of  possible  de- 
ductions that  can  be  spawned  depends  upon  the  number  of  different  rules  and 
facta  in  its  context  set,  against  which  the  deductions  can  be  resolved.  In 
addition,  several  constraints  may  be  applied  Including: 

(1)  budget  for  the  deductions, 

(2)  a limit  on  the  number  and  constraints  on  the  selection  of 
deduction  literals  to  be  resolved  at  each  development  attempt. 


To  determine  which  rules  are  to  be  resolved  against,  under  a limited 
budget,  two  considerations  apply: 

(1)  selection  of  the  deduction  literal  to  be  resolved, 

(2)  selection  of  the  rules  for  resolving,  where  more  than  one 

rule  is  applicable. 


The  first  consideration  will  have  already  been  taken  care  of  in  a preceeding 
operation  where  deduction  literal  ordering  is  established.  For  the  second 
consideration,  the  applicable  rules  will  have  merit  values  associated  with 
them,  and  the  first  n highest  merit  valued  rules  are  applied.  Rule  merit 
values  could  be  computed  in  the  same  manner  and  on  the  same  basis  as  described 
above  for  deduction  merit  functions  except  that  the  weight  of  the  resolving 
literal  need  not  be  included.  The  merit  value  of  the  newly  generated  deduction 
is  recomputed  as  the  composite  merit  values  of  its  parents  minus  the  merit 
value  of  the  resolved  literal.  To  give  the  most  accurate  value,  the  rule  merit 
is  computed  after  the  operation  of  unification. 

A final  deduction  merit  value  is  determined  after  all  operations 
upon  a deduction  have  been  completed,  since  some  of  these  operations  drop 
literals  in  the  deduction  (e.g.,  factoring)  or  otherwise  modify  them.  Literal 
ordering  within  a deduction  is  the  final  step  in  deduction  processing.  (In 
the  OL  refutation  procedure,  only  the  augmenting  literals  need  be  ordered  since 
older  literals  in  the  deduction  once  ordered  retain  their  order.) 

A refinement  of  the  above  method  of  rule  selection  is  to  develop 
merit  values  for  a rule  as  a whole,  with  each  merit  value  of  the  rule  being 
associated  with  a literal  of  the  rule  that  might  be  used  as  a resolver.  The 
merit  values  of  the  rule  could  be  defined  for  each  of  its  literals  used  as 
resolvers,  as  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  instances  the  rule  was  in  a success 
path  divided  by  the  number  of  times  the  rule  was  used,  over  a period  of  time. 


3.3  DEDUCTION  PRUNINC 


Pruning  refers  to  deleting  non-useful  deductions  on  a deduction  graph. 
It  is  applied  whenever  a non-useful  deduction  is  derived.  Pruning  is  applied 
when  merit  values  are  ascertained  to  be  below  certain  established  thresholds. 

It  is  also  applied  in  deduction  post-processing  operations  involving  subsump- 
tion determination,  tautology,  and  where  certain  special  deduction  graph  re- 


3-14 


r 


■21-'-  . 


SECTION  IV.  PROCRAM  DESIGH 

L PROGRAM  MODULES  AND  INFORMATION  FLOW 

Figure  4-1  presents  the  major  flow  of  information  among  the  program 
modules  of  the  Inference  system.  Data  sets  and  coummications  are  presented 
In  the  figure  with  the  program  modules.  The  principle  data  sets  are  the 
Deduction  Tree (a).  Rules  & Literals  File,  Fact  Information  File,  Answers 
File  and  Performance  Statistical  File,  Communications  data  Include  query 
coenunlcatlon,  fact  retrieval  orders,  deduction  developeient  orders  and  tree 
pruning  orders. 

Figure  4-2  presents  flow  chart  conventions  used  to  describe  pro- 
gram modules.  Figure  4-3  to  Figure  4-7  highlight  the  functions  of  the  In- 
dividual prosram  modules. 

query  Module 

The  Query  Module,  Figure  4-3,  accepts  a query  Input,  translates 
a refutation  form.  Initiates  a query  job  request  to  the  Operating 
Module,  and  then  seta  up  (Initialises)  a deduction  tree  with  the 
query  clause  as  top  node  In  the  tree.  The  Query  Module  also  accepts 


4.1.1 

it  Into 

Sy  a terns 
negated 


4-1 


Figure  4-1  Program  Architecture 
(Modules  & Data  Flow) 


Flow  Chart  Conventions 


sets 


These  flow  charts  show  process 
(files,  tables,  messages).  Graphic 


transactions  between  (or  among)  daUa 
elements  of  the  flow  charts  are: 


(1) 


^Z7 


trapezoid  specified  a data  set 


(2) 


rectangle.  Specifies  a data  transformation, 
or  process. 


(3)  > 

<*>  1 , I 


h fl 


directed  flow  line.  Specifies  data  flow, 

same  as  (2)  above,  except  that  functions 
{fi}  of  the  process  are  listed  outside  of 
the  rectangle 


same  as  above,  except  that  data  item  fdi) 
of  the  data  set  are  listed  outside  the 
trapezoid 


Figure  4-2  Flow  Chart  Conventions  for  Program  Modules 


4-3 


Deduction 


Figure  4-3  Query  Module 


r 


I 


user  data  with  user  recommendations  on  the  context  set  and  on  the  range  value 
and  merits  of  literals  in  the  query  and  in  the  context  set.  This  information 
is  used  to  determine  the  query  context  set  and  to  (re)compute  literal  merit 
values.  The  Query  module  also  interfaces  with  the  user  and  the  Answers  file 
to  supply  results  and  aid  in  user  dialogues. 

4.1.2  Deduction  Tree  Management  Module  ('DTMM1 

The  Deduction  Tree  Management  Module,  Figure  4-4,  maintains  all 
deduction  trees  and  performs  a number  of  tree  processing  operations.  These 
include  tree  pruning  operations,  such  as  deletion  of  inactive,  low  merit, 
and  subsumed  deductions,  tracing  a tree  from  specified  tree  leaves  back  to 
the  origin  query  (for  report  to  user  to  display  the  deduction  sequence), 
collecting  tree  statistics  (e.g.,  size,  cost  of  deduction),  and  other  opera- 
tions for  the  computer  management  of  the  trees. 

4.1.3  Deduction  Development  Module  (PPM) 

The  Deduction  Development  Module,  Figure  4-5,  determines  the  de- 
velopment of  deductions.  A Deduction  Merit  Ranking  Table  in  Figure  4-5 
contains  for  each  deduction  tree,  a list  of  all  currently  generated  deductions 
of  the  tree,  in  order  of  their  highest  to  lowest  merit.  The  DDM  collects 
queries  at  initialization  and  newly  generated  (resolved)  deductions  from  the 
Deduction  Resolution  Module,  computes  their  merits  and  sorts  them  into  the 
ranking  table.  Upon  execution,  by  the  scheduler  of  the  Operating  System 
Module,  the  DDM  selects  the  top  m entries  of  the  ranking  table  as  candidates 
for  spawning  new  deductions  ("m"  is  a quantity  to  be  specified  at  initializa- 
tion of  the  system).  These  are  formed  into  a work  order  and  sent  to  the 
Deduction  Resolution  Module  for  further  deduction  development.  Supporting 
these  operations  are  various  other  system  tables  containing  fact  and  literal 
Information. 

When  a deduction  can  no  longer  spawn  new  deductions,  it  is  deleted 
from  the  ranking  table.  Also,  when  new  information  is  supplied  to  the  DDM 
that  affects  the  merit  of  deductions  in  the  ranking  table  (e.g.,  current  fact 
range  information),  these  are  recomputed  and  resorted  into  the  ranking  table. 

When  the  ranking  table  gets  too  large,  if  it  is  not  extended  on  disk 
storage  (by  the  DTMM) , the  lowest  merit  entries  are  deleted.  When  deleted 


4-5 


Figure  4-4  Deduction  Tree  Management  Module 


From  Deduction 

From  Fact  Resolution  Module 

Search  Module  I 


entries  have  pending  requests  for  fact  base  data,  the  associated  fact  base 
orders  are  cancelled. 

4.1.4  Deduction  Resolution  Module 

The  Deduction  Resolution  Module  is  presented  in  Figure  4-6  (Pro- 
cedural flow  diagrams  for  the  Deduction  Resolution  Module  are  also  presented 
in  Appendix  D).  The  Deduction  Resolution  Module  generates  new  deductions 
from  parent  deductions.  One  parent  of  each  new  deduction  is  a member  of 
the  Deduction  Development  Order  Table  generated  by  the  Deduction  Development 
Module.  The  other  parent  is  chosen  from  the  Query  Clause  or  the  System  Rules 
Table.  Up  to  m pairs  of  parent  pairs  may  be  formed  for  each  Deduction  De- 
velopment Order  entry.  New  deductions  are  created  by  the  process  of  resolution, 
and  are  entered  into  the  New  Deductions  Table.  The  resolution  procedure  is 
augmented  by  procedures  of  unification,  tautology,  factoring  and  reduction. 

4.1.5  Fact  Search  Module 

The  Fact  Search  Module,  Figure  4-7,  accepts  orders  from  the  Deduction 
Development  Module  to  search  for  facts  that  will  satisfy  one  or  more  designated 
literals  of  deduction.  These  orders  are  passed  to  the  Fact  Search  Module  in 
a Fact  Search  Order  Table.  The  orders  identify  a deduction  and  the  literals 
of  the  deduction  that  are  to  be  fact  searched.  The  Fact  Search  Module  deter- 
mines a strategy  for  retrieving  fact  data  based  on  the  following  factors: 

(1)  interdependency  of  the  deduction  literals 
to  be  fact  searched 

(2)  fact  range  statistics  for  these  literals 

(3)  the  expected  cost  of  retrieval. 

The  Fact  Search  Module  sets  up  and  passes  a retrieval  order  to  the  Fact  Base 
or  Fact  Generator  Algorithms  of  the  information  system.  The  information 
system  executes  these  orders  and  retrieves  the  facts  and  passes  them  as  files, 
to  the  Fact  Search  Module.  The  retrieved  fact  files  are  maintained  by  the 
Fact  Search  Module.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  fact  files  may  arrive  at 
uncertain  times  . Depeeident  fact  files  related  to  interdependent  literals  of 
a deduction  are  then  intersected  to  form  fact  sub- files  satisfying  these 


4-8 


Figure  4-7  Fact  Search  Module 


Inter-dependent  literals  jointly.  A directory  Is  maintained  by  the  Fact 
Search  Module  that  links  all  retained  fact  files  to  the  literals  and  de- 
ductions they  satisfy. 


1 


I 


The  results  of  each  fact  search  order  are  reported  to  the  Deduct- 
ion Development  Module,  which  uses  this  information  to  recompute  merit  values 
of  deductions  and  to  delete  deductions  that  cannot  be  satisfied  by  fact 
search  or  that  have  been  completed.  When  a deduction  has  all  of  its  compo- 
nent literals  satisfied  with  the  required  quantity  of  fact  data,  fact  search 
is  completed  for  that  deduction,  and  the  deduction  and  its  associated  fact 
files  are  passed  to  the  user,  via  the  Answers  file. 

4.1.6  Fact  Generation  Algorithms 


The  information  system  provides  algorithms  that  generate  facts 
when  presented  with  certain  literals  or  literal  groups  (sub-clauses).  Opera- 
tionally, these  algorithms  are  treated  In  the  same  manner  as  a fact  base. 

The  Fact  Search  Module  issues  orders  to  the  appropriate  algorithm  and  awaits 
fact  files.  The  remaining  operations  are  the  same  as  described  in  responding 
to  fact  base  files. 

4.1.7  Other  Modules 


These  include  modules  that  perform  merit  performance  data  collection 
and  computation,  context  set  determination,  user  dialogue,  and  the  executive 
module  - to  be  developed. 

4 . 2 DEDUCTION  PROGRAM  DATA  DICTIONARY 


This  section  describes  tables  required  by  the  program  modules  of 
the  inference  system. 

4.2.1  Deduction  (Tree)  Table 

This  table  contains  general  deduction  tree  information  and  includes 
the  node  linkages  of  the  tree  (for  trace  purposes) , active/inactive  status  of 
deduction  for  the  tree,  and  summary  deduction  information. 


4-11 


TABLE  4-1 


DEDUCTION  TREE  TABLE 


A.  General  Information 

1 . Tree  Id 

2.  Query  Cleuaes 

3.  User  Input  Informs tlon 

4.  Node  1 

3.  Parent  Node  Id  of  Node  1 

6.  Node  Tree  Position 

Tree  level 

Sibling  position 

No.  of  Siblings 

7.  Node  Status 

Active  (But  not  fully 
Resolved) 

Dead 

Completed  (Fully  Resolved) 

Special  Characteristics 

Recursive  Node 
Other 

8.  Deduction  Fact  Determination 
Status 


B.  Deduction  (Node)  Information 

1.  Node  Id/Tree  Id 

2.  Node  Deduction  Clause  Merit 
Value 

Probability  of  Success  (0^X£1) 
Load  Expectation 

3.  Reaolver  Parent  Id 


Consent 

Each  Query  is  identified 

Each  query  clause,  in  refutation  fora, 
starts  a deduction  tree. 

User  supplied  merit  data,  etc. 

Nodes  are  listed  in  this  table  In  rendoai 
order,  since  parent/child  node  linkages 
are  maintained  in  each  entry. 


Levels  from  start  of  tree.  Sometimes 
called  deapth  of  tree. 

Position  with  respect  to  other  nodes 
of  the  same  parent. 


Rejected  Deduction 

To  be  fact  determined 

These  designate  special  deduction 
characteristics  with  regard  to  developing 
new  deductions 

Applies  to  partially  or  fully  resolved 
deductions  engaged  in  tact;  search. 


Comments 


Used  to  guide  in  deduction  development. 


Rule  Clause  or  System  Fact  Literal 
Parent  used  to  Resolve  this  deduction. 


4-12 


i 


TABLE  4-1  (Cont'd.) 


DEDUCTION  TREE  TABLE 


Deduction  Clause  Description 


No.  of  Literals  in  clause 


2.  List  of  Literals  in  clause 

2.1  Literal  ID 

2.1.1  Literal  Sign 

2.1.2  No.  of  terms  in  Literal 

2.1.3  Literal  Type 


2.1.4  Links  to  terms  (in  Terms 
List  below) 

2. 1.4.1  Link  to  term  3i 


Each  clause  consists  of  a Literals 
list  and  a Term  list. 

Literals  are  ordered  right  to  left. 


Negative  or  Positive  Sign 


Types:  Resolved;  fact  search  in 

process,  etc. 


2.1.4n  Link  to  term  3j 
3.  Term  List 

3.1  Term  Id  1 

3.2  Term  Id  2 

3.2  Term  Id  n 


This  list  contains  the  non  redundant 
set  of  terms  in  the  deduction  clause. 
Order  is  not  relevant 

The  terms  are  separated  to  facilitate 
the  operation  of  term  substitution  in 
resolution  unification  operations. 


4.2.2 


System  Rules  Table 


■ 


This  table  is  similar  to  Deduction  Tree  Table,  Part  C,  Deduction 
Clause  Description.  This  is  because  each  rule  is  a clause,  just  aa  a 
deduction  is  a clause.  The  Literal  Type  entry,  however,  may  have  different 
designations.  The  Rules  also  contain  merit  entries,  one  for  each  rule. 

4.2.3  Deduction  Development  Order  Table 

This  table  contains  parents  sent  to  the  Deduction  Resolution  Module 
for  new  deduction  generation. 

1.  Request  Order  Id 

1.1  Deduction  Id,  Tree  Id 

1.2  Status 

(1)  Process  stage  initiated 

(2)  Process  stage  completed 

(3)  No.  of  deductions  sired,  and  Max.  Possible  No. 

1.3  Statistics 

Time  In 
Time  Out 

2.  Request  Order  Id 


4.2.4  System  Literal  Table 

The  literals  within  the  system  are  listed  in  this  table.  A sub- 
table is  formed  from  this  table  corresponding  to  each  particular  context.  This 
table  is  used  by  the  Deduction  Resolution  Module  to  select  resolver  parents, 
once  the  resolver  literal  has  been  determined.  It  is  also  used  to  compute 
merits  of  literals.  Various  literal  forms  in  the  list  provide  different 
literal  merit  values. 

The  table  includes  variants  of  a literal,  e.g.,  1.1.3,  1.1.4,... 

1.1. n in  table  below. 


4-14 


TABLE  4-2 


IV.  SYSTEM  LITERAL  LIST 


1. 

1.1 

1.1.1 


Base  Context  Set  Id 

Literal  Id  (Alphabetic  Ordering  of  Literals) 

Form  1 : L (t , t , . . . t) 

Fact  Domain  of  literal.  Total  (all  sources) 


(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 


1.1.1. 2 


Fact  Domain  of  literal  in  Fact  Base  Only. 
Merit  (Probability  of  Success) 

Merit  Load  Expectation  - Time/Cost  for 

Search  Phase 

No.  of  Rules  as  Resolvers 
No.  of  Rules  containing  this  literal 

Rule  Resolvers  (Ordered  by  Rule  Merit) 

(1)  Rule  Id 


Deduction  Phase; 


(5) 

(6) 


(n)  Rule  Id 


1.1. 1.2  Form  2 : L(-,t t) 


1.1. 1.3  Form  3 : L(t,-,t,lll,t) 


l.l.l.N  Form  N : L(-,-,...,-) 


Base  Context  Set  Id 


1.2 


Literal  Id 


4-15 


j 


4.2.5  Deduction  Merit  Ranking  Table  (Active  Nodes  Only) 


This  Table  contains:  List  o £ Tree  node  Deduction  Id's  ordered  by 

Merit  Probability  of  Success. 

1.  Node  Idll  Highest  Merit 

2.  Node  Idi2  Next  highest  Merit 

I I 

I I 

I I 

N.  Node  Idin  Least  Merit 

4.2.6  Deduction  Fact  File  Base  (DFFB) 

This  is  a file  collection  of  facts  acquired  from  the  Fact  Base  and 
Fact  Generators  (computer  programs).  These  files  are  maintained  by  the  In- 
ference for  fact  determination  processing  (e.g.,  fact  intersecting)  and  for 
providing  answers  to  users  on  their  queries. 

This  DFFB  contains  a directory  of  its  files  linked  to  active  deductions 
which  are,  and  have  been,  fact  searched.  The  following  information  is  main- 
tained for  each  directory  entry. 

(DFFB)  Directory  Entries 

1.  Deduction  Id 

2.  Resolved  Literals  Fact  Searched 

2.1  Literal  Id 

2.1.1  No.  of  Answers 

2.1.2  DFFB  location  of  Facts 

2.1.3  Status  of  Search 

2.1.4  Retrieval  time  interval 
2.2  Literal  Id2 

2.n  Literal  Idn 

3.  Summary  Search  Information 


4.2.7 


Performance  Information  Table  (Statistics) 


This  table  contains  performance  information  on  literals  in  relation 
to  a queries  processing. 

1.  Literal  Id 

1.1  Resolved  by  (Rule  Id) 

1.2  Average  time  for  literal  verification  (full  fact  retrieved) 

1.3  Size  of  deduction  tree  when  literal  was  satisfied 

1.4  Average  no.  of  facts  retrieved  for  literal 

1.5  Average  of  facts  satisfied  deduction 

2.  Literal  Id2 

4.3  SOME  PROGRAMMING  DESIGN  TECHNIQUES 

4.3.1  Resolution  Unification  Mechanism 


This  section  presents  a table  structured  mechanism  for  resolving 
deductions  (an  optimized  algorithm  is  presented  in  Appendix  E) . 

Two  parent  clauses  generate  a deduction  by  resolving  on  a common 
literal.  The  common  literal  is  in  positive  form  in  one  parent  and  is  in 
negative  form  in  the  other  parent.  Prior  to  resolution,  the  terms  of  the 
resolving  literals  in  the  two  parents  may  differ  in  their  domains.  A process 
of  unification  is  applied  which  finds  a common  domain,  generally  the  greatest 
common  domain  for  the  terms  of  the  two  resolving  literals.  Following  this, 
a proper  substitution  of  terms  in  the  non-resolving  literals  of  the  parents 
is  applied  to  maintain  term  consistency.  This  is  illustrated  by  the  follow- 
ing example: 

Parent  1:  L^X)  L2(X,Y)  L3(l) 

Parent  2:  L^(X,Z)  L3(Y) 

Resolving  Literals  are:  L^(l)  and  L3(Y) 

Greatest  Common  Domain  forces  Y = 1.  This  is  unification. 


1 


! 


! 


Unified  Parents  are: 

Parent  1 L^(X)  L2(X,1)  1^(1)  Includes  substitution  into  non- 

_ resolving  litersls. 

Parent  2 L4(X,Z)  L3(l) 

Resolved  Deduction 
L^X)  L2(X,1) 

The  framed  literal  is  the  resolvent  litersl. 

Table  4-3  illustrates  how  the  resolution  procedure  is  mechanized  for 
the  following  example. 

Rule  Parent  ; : L4(Z,B,X)  L3(C,Y,Z)  L2(Y,A,Z)  L^Y.Z.X) 

Deduction  Parent  : L6(X,A,Z)  L5(C,Y,Z)  L4<Z,Y,C) 

Resolvent  Literals  : L4(Z,B,X)  and  L4(Z,Y,C),  also  BCY  and  CCX 

Unification  Substitution  Y -»  B,  X C 

Child  : L,(C,A,Z)  L.(C,B,Z) 

O 5 

4.3.2  Factoring  Mechanization 

Factoring  is  a resolution  operation  which  can  be  applied  to  eliminate 
a literal  in  a clause  when  it  appears  repeatedly  in  the  clause.  For  example, 
Lj(X)  L2(Y)  L^(X)  factors  to  L^(X)  L2(Y).  Care  must  be  exercised  to  note 
that  factoring  has  been  applied  in  the  resulting  clause;  this  is  important  to 
later  possible  operations  on  the  clause. 


L4(Z,B,C) 


1*3 (C ,B,Z)  l2(b,a,z)  L^B.Z.C) 


L3(l) 


l4(x,z) 


TABLE  4-3 


RESOLUTION  UNIFICATION  TABULAR  EXAMPLE 


Rule  Clause 

Parent  Deduction  Clause 

Literals  of  Clause 

Literals  of  Clause 

S4L4 , Type , TTLX , TTL2 , TTL3 

S 6L6 , Type , TH^  ,TTL2 , TTL, 

S3L3 , Type , TTL4 , TTL^ , TTL^ 

S 5L 5 , Type , TTL4 , TTL 5 , TTL 

S2L2,Type,TTL5,TTL6,TTL1 

S4L4 , Type , TTL3 , TTL 5 , TTL 

S1L1,Type,TTL5,TTL1,TTL3 

Terms  of  Clause 

Terms  of  Clause 

TTI:  Variable  Z 

TTI:  Variable  X 

TT2 : Constant  B 

TT2:  Constant  A 

TT3 : Variable  X 

TT3 : Variable  Z 

TT4:  Constant  C 

TT4:  Constant  C 

TT5:  Variable  Y 

TT5:  Variable  Y 

TT6:  Constant  A 

Child 

Deduction  Clause 

Literals  of  Clause 

S6L6’Type 

,ttl4,ttl2>ttl3 

S5L5,Type 

,TTL4,TTL1,m3 

, TTLj , TTL  , TTL4 

S3L3,type 

,ttl4,ttl1,ttl3 

S2L2,type 

,ttl1,ttl2,ttl3 

S1L1>type 

,ttl1,ttl3,ttl4 

Terms  of  Clause 
TT1:  Constant  B 
TT2:  Constant  A 
TT3 : Variable  Z 
TT4:  Constant  C 


Symbols:  Sn  ■ Sign  of  Literal  Ln 

Li  ■ ith  Literal  in  clause 

Type  =>  Designates  character  of  the  Literal,  e. 

means  a resolvent  Literal 
TTi  = A term  of  a Literal  in  the  clause 
TTLi  = A link  to  the  term  of  a Literal  in  the 


4-19 


Table  4-4  illustrates  how  this  factoring  is  handled  using  the  tab- 
ular structure  for  clauses.  Actually,  only  one  simple  change  takes  place 

that  is  the  "type"  of  the  factored  literal  is  changed  to  designate  that  the 
literal  has  been  factored. 

Note  that  a unification  operation  can  lead  to  a factoring  operation 
For  example,  given  ACY,  Lj(X,Y)L2(Y,Z)L^(X,A)  can  be  unified  to  generate 
a new  deduction  Lj^X.AJI^CA.^L^X.A)  which  can  be  factored  to  L^(X,A)L2(A,Z) 


4-20 


TABLE  4-4 

FACTORING  OPERATION 


Deduction  Clause  “ L1(X,A)L2(A1Z)L3(Y,A)L2(A,Z) 


Literal  List 


Literal  Description 


2^2 >Type 

,TTL,,TTL4 

L2(A,Z) 

3L3,Type 

,TTL2,TTL3 

l3(y,a) 

2L2,Type 

,TTL3>rrL4 

l2(a,z) 

i1L1,Type 

,TTL1,TTL3 

l3(x,a) 

Term  List 

TTl : Variable  X 
TT2 : Variable  Y 
TT3:  Constant  A 
TT4:  Variable  Z 


Factored  Deduction  Clause  = L3(X,A)L2(A,Z)L3(Y,A) 
Literal  List 

S2L2,Type  - Factor.TTL^.TTL^ 

S3L3,Type  ,TTL2>TTL3 

S2L2,Type  , TTL3 , TTL^ 

S1L1,Type  ,TTL^,TTL^ 


Term  List 

TTl:  Variable  X 
TT2 : Variable  Y 
TT3:  Constant  A 
TT4:  Variable  Z 


4-21 


REAL  AND  INFERRED  ANSWERS 


A.  Types  of  Deduction  Answers 

The  inference  system  makes  available  to  the  inquirer  three  types  of 
answers,  in  the  form  of  deduction  (disjunctive)  clauses.  They  are, 
in  the  framed  notation  of  this  report: 


I.  Complete  and  Real  Deductions 


Example  Deduction: 


The  frames  mean  that  all  literals  have  been  resolved 
by  system  inference  rules,  and  the  slash  in  the  frame, 
i.e.,  □ means  that  the  desired  quantity  of  fact 
data  has  been  retrieved  for  each  literal,  either  from 
the  fact  base  or  from  a computer  fact  generator. 


II.  Complete  and  Inferred  Deduction 


Example  Deduction: 


B 

C I s \ 

-22L 

Z£_ 

r ] rt 

This  means  that  all  literals  have  been  resolved 
by  system  inference  rules,  but  that  for  literals 
not  in  a slashed  frame,  the  quantity  of  desired 
facts  have  not  been  acquired  from  the  fact  base 
or  fact  generators.  As  a result  the  deduction 
is  not  verified  by  facts,  rather  it  is  affirmed 
by  the  system  inference  rules,  if  a user  analyst 
accents  such  a deduction,  he  in  effect  infers 
the  completion  of  the  deduction. 


III.  Incomplete  Deductions 
Example  Deduction 


r\ 

“ft's 

C 

s „ 

xy 

yz 

r 

rt 

This  means  that  not  all  literals  of  the  deduction 
have  been  resolved  by  system  rules. 


B.  Premises  of  an  Inferred  Literal 

A literal  in  a deduction  may  be  interdependent  with  other  literals  in 
the  deduction  if  the  domains  of  their  terms  overlap.  For  example  in 
the  deduction:  Axy  Bx  Cr  Drs  Et,  Axy  and  Bx  are  interdependent,  but 

independent  of  the  others.  In  connection  with  this,  the  literals  upon 
which  an  inferred  literal  is  dependent  are  called  its  premises.  In 
the  case  of  an  Inferred  Deduction,  each  inferred  literal  may  have 
real  or  other  inferred  literals  as  its  premises.  The  concept  of  prem- 
ises will  have  meaning  to  the  user  analyst,  and  also  to  the  deduction 
mechanism. 


C.  Mechanization  of  Premises 

Premise  pointers  are  used  to  mechanize  deduction  derivation.  Stored 
with  each  inf erred-framed  literal  are  pointers  to  its  premises.  As 
a literal  becomes  fact  satisfied,  premise  pointers  to  it  are  dropped. 
When  a literal  no  longer  has  any  premise  pointers  it  is  recognized  as 
fully  satisfied. 


A-3 


APPENDIX  B 


RF.r.llRSIVE  NODES 


A. 


GENERAL 


In  the  OL-deduction  procedure,  a parent  deduction  (tree  node)  is 
chosen  and  its  rightmost  literal  is  resolved  by  a parent  node  or  ouerv 
clause  to  form  a new  deduction. 

In  seeking  to  satisfy  a literal,  a satisfying  of  the  same  literal 
or  a more  general  literal  may  already  have  been  started  in  an  ancestor  de- 
duction higher  up  in  the  deduction  tree. 

For  example:  (Rule  parents  are  not  shown) 


In  this  deduction  tree,  we  see  that  solutions  (i.e.,  facts,  derived 
from  a fact  base)  that  satisfy  the  rightmost  literal  of  node  1 are  also  solutions 
to  the  rightmost  literal  of  node  7.  Any  such  solution  to  AAy  that  we  can  de- 
rive from  node  7 is  better  derived  under  node  1;  and  it  is  useless  to  rederive 
such  answers  to  A4y  at  node  7.  There  is  however  a purpose  in  expanding  the 
tree  at  node  7,  as  a generator  of  answers. 

Expanding  the  deduction  tree  at  node  7 generates  a duplication  of 
the  parent  tree  starting  at  node  1.  This  is  illustrated  by: 


This  mechanism,  further  described  in  the  next  section,  creates  a re- 


cursive function  or  fact  generator.  We  shall  call  such  node  pair  situations 
(e.g.,  nodes  1 and  7 in  the  example)  "recursive".  The  descendant  node  of 
the  pair  is  referred  to  as  the  recursive  node  and  the  tree  root  node  of  the 
pair  is  called  the  associated  node. 

B.  RECURSIVENESS 

Recursive  nodes  provide  a mechanism  for  generating  answers  to  satis- 
fy deductions.  The  answers  developed  by  this  mechanism  are  created  locally 
and  are  not  answers  retrieved  from  the  bact  base. 

The  recursive  deduction  tree  operation  for  generating  facts  is  illus- 
trated, by  the  following  example: 


1 


I 


i. 

f 

f 


I 


Node  3 is  recursive  with  associated  node  1,  and  can  be  resolved 
with  one  or  more  answers  already  known  to  satisfy  node  1.  Suppose,  now, 
node  2,  via  a fact  base  search,  acquires  an  answer  x = 1,  and  therefore 
T^.  This  answer  automatically  also  satifies  node  1.  The  value  x = 1 can 
also  be  instantiated  (a  process  implying  unification)  into  node  3 such 
that  P becomes  P , in  node  4.  Upon  a further  fact  base  search,  let  us 

y*  yi 

assume  as  returns  for  P^,  the  satisfying  values  x = (2,3).  With  further  in- 
stantiation of  these  values  with  node  4 we  derive  two  new  answers,  Ty^  and 
T^j  in  nodes  5 and  6 respectively.  This  process  can  continue  recursively 
until  no  more  facts  are  found,  or  we  reach  the  maximum  numbers  of  desired 
answers. 

Note:  Recursive  node  answer  generation  is  generally 

started  by  at  least  one  fact  base  answer. 


I 


B-5 


APPENDIX  C 

PARTIALLY  TRANSITIVE  RULES 
AND  RECURSIVE  DEDUCTION  TREES 


C-l 


Almost  all  rules  or  classes  of  rules,  when  analyzed  in  depth,  will 
display  characteristics  that  can  be  used  to  guide  deduction  tree  development. 
This  section  presents  an  analysis  of  one  of  these  rule  classes  generally  des- 
cribed as  a "partially  transitive  rule"  class. 

A.  PARTIALLY  TRANSITIVE  RULES 

A partially  transitive  rule  has  the  disjunction  clausal  form: 

§ K,  A „>  or  the  implicative  form:  B A A >A  . 

xy  xz  yz  xy  xy  ^ yz 

A partially  transitive  rule  can  also  be  expressed  by  the  form  P 
(Ar,  Bs),  where 

A = the  shared  relation  of  x and  y to  z 

B = the  relation  between  the  terms  x and  y 

r = specifies  the  (1  or  2)  position  of  term  z in  A 

s = specifies  the  (1  or  2)  position  of  term  y in  B 


(1)  P (A  , B ) or  Bxy A Axz=^>Ay z 

(2)  P (A^  B2)  or  BxyAAzx=£Azy 

(3)  P (A2,  B^  or  ByxAAxz=^Ayz 

(4)  P (A1,  B^  or  ByxAAzx=£Azy 


(1)  When  B is  symmetric,  the  subscript  is  dropped  since  rules 
1 and  3 become  identical  as  do  rules  2 and  4. 

(2)  The  pure  transitive  rule  P(Ar,A,.)  is  a special  case  of  the 
partially  transitive  rule. 


A partially  transitive  rule  is  apt  to  produce  a recursive  deduction 

tree.  For  example,  application  of  the  rule  P (XI,  Z2)  = X Z X to  the 

zy  xy  zx 

literal  X^  produces  the  recursive  node 


I X3y|  Z^  X^x  where  x and  y are  equally  general 

This  node  while  redundant  for  fact  base  searches  can,  however,  be 
applied  as  a recursive  answer  generator.  For  example,  given  a single  value 
of  y,  it  becomes  possible  to  generate  satisfying  values  of  x;  these  can  then 


i 


be  used  recursively  when  the  domain  of  x and  y overlap.  That  is,  to  y may 
be  applied  the  new  values  of  x,  to  further  generate  new  values  of  x-  This 
recursive  procedure  stops  when  the  values  of  x that  are  generated  are  not 
new;  that  is,  when  the  values  of  x that  are  generated  have  previously  been 
generated. 

C.  REDUNDANT  DEDUCTIONS:  A SPECIAL  CASE 

When  two  literals  in  the  same  node  may  be  resolved  by  a similar 

partially  transitive  rule,  a great  deal  of  redundancy  may  result.  Two  par 

tially  transitive  rules  are  similar  when  the  rules  have  the  forms  P(Ar,Bg) 

and  P(C  , B ),  respectively, 
r w 

Example:  Similar  Partially  Transitive  Rules 


P (XI,  Z2)  - Zzx  Xy2 
P (Y2,  Zl)  = Zxz  Yzy  Yxy 

and  Y , 
xb 


In  this  example,  the  literals  X and  Y each  have  a partially  trans- 
itive rule  with  the  literal  Z,  they  share  a term,  and  they  are  both  members  of 
the  same  deduction  clause  (see  top  node).  This  structure  allows  the  develop- 
ment of  a pair  of  nodes  (4  and  5)  whose  remaining  unresolved  literals  are 
virtually  the  same.  Also,  the  resolved  literals  requiring  fact  base  retriev- 
als are  the  same.  Consequent v,  the  work  required  on  both  deductions  nodes 
(4  and  5)  is  the  same.  In  such  situations  we  should  restrict  use  of  both 
partially  transitive  rules  in  deduction  operation 


C-3 


APPENDIX  D 

DEDUCTION  RESOLUTION  MODULE-PROCEDURAL  FLOW  CHARTS 


This  Appendix  presents  procedural  tiow  charts  for  the  deduction  resolu- 


tion module. 


Sections  of  the  flow  charts  not  applicable  to  SNL  are  denoted  by  the 
following  marking:  Sections  involved  with  advanced  concepts  not 
needed  for  a minimum  system  are  denoted  by:  I 1 

Numbers  in  parentheses  within  the  flow  charts  refer  to  notes  found 
at  the  end  of  this  Appendix. 


Certain  concepts  referenced  in  the  flow  charts  such  as  "recursive 
node"  are  explained  in  the  other  Appendices. 


I 


Y 


/ This  is  an  \ N 
'Active  Node  with] — 
tFact  Requests  ] 


NOTES 

1.  A list  of  deductions  for  further  deduction  tree  development  ha°  been 
sent  to  this  module  from  the  Deduction  Development  Module.  The  list' 
may  be  the  explicit  nodes  or  pointers  to  the  nodes  in  the  tree. 

2.  No  facts  are  requested  at  this  point.  The  requests  are  made  after 
post-processing.  In  a later  version  of  the  system,  there  may  be  a 
decision  at  this  point  whether  or  not  to  resolve  with  facts. 

3.  The  NNT  contains  a list  of  pointers  to  locations  in  the  tree  where 
the  new  nodes  are  stored  explicitly. 

4.  Includes  paramodulation-reduction  capability. 

5.  Resolution  with  rules  includes  paramodulation  with  rules. 

6.  Rules  are  stored  either  in  the  external  rule  base,  or  in  a local 
rule  table. 

7.  Query  clauses  are  not  used  as  inputs  under  SNL  restrictions.  (See 
Appendix  F) 

8.  This  restriction  could  be  implemented  by  allowing  complete  rule 
resolution  and  then  inactivating  those  nodes  that  have  leen  created 
with  the  illegal  rules. 

9.  Once  a deduction  has  been  resolved  with  all  possible  input  clauses, 
it  is  inactivated.  This  means  that  the  deduction  will  never  be 
chosen  for  resolution.  Other  reasons  for  inactivation  are: 

• Tree  Path  Subsumption 

• Tautology 

• Partially  Transitive  Rule  Restriction 

• Recrusive  node  whose  associated  requires  only  one  answer 

• Pruning 

• Fact  Search  fails 

Deductions  with  fact  retrievals  request  confirmation  from  the  Fact 
Search  Module,  i.e.,  verification  that  the  fact  requests  are  satis- 
fiable.  This  information  is  used  to  improve  the  merit  of  the 
deduction.  However,  merit  is  no  longer  useful  to  an  inactive  node, 
so  any  confirmation  requestes  from  inactivated  nodes  are  cancelled. 

10.  An  evaluatable  literal  is  a fact  literal. 

11.  At  this  point,  we  attempt  to  find  a literal  to  the  left  which  will 
match  the  unframed  literal  (A)  that  we  are  working  on,  regardless 
of  whether  the  left  literal  (B)  is  framed,  unframed,  complementary, 
or  of  the  same  sign;  since  we  will  take  action  in  all  cases. 

State  of  Literal  B Action 

Unframed,  identical  sign  Factoring  - drop  A 

Unframed,  complement  Tautology  - inactivate  the  node 

Framed,  identical  sign  Chain  Subs.  - inactivate  the  node 

Unframed,  complement  Reduction  - drop  A 


D-10 


12. 


f 


All  post-processing  operations  (factoring,  reduction,  tree  path 
subsumption,  tautology)  require  that  terms  of  'A'  and  'B1  are 
identical.  If  variable  terms  are  different,  then  the  only  re- 
maining possibility  of  interest  is  that  the  new  node  may  be 
recursive.  (See  Appendix  E) 

To  be  absolutely  sure  of  a possible  recursive  node,  the  checks 
should  be  made  between  the  unframed  literal  A and  the  rightmost 
literal  of  the  root  node  of  literal  B. 

13.  Splitting  is  a procedure  by  which  a node  which  contains  multiple 

instantiations  is  separated  into  two  nodes.  These  2 nodes  are 
identical  to  the  first  except  for  one  or  more  constant  terms. 

The  sum  of  the  new  nodes  equals  the  old  node. 

The  new  nodes  are  created  by  altering  the  old  node  and  creating 
one  new  one.  The  splitting  is  done  by  the  intersection  of  one 
constant  list  in  the  node  with  another  list  (constants  in  a rule 
or  fact  or  in  a previous  literal  in  the  node).  The  new  node  re- 
ceives the  intersecting  terms  while  the  old  node  keeps  only  the 
non-intersecting  terms. 


Example  1 : 


A(  2 


This  node  can  be  split  by  the  intersection  of 


0 


and 


2 I into 
(3/ 


New  Node: 




11  / 51 

A 

U (7/ 

d'1 


x and 


__ 





Old  Node: 

A39 

D3x 

Cx9 

D5x 


The  first  node  is  factored  into 


El 


,2 


_ 

(5\ 

Cx| 

s 

Example  2: 

Sometimes  a constant  is  not  yet  defined  due  to  pending  fact  lockup. 
Splitting  may  still  be  done,  e.g.: 


The  first  node  is  immediately  inactivated  by  tree  path  subsumption. 

In  this  procedure,  the  old  node  is  placed  at  the  top  of  the  NNT  while 
the  new  node  continues  post-processing. 


'■rMi'iMlMM 


D-ll 


Which  operation  applies  depends  on  the  framing  and  sign  of  literal 
B as  described  in  note  11. 

A node  is  useful  in  the  derivation  of  new  lemmas  if: 

(1)  A new  real  framed  literal  was  added  to  this  node,  or 

(2)  There  is  an  inferred-framed  literal  which,  because  of  the 
last  resolution,  now  meets  the  following  criteria: 

a.  No  unframed  literals  to  the  right  of  it, 

b.  All  premise  literals  satisfy  criteria  a and  b. 

This  prevents  the  derivation  of  the  same  lemma  more  than  once  in 
the  same  path. 


D-12 


This  section  describes  a design  for  optimizing  the  program  that  im- 
plements the  Unification-Resolution  Procedure.  The  design  incorporates  a table 
structure  for  representing  clauses  in  the  unification  resolution  process  that 
consolidates  common  entries.  While  this  design  is  more  complex  than  the  design 
presented  in  the  main  body  of  this  report,  it  offers  a reduction  in  storage  and 
an  improvement  in  processing  speed 

The  design  presented  is  an  adaptation  of  the  method  described  in 
"Computational  Logic:  The  Unification  Computation"  by  J.  A.  Robinson.  A 
simpler,  non-optimal  design,  is  presented  in  the  main  text,  section  4.3.1. 

A.  NODE  REPRESENTATION 

All  nodes  of  a deduction  tree  are  defined  by  four  tables: 

(1)  Constant  Table  (CT)  , 

(2)  Node  Table  (NT), 

(3)  Literal  Table  (LT) , 

(4)  Term  Table  (TT) . 

A. 1 Constant  Table  (CT) 

The  CT  contains  all  constants  that  are  instances  of  terms  appearing 
in  the  literals  of  nodes  in  the  deduction  tree.  The  entries  in  the  CT  are 
linked  by  pointers  to  these  related  terms  in  the  Term  Table  (TT) . Entries 
may  be  single  constants  or  arrays. 

A. 2 Node  Table  (NT) 

The  NT  represents  all  nodes  of  the  deduction  tree.  Each  row  of 
the  NT  represents  one  node.  Nodes  enter  the  NT  and  are  arranged  in  the  table 
in  their  order  of  creation.  For  each  node,  the  table  contains  the  following 
information : 

(0)  ID  number 

(1)  Number  of  literals  in  this  node 

(2)  A list  of  pointers  that  link  to  entries  in  the  literal 
Table  (LT) . This  is  an  ordered  list  which  denotes  the 
left-to-right  order  of  the  literals  in  this  node. 

For  each  pointer  the  following  associated  information  is  provided 


• The  framed  or  unframed  status  of  this  literal 

• The  fact  retrieved  status  of  the  literal  (being  looked 
up  in  the  fact  base) 

• Links  to  premise  literals 

(3)  A pointer  to  a term  table  segment  (which  defines  the  terms 
of  the  literals  of  this  node). 

(4)  Other  information  about  the  node: 

• Node  Merit 

• Active  Status 

• Pointer  to  Resolvent  Parent  Node  (Resolvent  Clause  or 
Top  Clause  of  Deduction  Tree) 

• Pointer  to  Input  Parent  Node 

A. 3 Literal  Table  (LT) 

LT  represents  the  literals  of  the  nodes  of  the  deduction  tree. 
Each  row  of  the  LT  represents  a specific  literal.  Whenever  new  literals 
(e.g.  via  rules)  enter  the  deduction  tree  development  they  are  added  to  the 
LT.  LT  contains  the  following  information: 

(0)  ID  number  (implicit  or  explicit) 

(1)  Literal  ID 

(2)  Sign  - positive  or  negative 

(3)  Arity  - number  of  terms 

(4)  List  of  pointers  that  link  to  the  literals  terms  which  are 
maintained  as  entries  in  segments  of  the  term  table. 

Note:  The  literal  table  can  be  augmented  but  not  updated, 

i.e.,  once  a row  is  created,  it  is  not  modified. 


A. 4 Term  Table 

The  terms  of  the  literals  of  the  nodes  of  a tree  are  defined  by  a 
segmented  term  table.  Each  node  links  to  a segment.  Each  segment  is  suf- 
ficient to  define  the  terms  of  one  or  more  nodes. 

Each  row  in  the  TT  represents  a term.  The  following  information 
is  recorded  for  each  term: 


^O-A031  481  AUERBACH  ASSOCIATES  INC  PHILADELPHIA  PA  F/G  ' 

A DEDUCTIVE  SYSTEM  FOR  INTELLIGENCE  ANALYSIS. (U) 

JUL  76  I>  L GOLDHIRSH*  R CARSON  F30602-74-C-0250 

UNCLASSIFIED  RADC-TR-76-199  NL 

2of  2 

ADA03I48I 


END 

date’ 

FILMED 

12  -76 


(0)  ID  number  (implicit  or  explicit) 

(1)  Term  type  - variable  (V)  or  constant  (C) 

(2)  Substitution  value 

• If  the  term  is  a constant,  this  field  contains  a 
pointer  to  its  value  in  the  constant  table. 

• If  the  term  is  a variable,  and  has  not  been  uni- 
fied, this  field  is  empty. 

• If  the  term  is  a variable  and  has  been  unified 
to  another  term,  this  field  contains  a pointer 
to  that  other  term.  (Unified  terms  are  in  the 
same  segment.) 

A TT  segment  is  created  for  each  node.  Once  created,  it  is  not  modified. 

A.  5 Example:  The  nodes  (1):  Axy  |^B4x  1 C4x  and  (2):  Ax3  can  be 

represented  as  follows: 


NT 

Number  of 

Pointers  to 

Pointers  to  Term 

ID  Number 

Literals 

Literal  Table 

Table  Segment 

1 

3 

1. 

CU,  3 

I 

2 

1 

1 

II 

LT 

ID  Number 

Relation  ID 

-Sigh 

Ariti 

Pointers  to  TT 

1 

A 

- 

2 

1 2 

2 

B 

- 

2 

3 1 

3 1 

C 

- 

2 

3 1 

TT 

Segment 

Term  ID 

Term  Type 

Sub st  Value 

I 

1 

V 

- 

2 

V 

- 

3 

C 

\ 

11 

1 

V 

\ points  to 
/ constant  table 

2 

c 

2 

E-4 


ID  Number 
1 
2 


CT 


Value 

4 

3 


Looking  solely  at  the  term  table  pointers  in  the  first  entry  In 
the  literal  table  (A),  It  cannot  be  determined  which  segment  of  the  term 
table  these  apply  to.  This  determination  must  be  traced  through  the  NT. 

The  purpose  of  this  structure  is  to  facilitate  passing  essentially  unchanged 
literal  relations  from  parent  node  to  descendant  node  with  but  at  most  a 
change  in  terms.  Also,  when  the  passed-on  literal  Is  not  changed,  even  to 
its  term,  it  need  not  be  duplicated  in  the  tables. 

The  example  in  the  following  portions  of  this  report  are  based 
on  the  clauses  represented  above. 


B. 


RESOLUTION  BY  FACT  REQUESTS 


When  a deduction  is  resolved,  as  a parent,  to  create  one  or  more 
new  nodes,  at  least  one  new  node  term  table  segment  Is  created,  a new  entry 
is  added  in  the  node  table  for  each  new  node,  and  an  entry  is  added  in  the 
literal  table  for  each  literal  added  by  rule  resolution. 


In  fact  resolution,  no  new  literals  are  added  so  the  literal  table 
remains  unchanged.  No  matter  how  many  results  are  found  in  the  fact  base, 
all  the  information  can  be  expressed  with  one  new  node  entry  and  one  new 
term  table  segment. 


B(l)  Mechanism 

(1)  Duplicate  the  term  table  segment  of  the  parent. 

(2)  Add  a new  term  into  the  TT  for  each  instantiable  term. 
Designate  its  term  type  "Constant".  Set  the  subst  value 
of  the  new  term  to  point  to  the  constants  location  in 
the  CT.  This  location  will  probably  not  be  known  at 
the  time  of  creation  of  this  node.  However,  it  will 
eventually  be  supplied  by  the  fact  search  module. 

(3)  Set  the  subst  value  of  the  variable  term  being  in- 
stantiated to  point  to  the  new  constant  term. 

(4)  Create  a new  entry  in  the  NT  for  this  new  node. 


Example : 

Suppose  we  decide  to  resolve  node  #1  with  facts.  The  following 
procedure  is  followed: 

(1)  Create  segment  III  of  the  Term  Table  as  a duplicate  of 
segment  I of  node  1. 


Ill  1. 

V 

- 

2. 

V 

- 

3. 

C 

1 

The  rightmost 

literal  is  C4x.  There  is  one  instantiable 

term  x so 
pointer. 

add 

one  constant  term  with  presently  unknown 

Ill  1. 

V 

2. 

V 

3. 

C 

1 

4. 

C 

- 

P.-6 


MMMMMIftfll 


L — 


(3)  Sec  subst.  value  of  the  ins tantiable  term,  term  #1, 

to  point  to  the  new  constant  term,  term  #4. 

Ill  1.  V 4 

2.  V 

3.  0 1 

4.  C 

(4)  Add  a new  node  to  the  node  table. 

NT 

ID#  3.  3 1,  ffi,  [g  III 

The  frame  around  the  3 denotes  that  literal  #3  Is  being 
fact  searched.  If  there  are  no  answers,  this  node  Is 
inactivated.  If  answers  exist,  the  FSM  stores  the 
location  of  these  answer(s)  in  the  CT.  At  this  point, 
the  literal  [JJmay  be  dropped. 

The  final  alterations  are: 

TT 

III  1.  V 4 

2.  1 V 

3.  C 1 

4.  C 3 

NT 

3.  2 1,  [7]  III 


B(2)  Resolution  With  a Set  of  Rules 

When  resolving  with  facts,  an  entire  set  of  related  faces  could 
resolve  with  a node  at  once  using  only  one  term  table  segment  and  only  one 
entry  in  the  node  table.  When  resolving  with  rules,  a related  group  of  rules 
can  also  resolve  together  using  one  term  segment  but  producing  different 
entries  in  the  node  table. 

B(3)  Unification  Classes 


A group  of  rules  may  resolve  simultaneously  if  they  are  of  the 
same  unification  class,  i.e.,  their  resolving  literal  is  the  same.  When  a 
node  is  chosen  for  rule  resolution,  a number  of  applicable  unification 
classes  are  accessed. 


E-7  ’ 


A literal  table,  node  Cable,  and  a terra  table  with  one  segment  are 
developed  for  these  rules.  There  is  one  set  of  tables  for  each  unification 
class.  For  example,  suppose  node  2 was  chosen  for  rule  resolution. 

Node  2 " Ax3 


A request  would  be  made  for  all  rules  in  all  unification  classes  which  can 
resolve  with  this  literal.  Here  are  some  sample  rules: 


Axy  Axz  Byz 
Axy  Axz  Czy 
Axy  Dxz  Ezy 

Ax3  Dx3 
Ax3  G3x 


Unification  Class  #1  Axy 


Unification  Class  #2  Ax3 


These  rules  would  be  placed  in  the  following  structures: 


1.  3 1,  2,  3 

2.  3 1,  2,  4 

3.  3 1,  5,  6 


1.  2 1,  2 

2.  2 1,  3 

2.  2 1,  3 


No  segment  reference  is  necessary  since  there  will  only  be  one  segment. 


1. 

A + 2 

1 

2 

1. 

A + 2 

2 1 

2. 

A - 2 

1 

3 

2. 

D - 2 

2 1 

3. 

B - 2 

2 

3 

3. 

G - 2 

1 2 

4. 

C - 2 

3 

2 

5. 

D - 2 

1 

3 

6. 

E - 2 

3 

2 

TT1 

TT2 

1. 

V 

1. 

C 2 

(points  to  CT) 

2. 

V 

2. 

V 

3. 

V 

E-8 


Note:  It  may  be  convenient  to  maintain  the  rules  in  this  format;  originally, 

however,  it  is  not  required  for  this  process. 

These  tables  are  needed  only  temporarily  since  resolution  will 

result  in  the  appendage  of  these  tables  to  the  permanent  tables.  In  order 

1 2 

to  unify  one  of  these  sets,  we  must  unify  the  first  literal  of  LT  or  LT 
(A)  with  the  rightmost  literal  of  the  parent  node  #2,  which  is  literal  #1 
of  LT  (A). 

B(4)  Mechanism  for  Rule  Kesolution  & Example 


The  following  steps  are  done: 


In  the  rules  NT,  delete  the  first  lieral  pointer  (this  is  the 
resolving  literal  which  is  dropped)  and  add  to  the  remaining 
pointers  M = (number  of  literals  in  literal  table  1). 

Example  (Refers  to  tables  NT*,  LT*,  and  TT*) 

M = 3 - 1 = 2 NT*  becomes 


1.  2 4,  5 

2.  2 4,  6 

3.  2 7,  8 


In  the  rule  LT  add  to  the  term  pointers  N = # of  terms 
presently  in  the  term  table  of  the  parent. 

Example:  N = 2 LT*  becomes 


1.  A + 2 3 4 

2.  A - 2 3 5 

3.  B - 2 4 5 

4.  C - 2 5 4 

5.  D - 2 3 5 

6.  E - 2 5 4 


Create  a new  segment  of  the  term  table  by  copying  over  the  TT 
segment  of  the  parent  and  appending  the  rules  TT. 


Example:  Create  segment  IV  of  the  TT. 


IV  1.  V 

2.  C 2 

3.  V 

4.  V 

5.  V 

Unify  the  terms  of  the  first  literal  of  the  rules  LT  with  the 
terms  of  the  rightmost  literal  of  the  parent  node  as  follows: 

• If  the  parent's  term  is  a variable,  link  that  term  to 
the  rule's  new  term. 

• If  the  parent's  term  is  constant  and  the  rule's  term 

is  variable,  link  the  rule’s  term  to  the  parent's  term. 

• If  both  terms  are  constant,  set  both  constant  pointers 
to  same  location  in  constant  table. 

Example:  Unify  terms  of  1st  literal  of  LT^  = 3,  4 with  terms 

of  literal  #1  in  LT  = 1 , 2. 

In  TT  segment  4 

1 and  3 are  both  variable  so  link  1 to  3 

2 is  constant  and  4 is  variable  so  link  4 to  2 

IV  1.  V 3 

2.  C 2 

3.  V 

4.  V 2 

5.  V 


Append  the  rules  LT  to  permanent  LT  except  for  the  first  entry 
(conclusion) . 

For  each  entry  in  the  rules  NT,  create  a new  entry  in  NT  with 
the  same  literals  as  the  parent  node,  with  the  last  one  framed, 
followed  by  the  added  literals.  Set  the  term  segment  pointer 
equal  to  the  new  segment. 

NT  (continued) 


4. 

3 

1 

4,  5 

IV 

5. 

3 

1 

4,  6 

IV 

6. 

3 

1 

7,  8 

IV 

E-10 


! 





LT  (continued) 

4.  A - 2 3 5 

5.  B - 2 4 5 

6.  C - 2 5 4 

7.  D - 2 3 5 

8.  E - 2 5 4 


After  applying  the  sane  procedure  with  the  second  unification  class, 
two  additional  nodes  are  created.  The  final  structures  describing 
all  8 nodes  are  as  follows: 


ID# 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


# of  Lit. 

NT 

Pointers 

i to  LT 

Pointer  to  TT  seg. 

3 

1,  0, 

3 

I 

1 

1 „ 

II 

2 

U 0 

III 

3 

2* 4 » 

5 

IV 

3 

E.  * , 

6 

IV 

3 

[Tj  , 7 , 

8 

IV 

2 1 

S , 9 

V 

2 

S.  io 

V 

ID# 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 


LT 

Relation 

Sign 

Arity 

Pointers  to  TT 

A 

- 

2 

1 2 

B 

- 

2 

3 1 

C 

- 

2 

3 1 

A 

- 

2 

3 5 

B 

- 

2 

4 5 

C 

- 

2 

5 4 

D 

- 

2 

3 5 

E 

- 

2 

5 4 

D 

- 

2 

4 3 

G 

- 

2 

3 4 

Segment  Term  ID 


2. 

3. 


TT 

Term  Type 

V 

V 
C 


II 


1. 

2. 


V 

C 


Subst  Value 


1 

2 


III  1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 


V 

V 
C 
C 


4 

1 

3 


IV 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 


V 

c 

V 

V 

V 


3 

2 

2 


E-ll 


V 


4 

2 

2 


1. 


2. 

3. 

4. 


V 
C 
C 

V 


This  method  has  the  benefit  of  automatically  separating  variables, 
i.e.,  a variable  in  a resolving  rule,  which  is  not  being  unified,  will  never 
match  a variable  ir  the  parent  node. 


B (5)  Possible  Optimizations 

(1)  Instead  of  adding  all  terms  from  the  rules  TT,  just  add  the 
new  terms  and  change  the  old  references.  Furthermore,  if 
no  new  terms  are  added,  no  new  TT  segment  need  be  created. 

(2)  As  resolution  proceeds  and  framed  literals  are  dropped, 
terms  are  lost.  However,  these  terms  are  still  kept  in 
the  term  table. 

For  example,  on  the  previous  page,  look  at  node  3.  Literal 
#2  may  be  contracted.  Once  this  happens,  node  3 has  only 
one  literal,  number  1 which  references  two  terms  in  segment 
III  - 1 and  2.  In  segment  III,  term  1 is  linked  to  term  4. 
However,  there  is  no  reference  to  term  #3  in  segment  III. 

Terms  which  are  not  referenced  could  be  deleted  from  the 
segment.  This  would,  however,  require  explicit  ID  numbers 
in  the  term  table. 

(3)  After  repeated  resolutions , it  is  possible  to  create  a 
number  of  levels  of  pointers,  i.e.,  term  1 is  linked  to 
term  4 which  is  linked  to  term  7,  etc.  This  situation 
can  be  improved  by  updating  pointers,  so  that  when  term 
4 is  linked  to  term  7,  all  other  terms  which  were  pre- 
viously linked  to  term  4 (e.g.,  term  1)  are  linked  to 
term  7 as  well. 


i 

i 


E-12 


REFERENCES 


Symbolic  Logic  and  Mechanics  Theorem  Proving.  Clary,  C.  L. 
and  Lee,  R.  C.  J. , Academic  Press,  New  York,  New  York,  1973. 

Design  Concept  for  an  Augmented  Relational  Intelligence 
Analysis  System  (ARIAS).  Auerbach  Report  2022-TR-2  1973, 

Sable,  J. , et  al. 

The  Complexity  of  Resolution  Procedure  for  Theorem  Proving 
in  the  Propositional  Calculus.  Zvi  Calli  TR-75-239,  Cornell 
University,  1975. 

TT-Representation  - A Clause  Representation  for  Parallel  Search. 
Fishman,  D.  H.  and  Minker,  J.,  TR  74A-u,  University  of  Mass- 
achusetts, 1974. 

A CM-SIGMDD  International  Conference  on  Management  of  Data. 

San  Jose,  California,  May  1975.  Re  Relational  Data  Nets  in 
Information  Systems. 

Resolution  Refinements  and  Search  Strategies.  A comparative 
Study.  Wilson,  G.  and  Minker,  J.  University  of  Maryland, 

July  1975. 

Artificial  Intelligence.  The  Heuristic  Programming  Approach. 
Slage,  J.  R. , McGraw-Hill  Series  in  Systems  Science,  1971. 

Computational  Logic:  The  Unification  Computation.  Robinson, 

J.  A.,  Maclune  Intelligene  6,  Amer.  Elsevier  (1971). 

Problem  Solving  Methods  in  Artificial  Intelligence.  Nilsson, 
N.,  McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  New  York,  1971. 

A Problem-Oriented  Search  Procedure  for  Theorem- Proving. 
Fishman,  D.  H. , Coins  TR  75-C-4,  University  of  Massachusetts, 
June  1975. 


Some  Special  Purpose  Resolution  System.  Kuehne,  D. , Machine 
Intelligence  7,  Wiley  (1972)  pp.  117-128. 

And-or  Graphs,  Theorem-Proving  Graphs  and  Bi-directional  Search. 
Kowalski,  R. , Machine  Intelligence,  Wiley  (1972)  pp.  167-194. 


■ 


| 


MISSION 

of 

Rome  Air  Development  Center 


RADC  plans  and  conducts  research,  exploratory  and  advanced 
development  programs  In  command,  control,  and  communications 
(C3)  activities,  and  in  the  C3  areas  of  information  sciences 
and  intelligence.  The  principal  technical  mission  areas 
are  communications , electromagnetic  guidance  and  control, 
surveillance  of  ground  and  aerospace  objects,  intelligence 
data  collection  and  handling , information  system  technology , 
ionospheric  propagation,  solid  state  sciences,  microwave 
physics  and  electronic  reliability , maintainability  and 
compatibility . 


