Prepared  for: 

Office  of  Naval  Research 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 


November  1975 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


AD  A 0 1 7 6 8 


o « 


ARPA  ORDER  NO.  2V  H) 
NR  154-374 


n 


ISI/RR-  75  41 

Sot-ember  IV  75 


William  C.  Mann 


Dialogue-Based  Research  in  Man-Machine  Communication 


Reproduced  by 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 

US  Department  of  Commerce 
Springfield,  VA.  22151 

INFORMATION  SCIENCES  INSTITUTE 

4(76  Admiralty  Way/ /Manna  del  Ret/ California  902VI 

(2H)R22  Dill 

Preparation  of  tbit  paper  war  supported  by  the  Office  of  Naval  Research,  Personnel  and  Training  Research  Program  > Code  4W,  under 
Contract  N0U0I4-75-C-07I0.  NR  '54-374,  tinder  terms  of  ARPA  Order  Number  2930, 

The  lieu  r and  conclusions  contained  in  this  document  are  those  of  the  author(s)  and  should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily  repre- 
senting thi  official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of  the  Office  of  Naval  Research,  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects 
tgeiicy,  or  the  IJ.S  Government 

This  die /,  .till  t ' approved  for  public  release  and  sale:  distribution  is  unlimited 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  of  This  page  r»Ti»n  Dele  Entered; 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLET'NG  FORM 


3 RECIPIENT’S  CAT  ALOS  NUMBER 


* TITLE  (end  Subtitle) 

DIALOGUE-BASED  RESEARCH  IN 
MAN-MACHINE  COMMUNICATION 


7 AuTMORrtJ 

WILLIAM  C.  MANN 


» performing  organization  name  and  address 

USC/INFORMATION  SCIENCES  INSTITUTE 

4676  ADMIRALTY  WAY 

MARINA  DEL  REY,  CALIFORNIA  90291 


II  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  AOORESS 

HUMAN  RESOURCES  RESEARCH  OFFICE 
ADVANCED  RESEARCH  PROJECTS  AGENCY 
1400  WILS 


I*  monitoring  agency  name  A ADDRESSn/  dllltitnl  Itom  Controlling  Olllco) 

PERSONNEL  AND  TRAINING  RESEARCH  PROGRAMS 
OFFICE  OF  NAVAL  RESEARCH  - CODE  458 
800  N.  QUINCY  STREET 
ARLINGTON,  VA  22217 


16  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  rot  Ihl,  Report; 


5 TYPE  OF  REPORT  A PERIOD  COVERED 

RESEARCH 


6 performing  org.  report  number 


i.  contract  or  grant  number^ 

N00014-75-C-0710 


to.  program  element. project,  task 
AREA  A WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

61153N  RR042-06-0] 

RR042-06  NR154-374 


IiMi}:1 


13.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

-33- 


IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (ol  Ihlo  report; 


UNCLASSIFIED 


1 Se.  DECLASSIFICATION  ' DOWNGRADING 
SCHEDULE 


APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE;  DISTRIBUTION  UNLIMITED 


UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  RAOEfW»«n  Data  Kn«ar*« 


20.  Ansi  P AC  1 

This  paper  first  surveys  current  knowledge  of  human  communication  from  a point  of 
view  which  seeks  to  find  or  develop  knowledge  that  will  be  useful  to  computer  system 
designers.  The  relevant  scientific  knowledge  is  found  to  be  fragmentary  and  hard  for 
designers  to  use. 

Next,  ‘he  problem  of  complexity  is  explored.  Building  a useful  knowledge  of  human 
tommunica  on  is  an  extremely  complex  task.  Controlling  this  complexity  and  its  effects, 
without  giving  up  usefulness,  is  seen  as  the  central  problem  in  designing  a research 
approach. 

Finally,  a new  research  methodology  is  presented.  It  contains  some  innovations  that 
help  control  the  complexity  of  the  task,  and  others  that  make  the  results  useful  to 
designers.  The  methodology  is  unique  in  that 

• It  is  based  on  case  analysis  rather  than  functional  system  design. 

• The  results  are  in  the  form  of  individual  computer  algorithms  (much 
smaller  than  systems). 

• The  algorithms  are  transferable  into  useful  (nonresearch)  systems. 

This  research  is  an  integral  part  of  a larger  set  of  research  objectives  to 
substantially  improve  man/machine  communication—particularly  for  the  growing  level  of 
on-line,  interactive  use  of  computers  by  the  Department  of  Defense  and  Ihe  military 
departments. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  This  RAGEflWi»n  D»f»  Enfrtd) 


DIALOGUE-BASED  RESEARCH  IN  MAN-MACIIINE  COMMUNICATION 


BY 

William  C.  Mann 


ISI/KR-7S-4I 


November  1975 


USC/Information  Sciences  Institute 
4676  Admiralty  Way 
Marina  del  Rey,  California  90291 


The  research  reported  herein  is  supported  by  the  Personnel  and  Training  Research 
Programs  of  the  Office  of  Naval  Research  (Code  458),  Arlington  VA  22217,  Contract 
Authority  Identification  Number  NR  154-374,  Contract  N00014-75-C-0710,  under  ARPA 
Older  Number  2930  from  the  Human  Resources  Research  Office  of  the  Advanced 
Research  Projects  Agency  The  report  is  approved  for  public  release;  distribution 
unlimited.  Reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  is  permitted  for  any  purpose  of  the  United 
States  Government.  Opinions  expressed  herein  are  those  of  the  author  and  do  not 
necessarily  reflect  policy  of  any  agency  of  the  United  States  Government. 

I. 


2 


ABSTRACT 

This  paper  first  surveys  current  Knowledge  of  human  communication  from  a point  of 
view  which  seeks  to  find  or  develop  knowledge  thal  will  be  useful  to  computer  system 
designers.  The  relevant  scientific  knowledge  is  found  to  be  fragmentary  and  hard  for 
designers  to  use. 

Next,  the  problem  of  complexity  is  explored.  Building  a useful  knowledge  of  human 
communication  is  an  extremely  complex  task.  Controlling  this  complexity  and  its  effects, 
without  giving  up  usefulness,  is  seen  as  the  central  problem  in  designing  a research 
approach. 

Finally,  a new  research  methodology  is  presented.  It  contains  some  innovations  that 
help  control  the  complexity  of  the  task,  and  others  that  make  the  results  useful  to 
designers.  The  methodology  is  unique  in  that 

• It  is  based  on  case  analysis  rather  than  functional  system  design. 

• The  resuhs  are  in  the  form  of  individual  compu'er  algorithms  (much 
smaller  than  systems). 

• The  algorithms  are  transferable  into  useful  (nonresearch)  systems. 

This  research  is  an  integral  part  of  a larger  set  of  research  objectives  to 
substantially  improve  man/machine  communication—particularly  for  the*  .'.rowing  level  of 
on-line,  interactive  use  of  computers  by  the  Department  of  Defense  and  the  military 
departments. 


This  research  was  supported  by  the  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  of  the 
Department  of  Defense  and  was  monitored  by  ONR  under  Contract  No. 
N00014-75-C-0710.  A nearly  identical  version  has  been  submitted  for  publication 


3 


INTRODUCTION 

When  people  communicate  with  machines  they  do  so  by  specializing  and  extending 
their  ability  to  communicate  with  each  other.  To  design  systems  that  can  communicate 
with  peop'e,  we  need  to  know  how  people  communicate. 

This  paper  first  surveys  current  knowledge  of  human  communication  from  a point  of 
view  which  seeks  to  find  or  develop  knowledge  that  will  be  useful  to  system  designers. 
The  relevant  scientific  knowledge  is  found  to  be  fragmentary  and  hard  for  designers  to 
use. 


Next,  the  problem  of  complexity  is  explored.  Building  a useful  knowledge  of  human 
communication  is  an  extremely  complex  task.  Controlling  this  complexity  and  its  effects, 
without  giving  up  usefulness,  is  seen  as  the  central  problem  in  designing  a research 
approach. 

Finally,  a new  research  methodology  is  presented,  it  contains  seme  innovations  that 
help  control  the  complexity  of  the  task,  and  others  that  make  the  results  useful  to 
designers. 

The  methodology  is  unique  in  that  a variety  of  features  of  the  approach  that  limit 
the  complexity  of  algorithm  development  are  described. 

The  development  of  these  algorithms  produces  new  knowledge  about  people  and 
how  they  communicate.  Using  the  algorithms  in  systems  makes  those  systems  more 
flexible  and  mere  skilled  in  communicating  with  people,  because  they  incorporate 
methods  that  people  already  use,  recognize  and  understand. 


• It  is  based  on  case  analysis  rather  than  functional  system  design. 

• The  results  are  in  the  fo'm  of  individual  computer  algorithms  (much  smaller 
than  systems). 

• The  algorithms  are  transferable  into  useful  (nonresearch)  systems. 


4 


PART  i:  NERDS  AND  SOURCES  OF  KNOWLEDGE 
OF  M/tu-MACUINF.  COMMUNICATION 

The  Technical  Nature  of  Man-machine  Communication 

When  people  start  to  learn  to  use  computers,  they  build  on  their  knowledge  of 
numari  communication.  They  are  told  about  "commands",  "statements"  and  "error 
messages"  They  are  told  to  "tell  the  computer"  things,  and  "it  will  tell  you"  others. 
Their  own  ability  to  understand  and  engage  in  two-party  communication  is  the  primary 
basis  on  which  their  skills  in  computer  use  are  built. 

The  specialization  from  human  dialogue  to  computer  use  has  always  been  a drastic 
or.e.  The  languages,  participants’  goals,  interpretation  rules,  means  of  control  of 
computer  interfaces  are  unfamiliar  to  most  people,  and  often  even  hard  to  conceive.* 

Man-machine  interfaces  today  exploit  very  little  of  people’s  communication  abilities, 
so  their  power  tc  serve  people  s needs  turns  out  to  be  strongly  limited  as  well.  The 
communication  problem  is  a bottleneck,  preventing  people  from  getting  easy  access  to 
computer  methods  and  information  that  could  otherwise  be  extremely  useful  to  them. 
One  direction  of  major  improvement  is  therefore  to  identify  particular  expressive  and 
receptive  abilities  of  people,  and  then  make  machines  appropriately  responsive.  But 
there  is  a catch.  A special  understanding  of  how  people  communicate  is  needed. 

This  paper  describes  a research  methodology  which  is  explicitly  designed  for 
developing  the  necessary  understanding. 


USEFUL  MODELS  OF  COMMUNICATION 

Consider  the  information  needs  of  the  designer  of  a system  which  includes 
man-machine  communication. 

The  designer  of  a machine  which  is  intended  for  man-machine  communication  is 
necessarily  designing  only  half  a system.  The  machine,  and  perhaps  the  medium,  are 
subject  to  design,  but  man  is  not  - he  is  only  adaptive,  not  arbitrarily  variable.  He 
comes  equipped  with  richly  complex  symbol  manipulation  abilities,  which  the  computer 
system  must  engage  effectively.  So  the  designer  needs  a model  of  that  other  half  of 
hit  tystem. 


* The  work  described  here  is  intended  especially  to  apply  to  users  of  interactive 
computer  systems  '.vho  are  not  programmers  and  who  are  not  performing  stereotyped 
tasks.  A major  share  of  the  trouble  comes  from  excessive  reliance  on  command  forms 

(Mann  1975). 


5 


What  kind  of  a model  of  the  human  communicator  would  be  helpful?  It  should  be: 

1.  Complete  enough  to  know  what  specific  human  capabilities  will  be 
exercised  by  a proposed  system 

2.  Explicit  enough  to  predict  human  performance. 

3.  Detailed  enough  to  represent  the  human  performance  limits  realistically. 

4.  Detailed  enough  to  support  a tradeoff  comparison  or  human  versus 
machine  performance  of  parts  of  the  task. 

5.  Explicit  enough  about  human  methods  so  that  they  can  be  imitated  in 
system  designs. 

Completeness,  explicitness  and  detail  can  be  found  in  varying  degrees,  of  course. 
The  models  of  symbol-manipulating  man  that  are  currently  in  existence  are  almost 
entirely  inadequate  for  each  one  of  the  designers’  needs  suggested  above. 
(Examination  of  current  systems  shows  that  designers’  intuitions  are  also  an  inadequate 
source.) 

There  is  no  reason  to  expect  that  more  adequate  models  will  be  easy  to  come  by. 
Human  symbolic  behavior  is  known  to  be  complex,  unstable,  and  difficult  to  characterize. 
But  it  is  extremely  worthwhile  to  seek  the  knowledge,  for  several  reasons: 

• To  reduce  the  frustration  of  using  systems  poorly  matched  to  human 
capabilities  and  goals. 

• To  reduce  the  costs  of  error  and  labor  associated  with  current  systems. 

• To  increase  our  understanding  of  man. 

On  a very  practical  scale,  it  appears  that  even  modest  improvements  in  our  current 
models  of  man  would  have  significant  direct  benefits  to  designers.  Many  kinds  of 
information  tasks  can  only  be  performed  to  people’s  satisfaction  by  people. 
Satisfactory  explicit  methods  are  unknown.  Having  even  approximate  models  of 
people’s  methods  would  allow  designers  to  imitate  and  improve  on  them  in  many  cases. 

We  have  cnosen  processes  as  the  appropriate  medium  to  express  the  kind  of  models 
we  are  seeking.  Practically,  this  means  that  the  models  will  be  expressed  and  tested  as 
computer  programs. 


6 


CURRENT  SOURCES  OF  MODEI.S 

Although  no  integrated  and  detailed  account  exists  of  how  people  communicate, 
there  is  an  abundance  of  relevant  information  which  can  contribute  to  developing  such 
an  account.  Some  of  the  existing  work  in  Artificial  Intelligence,  Linguistics,  Cognitive 
Psychology,  and  the  Philosophy  of  Language  is  particularly  relevant.  A selection  of 
these  is  reviewed  below,  followed  by  our  approach  to  an  integrated  theory. 


Artificial  Intelligence 

Much  of  the  recent  work  on  processing  of  natural  language  has  been  undertaken  as 
research  in  Artificial  Intelligence.  There  is  a sequence  of  developments  on  programmed 
question  answering,  another  on  tools  for  linguists,  another  on  design  of  special  purpose 
subsets  of  natural  language  for  particular  uses,  another  on  teaching  machines,  another 
on  so  '.iu  algebraic  word-problems,  another  on  getting  a program  to  obey  natural 
language  commands. 

Most  of  these  efforts  are  pursued  as  contributions  to  a theory  of  problem 
solving:  "Here  is  some  text.  Use  it  to  select  an  appropriate  action,"  where 

appropriateness  is  to  conform  to  human  judgment  about  the  text.  The  problem  is  a 
selection  problem  (or  a synthesis  problem).  The  program  is  to  derive  enough  information 
from  the  text  and  its  context  to  act. 

Different  programs  involved  human  interaction  in  different  degrees,  from  no 
involvement  (for  many)  to  provision  of  an  interface  for  ongoing  dialogue  (as  in 
Winograd’s  blocks-worid  program  (Winograd  1973)).  The  current  level  of  development 
of  these  programs  does  not  reveal  much  about  how  the  person  who  uses  them  functions 
as  a communicator.  The  programs  are  interesting  as  models  of  receivers.  Usually  no 
claims  are  made  for  their  correspondence  to  functional  descriptions  of  people. 

Developing  appropriate  knowledge  representations  will  be  a major  factor  in 
determining  the  generality  of  Our  dialogue  models.  We  have  the  benefit  of  a long 
sequence  of  knowledge  representation  work.  This  background  is  currently  represented 
in  part  by  work  at  SRI  (especially  Strips  and  QA4  3nd  their  descendants)  (Fikes  and 
Nilsson,  1371;  Rulifson  1972)  and  K ,<T  (especially  the  Planner  family)  (Hewitt,  Bishop  and 
Steiger,  1973).  (The  recent  work  on  Automatic  Programming  at  ISI  uses  a knowledge 
representation  which  is  in  the  same  general  style.)  There  is  a widely  scattered 
generation  of  systems  bearing  the  label  "semantic  net,"  descended  from  relational 
systems  (Raphael  1968;  Quillian  1968,  1969;  Elliott  1965.)  Recent  work  has  applied 
semantic  net  representation  to  a variety  of  information  tasks  (Lindsay  and  Norman, 
1972;  Rumelhart,  Lindsay  and  Norman  1972;  Norman  and  Rumelhart,  1975;  Simmons 
1973;  Schank  1971,  1973;  Hendrix  1973a,  1973b;  Collins  and  Passafiume,  1974;  Collins, 
Passafiume,  Gould  and  Carbonell,  1973;  Moore  1971;  Moore  and  Newell,  1973;  Srinivasan 
1973).  The  Sophie  system  is  particularly  significant  in  combining  a dialogue  capability 
in  restricted  English  with  a variety  of  models  of  an  electronic  circuit  being  repaired 
(Brown,  Burton  and  Bell,  1974).  The  Sl^*"  • ystem  combines  relational  representation 


7 


with  methods  for  retrieving,  combining  and  interpreting  larger  units  of  information  in  a 
model  of  human  short-term  memory  (Mann  1974). 


Linguittia 

The  concerns  of  linguistics  encompass  several  loosely  related  groups  of  phenomena. 
For  our  purposes,  we  will  consider  only  those  which  are  approximately  invariant  under 
the  differences  between  speech  and  writing.  The  others,  which  deal  specifically  with 
auditory  and  articulatory  phenomena  are  less  germane  to  the  general  topic  of 
communication. 

Linguistic  theory  is  a theory  of  symbols  and  compositions  of  symbols.  Strings  of 
symbols  are  characterized  as  grammatical,  meaningful,  equivalent,  and  so  forth. 
Categories  of  strings,  such  as  the  categories  of  sentences  and  non  sentences,  are 
distinguished  by  exhibiting  formal  systems  in  which  they  have  differing  derivational 
properties.  In  one  of  the  mainstreams  of  current  work,  the  theory  is  regarded  as 
expressing  the  "competence  of  the  native  speaker,"  without  any  commitment  to 
correspondence  between  theoretical  entities  and  operations  performed  by  actual 
speakers  (Chomsky,  1965). 

The  "native  speaker"  is  not  speaking  to  a listener,  and  his  competence  remains  fixed. 
No  state  changes  are  represented,  and  thus  language  is  not  treated  as  a vehicle  of 
communication.  Whatever  consequences  there  are  of  the  communication  use  of 
language  are  not  directiy  representable  as  such  in  this  kind  of  theory. 

An  example  below  illustrates  on  the  one  hand  the  difference  in  focus  between  this 
style  and  our  concerns,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  need  for  an  explicitly 
communication-oriented  theory. 

...At  this  point  discourse  may  become  relevant  in  a way  that  it  hasn’t  usually 
been  taken  to  be  for  syntax.  If  you  say  to  me  "you're  staring  at  me"  and  I 
reply  "no,  I’m  not”,  are  we  to  say  that  the  deep  structure  of  my  sentence 
includes  a transformed  version  of  your  sentence?  It  certainly  wouldn’t  include 
"you’re  staring  at  me";  if  it  included  any  thing,  it  would  be  “I’m  staring  at  you", 
but  ever,  that  hardly  seems  plausible.  And  if  the  deep  structure  of  my 
sentence  does  not  include  some  transformed  version  of  your  sentence,  then 
what  is  my  deletion  based  on?  ’t  might  be  worth  working  on  that  question  as  a 
source  for  new  ideas  about  deletions  in  general  — (Pcrtee  1971). 


Notice  that  the  driving  question  is  that  of  finding  the  right  underlying  form  to  use  in 
the  justification  of  (he  claim  that  "no  I’m  not"  is  grammatical.  There  is  no  consideration 
of  what  the  transmitted  content  of  "you’re  staring  at  me”  might  have  been.  Yet  this 
knowledge  seems  to  be  just  what  is  vital  for  answering  Partee’s  question  about  the 
proper  underlying  form  for  representing  the  speaker’s  competence. 


8 


For  communication  modeling,  a theory  of  speaker’s  competence  is  particularly 
helpful  in  suggesting  what  underlying  units  are  used  in  communicating,  and  how  the 
units  are  related. 

Some  linguists  are  working  more  directly  on  ihe  kind  of  language  that  actually 
occurs  (performance  rather  than  competence).  George  Lakoff  presents  grammatical 
theories  which  he  regards  as  subject  (in  principle)  to  refutation  from  psychological 
experiments.  A significant  grammar  of  the  English  of  scientific  publications  has  heen 
developed  at  NYU  (Sager  1972,  1975).  Grimes,  and  many  others,  are  exploring 
structural  units  larger  than  sentences  (Grimes  1972).  Several  are  working  on  theories 
composed  of  processes  (Woods  1971;  Kaplan  1971;  Kay  1971). 

These  developments  provide  a rich  source  of  ideas  about  the  necessary  components 
of  a linguistically  adequate  theory  of  communication. 


Cognitive  and  Experimental  Psychology 

The  Cognitive  Psychology  movement  has  its  roots  Drimarily  in  Experimental 
Psychology.  It  aims  to  produce  theories  of  complex  human  activities,  especially 
involving  memory,  perception  and  language  behavior.  The  units  of  analysis  are  usually 
complex  objects  such  as  sentences,  stories  or  scenes,  and  the  experiments  may  deal 
with  either  individuals  (e.g.,  Newell  and  Simon  1972)  or  groups  (e.g.,  Friend  1973,  Colby 
1973;  Abelson  1973).  The  work  proceeds  from  a view  of  man  as  an  information 
processor,  appropriately  represented  by  theories  containing  information  processes. 

The  current  state  of  Cognitive  Psychology  is  supportive  of  our  goals  for  theory  of 
communication  in  a number  of  ways.  It  is  coping  with  elements  such  as  common!,  occur 
in  communication,  and  is  discovering  structural  properties  which  affect  their 
communicative  use  (e.g.,  Chase  and  Clark,  1972),  (Anderson  and  Otony  1975).  Retelling 
a story  resembles  Ordinary  communicative  behavior  m many  ways  that  performance  on 
a paired-associate  memory  test  with  nonsense  syllables  does  not.  Representation 
problems  and  the  consequences  of  using  particular  representations  are  being  dealt  with 
explicitly  (Simon,  1975).  In  particular  there  are  production-system  representation 
methods  that  have  been  through  many  stages  of  refinement  (Waterman,  1971,  1973). 
Sufficient  theories  to  account  for  particular  complex  behaviors  are  being  developed,  and 
an  understanding  of  the  evaluation  of  such  theories  is  emerging.  The  field  is 

demonstrating  ways  of  coping  with  rich  complexity  in  an  empirical  way. 


9 


Philo,.,tphy  of  Language 

There  is  a line  of  development  in  philosophy  which  is  currently  addressing  some  of 
the  central  problems  of  communication,  but  from  a different  p°rspective.  The 
development  runs  through  early  Logical  Positivi.m,  through  the  later  work  of 
Wittgenstein  and  work  of  J.  L.  Austin  to  recent  work  by  John  R.  Searle,  P.  Grice  and 
now  many  others  (Wittgenstein  1953;  Austin  1962;  Searle  1969;  Grire  1975;  Cole  and 
Morgan  1975).  They  are  developing  a theory  of  the  re'ationshios  that  occi.v  between 
speakers  and  their  words.  The  notion  of  an  illocutionary  act,  anc  the  theory  of  "speech 
acts"  are  important  parte  of  this  development.  The  theory  identifies  some  aspects  of 
the  words  which  are  important  to  understanding  the  words  in  dialogue,  including,  for 
example,  characterizing  the  different  kinds  of  comm1  ,ent  to  the  spoken  v/ords  that 
speakers  may  express. 


10 


P/IRT  2:  COMPLEXITY 


Complrrily  of  the  Theory 

Our  seal  is  to  build  a theory  ol  human  communication  that  specilins  how r it  is 
accomplished.  Approaching  this  goal  we  lace  a serous  problem  0 coping  with  I e 
complexity  ol  the  phenomena.  The  diversity  ol  It.  contributing  fields  ‘|'* .above  is 
one  evidence  ul  this  complexily.  The  complexity  ol  a single  isolated  acl  ol 
communication  arises  from  a number  of  sources: 


The  complexity  of  personhood 
Individual  differences 
The  medium 

The  tasks  being  attempted  by  the  communicators 

The  complexity  of  their  available  languages  and  conventions 

The  side  effects  o*  communicating 

The  extent  and  variety  of  relevant  .world-knowledge 


The  difficulty  of  dealing  with  these  complexities  is  compounded  and  magnified  by  the 
weakness  of  currently  available  theoretical  formalisms. 


For  theories  of  physical  events,  II  is  a practical  necessity  to  describe  »l  a variety  ol 
levels.  For  example,  sterilization  ol  a surface  with  boiling  waler  can  be  desc  be 
terms  of: 


Epidemiology 
Cell  physiology 
Organic  chemistry 
Atomic  physics 


each  of  which  can  be  further  divided  yielding  coherent  descriptions  at  several  eve  s. 
These  descriptions  are  primarily  in  c relationship  of  composition;  the  objects  of  a more 
detailed  descriptive  level  are  taken  as  the  building  blocks  of  the  adjacent  less  detailed 

one. 


Likewise  human  communication  can  be  described  at  a variety  of  levels,  some  of 
them  reeled  by  composition  relations.  Our  goal  is  no,  involved  in  all  ol  the  complexity 
ol  communication  because  we  are  no,  trying  lo  address  ,11  of  the  possible  leve  a, 
once.  But  this  is  s', II  a complex  matter.  In  order  to  meet  the  designer  s needs  outlined 
above,  a "sufficient"  theory  is  r?eded  - that  is,  one  that  speci  ies  °w 
representative  communicating  agent  acts.  Such  a theory  is  equal  m complexity 
task  of  building  a robot  that  acts  that  way. 


The  difficulty  is  not  the  volume  of  information  involved,  but  its  diversity.  Having 
computers  a million  times  faster  or  larger  would  not  allow  us  to  build  that  robot,  since 
we  would  not  know  what  to  put  into  the  programs.  The  limitation  comes  from  the  state 

of  the  theory  itself. 


11 


Controlling  Complexity  In  The  Research  Activity 

Complexity  in  the  theory  leads  directly  to  complexity  in  the  activity  in  which  the 
theory  is  developed.  The  research  cannot  be  less  complex,  since  it  takes  effort  to 
establish  each  independent  point.  In  fact,  elaborate  effort  is  often  required  to  establish 
single  hypotheses.  How  can  the  complexity  of  the  theory-building  effort  be  controlled 
and  prevented  from  causing  the  effort  to  fail? 

Just  as  we  reviewed  the  state  of  some  communication  sciences,  we  could  review  the 
state  of  the  art  of  complexity  limitation  in  science  But  this  is  far  too  great  a task.  A 
large  fraction  of  the  techniques  of  science  --  instruments,  laboratories,  controlled 
comparisons,  formalisms  of  expression  --  serve  to  limit  complexity.  Closer  to  home, 
there  are  several  methods  in  common  use: 

Strong  restriction  of  the  world  of  knowledge  (the  micro-world  method) 

The  restriction  comes  in  two  flavors:  selective  attention  to  real-world 
knowledge,  exemplified  by  the  Scholar,  Sophie  systems  and  by  recent  work  of 
Malhatra  (Brown  et  at.  1974;  Collins  et  al.  1973,  1974;  Carbonell  1970; 
Grignetti  and  Warnock,  1973;  Malhotra  1975)  or  a wholly  synthetic  world  of 
objects  and  concerns,  exemplified  by  the  Blocks  World  (Winograd  1973). 

Selection  of  simple  problems  as  the  subjects  of  communication,  such  as 
Cryptarithmetic  (Newell  et  al.  1972) 

/, imitation  of  the  scope  of  the  theory,  for  example,  to  the  syntactic 
competence  of  native  speakers  Of  a language.  This  is  a strong  restriction,  in 
that  the  nature  of  the  competence  is  assumed  not  to  change  as  a result  of  the 
act  of  speaking  or  hearing.  State  changes  of  the  language  users  are  not 
represented,  and  so  any  theory  of  communication  which  includes  such  state 
changes  is  outside  of  the  scope. 

Failure  to  reconcile  theoretical  fragments,  represented  either  by  an 
informal  (descriptive)  coordination  of  formal  results,  or  none  whatever. 
Serious  problems  of  consistency  of  the  fragments  remain.  Collections  of 
fragments  of  theory  do  not  fulfill  the  notion  of  sufficiency  described  above. 

Use  of  synthetic,  data.  It  is  common  in  Linguistics  and  Philosophy  to  deal 
with  constructed  examples  that  highlight  particular  points.  This  is  a legitimate 
and  fruitful  approach,  but  it  tends  to  leave  large  colledions  of  phenomena 
unexamined. 

"593.  A main  cause  of  philosophical  disease  — a one-sided  diet:  one 
nourishes  one’s  thinking  with  only  one  kind  of  example." 
(Wittgenstein  1953) 

It  also  tends  to  leave  Vis  of  the  theory  unreconciled,  since  the  process  of 
creating  clear  examples  eliminates  complicating  interactions. 


12 


These  ways  of  reducing  complexity  of  research  all  share  a commcn  risk:  That 
necessary  Information  will  be  ruled  out  of  the  investigation,  either  by  being  excluded 
from  the  data  or  excluded  from  the  scope  of  possible  results.  (For  example,  it  may  be 
necessary  to  have  data  on  context  or  a notion  of  communication  in  order  to  develop  a 
sufficient  theory  of  meaning.)  Because  of  this  risk  we  should  see*  and  prefer  controls 
on  complexity  that  do  not  restrict  the  scope  of  associated  data  or  theory. 

PART  .?•  RESEARCH  METHODOLOGY 

A desire  for  sufficient  theory,  and  for  strong  controls  on  the  immediate  complexity 
of  the  research,  have  guided  the  design  of  the  work  described  below.  We  believe  that 
it  addresses  the  concerns  raised  above  in  an  interesting  and  powerful  way. 

Overview 

The  complexity  of  building  new  theoretical  hypotheses  is  limited  by  requiring  that  a 
new  hypothesis  only  account  for  a single  case.  Hypotheses  (expressed  as  processes) 
are  vatidated  and/or  progressively  generalized  by  requiring  that  they  account  for 
additional  single  cases.  The  size  of  a case  is  controllable  by  the  way  we  select  it. 

Incremental  progress  toward  a sufficient  theory  is  achieved  by  developing  it  in 
parts,  each  part  being  in  the  form  of  a process,  and  the  overall  theory  in  the  form  of  a 
set  of  cooperating  processes.  The  processes  are  made  explicit  by  stating  them  in  a 
suitable  process  formalism,  a programming  language.  The  processes  are  tested  as  parts 
of  a computer  program,  and  their  mutual  consistency,  compatibility  and  coverage  are 
made  explicit  and  tested  by  combining  them  in  this  way. 

Use  of  actual  human  communication  helps  retain  comprehensiveness  and  contact  with 
a full  range  of  communication  phenomena.  We  choose  lo  work  on  dialogue,  partly 
because  it  is  the  starting  point  for  learning  rnan-rnachme  communication,  and  partly 
because  we  want  to  avoid  the  complexity  of  side  effects  (eg.,  A speaks  to  B for  the 
benefit  of  C). 

The  complexity  of  knowledge  required  is  limited  to  that  actually  involved  in 
particular  cases  being  studied,  rather  than  spanning  a knowledge  domain.  The  required 
knowledge  is  identified  by  examining,  the  cases,  since  the  studies  work  from  transcripts. 
Certain  central  phenomena  are  selected  to  lead  into  t lie  development  and  gauge  its 
progress. 


Dialogue  Process  Modeling 


This  modeling  effort  involves  a series  (cycle)  of  experiments  with  human  dialogue, 
having  results  which  are  processes  (represented  as  computer  programs)  which 
collectively  are  able  to  follow  and  make  sense  of  dialogue  transcripts.  The  effort 
addresses  a limited  range  of  descriptive  levels. 


13 


What  do  we  plan  to  exclude?  All  of  the  long-term  communication  effects,  from  the 
multi-century  development  of  language  up  to  the  personal  long-.erm  effects,  including 
the  gross  developments  of  language  acquisition,  are  outside  our  scope.  At  the  detailed 
levels,  articulatory  or  phonological  or  auditory  phenomena  are  also  outside  the  scope. 
The  smallest  unit  of  analysis  Will  ordinarily  be  the  word  or  morpheme.  The  goal  is  to 
understand  immediate  effects  in  communication  with  words. 

The  effort  addresses  a limited  range  of  described  levels.  The  cyr’j  of  experiments 
works  as  follows: 

1.  In  each  single  experiment,  processes  are  developed  which  can  cope  with 
the  transcript  of  a single  dialogue.  These  processes  are  a kind  of  empirical 
hypotheses. 

2.  The  results  of  multiple  experiments  are  examined  to  identify  those 

processes  which  reoccur,  which  therefore  successfully  cope  with  phenomena 
from  several  dialogues.  These  are  the  verified  processes  which  we  expect  to 
successfully  transfer  into  future  communication  systems.  In  multiple 

experiments  a kind  of  refinement  and  verification  of  hypotheses  occurs,  the 
hypotheses  being  stated  as  processes  and  debugged  as  computer  programs. 


D/1771  SOURCES 

The  data  are  dialogues.  For  stable  resul’s,  we  need  to  cope  with  a diversity  of 
kinds  of  dialogues,  including  diversity  of  source,  selecting  on  the  basis  of  experience.  A 
priori,  the  follow, ng  are  sources  of  readily  / .ole  data  with  interesting 
characteristics: 

• We  have  in  hand  a wide  selection  of  Operator-User  dialogues  from  the 
TENEX  time  sharing  system,  including  many  appeals  for  help  or  advice. 

• NASA  has  provided  us  with  spacecraft-to-ground  transcripts  and  voice 
tapes  of  the  Apollo  13  mission  (the  one  with  the  blowout).  These  provide 
another  interesting  kind  of  task-oriented  dialogue. 

• Radio  dial-up  talk  shows.  These  provide  well-bounded  context  and 
discussion  between  strangers. 

• We  construct  some  experimental  situations  ourselves. 

We  use  only  media,  in  which  the  participants  are  separated  (telephone,  linked 
typewriters,  computer  mediated  exchange,  etc.)  because  we  need  to  be  able  to 
represent  the  symbolic  content  of  the  exchanges  fully  and  easily.  Facial  expressions, 
gestures  and  the  like  arj  beyond  our  abilities  to  encode  well  enough  to  make  them 
useful  to  us.  (Also,  thr.se  media  are  most  like  the  common  man -machine  media.) 


TRANSCRIPT 


Figure  1 - An  Experiment  with  a Single  Dialogue 


15 


SINGLE  EXPERIMENT 

Dialogue  process  modeling  is  a series  of  experiments  which  develop  communicating 
processes.  The  single  experiment  consists  of  four  parts: 


1.  Capture  human  dialogues. 

2.  Identify  important  phenomena  in  the  dialogue. 

3.  Create  processes  that  can  follow  the  dialogue. 

4.  Evaluate  the  processes  relative  to  the  phenomena  identified  in  item  2. 


Each  of  these  is  explained  in  detail  below.  Figure  1 illustrates  the  experiment. 


Experiment  Step  I 


Step  1 is  to  capture  the  dialogue.  A transcript  of  the  dialogue,  suitable  fo'  both 
computer-reading  and  human  reading,  is  produced.  The  emainder  of  the  experiment 
deals  with  this  transcrip  , in  particular  with  reconciling  a human  reading  and  a computer 
reading  of  it. 

This  step  (and  all  prior  steps)  also  includes  some  selection  of  transcript  material  for 
further  analysis,  since  dialogue  is  abundant  and  easy  to  create,  and  there  will  always  be 
far  more  than  we  can  analyze.  This  is  one  of  several  controls  we  have  on  the  difficulty 
of  Our  task.  Another  is  the  length  of  the  exchange  that  we  select. 

To  help  follow  the  explanation,  consider  the  following  example,  which  is  an  actual 
operator-user  dialogue,  from  the  ISI  TENEX  computing  facility,  cleaned  up  for  readability 
but  essentially  unaltered  in  content: 


16 


The  dialogue  below,  between  parties  0 (a  computer  system  operator)  and  L (one  of 
the  system  users),  was  mediated  by  the  system.  0 and  L were  at  separate  locations, 
typing.  RUNOFF  is  a commonly  used  text-formatting  program.  Spelling,  punctuation  and 
visual  format  have  been  edited  for  readability  and  privacy. 


********* 

L: 

How  do  I get  RUNOFF  to  work,  I keep  executing  it  but  it  just  grabs 
my  input  file  and  then  says  done  but  gives  me  no  output?  Go  ahead. 
0: 

The  output  comes  out  on  the  line  printer 
L: 

Throw  it  away  but  can  I get  it  to  go  to  a file?  Go  ahead. 

0: 

Confirm  your  commands  with  a comma  and  you’ll  be  queried  for  files, 
etc.  Go  ahead. 

L: 

Thanx  mucho 
BREAK 


********* 


Experiment  Step  2 

Of  course,  a dialogue  is  generally  a unique,  one-of-a-kind  event.  It  contains 
systematic  features  that  make  communication  possible,  together  with  a lot  of 
unexplainable,  idiosyncratic  detail.  Understanding  the  regularities  that  govern  a 
dialogue  requires  describing  them  in  common  terms.  The  first  stage  of  description  in 
common  terms  involves  deriving  systematic  data  from  dialogue.  For  this  work,  we  use  a 
person  we  call  the  Observer. 


Step  2 in  the  single-experiment  figure  shows  the  Observer  creating  a commentary 
on  the  dialogue,  based  on  a set  of  categories  of  observation  described  below. 


The  Observer  is  asked  to  assert  only  those  phenomena  for  which  he  has  high 
confidence  that  his  interpretation  would  be  widely  agreed  upon,  say,  by  957  of  a group 
of  people  as  competent  as  himself  in  communication.  We  do  so  in  order  to  keep  the 
attention  of  the  modelers  on  a set  of  phenomena  for  which  we  expect  a consistent  set 
of  technical  accounts.  There  is  presently  no  profit  in  dealing  with  marginal  cases.  Our 
situation  is  like  that  of  the  linguists  interested  in  grammatically 


"Even  though  few  reliable  operational  procedures  have  been  developed, 
the  theoretical  (that  is,  grammatical)  investigation  of  the  knowledge  of  the 


17 


native  speaker  can  proceed  perfectly  well.  The  critical  problem  for 
grammatical  theory  today  is  not  a paucity  of  evidence  but  rather  the 
inadequacy  of  present  theories  of  language  to  account  for  masses  of  evidence 
that  are  hardly  open  to  serious  question."  (Chomsky  1965) 


The  Observation  Process 


The  role  of  the  Observer  is  not  to  tell  why  the  dialogue  went  as  it  did,  nor  what 
methods  the  participants  used  to  create  their  parts,  since  these  are  theoretical 
questions.  Such  questions  belong  to  the  accounting  for  the  observations  rather  than  to 
the  observational  process.  Figure  2 below  illustrates  the  Observer’s  activity, 
annotating  transcripts  of  the  dialogue  according  to  instructions  and  his  own 
understanding  and  judgment. 

The  Observer  of  communication  activity  is  a kind  of  instrument.  His  judgments  on 
the  condition  of  the  communication  constitute  the  properties  of  the  communication  that 
need  to  be  explained.  They  are  analogous  to  the  judgments  of  grammaticality  in 
linguistics,  which  attach  the  * to  some  strings  and  not  to  others. 

The  Observer  is  a kind  of  reducer  of  the  data,  an  inscrutable  perceiver  and  filter, 
whose  presence  is  acceptable  and  necessary  because  his  comments  somehow  represent 
his  whole  community  of  communicators,  and  therefore  represent  underlying  regularities 
which  arise  from  the  conventional  communication  methods  of  that  community.  Thus  in 
this  methodology  the  observer  must  be  a person:  he  cannot  be  replaced  by  a computer 
program. 

The  Observer  is  able  to  answer  sufficiently  specific  questions  about  the  dialogue 
with  high  reliability  and  repeatability,  and  is  normally  able  to  s.ate  correctly  the 
communication  effects  of  parts  of  the  dialogue.*  Of  course,  the  reliability  and 
repeatability  of  Observers  must  be  verified  experimentally. 

In  order  to  have  the  observations  in  an  experiment  reflect  a s ngle  coherent  point  of 
view,  each  dialogue  is  modeled  relative  to  the  comments  of  a single  observer  rather 
than  with  pooled,  possibly  inconsistent,  observations. 

Part  of  the  work  of  the  project  is  to  develop  this  framework  of  observation  into  an 
easily  used  tool.  We  intend  that  the  theory  rest  on  "obvious"  cases,  and  that  the 
observation  process  be  easy  to  understand  and  use  without  extensive  training. 

*The  Observer  is  doing  a kind  of  encoding  of  the  interaction.  There  is  a line  of 
development  of  group  interaction  coding  methods  in  social  psychology,  including  for 
example  Bales,  1951.  We  expect  these  developments  to  be  of  some  help,  but  our 
demands  (for  example,  relative  to  content)  are  quite  different. 


19 


The  Observer  is  trained  to  seek  several  prescribed  categories  of  phenomena,  which 
are  described  below.  The  function  of  each  of  these  categories  of  observation  is  to 
influence  the  attention  of  the  model-builders  toward  some  aspect  of  ordinary,  successful 
human  communication.  By  attending  to  a suitable  number  of  cases,  the  model  builders 
are  to  derive  processes  whose  structure  reflects  the  regularities  of  at  least  those 
cases,  and  hopefully  mrch  more.  Since  each  of  these  models  must  account  for  multiple 
categories  of  observations,  interactions  and  mutual  dependencies  among  people’s 
methods  can  be  reflected  in  the  processes. 

Some  parts  of  the  dialogues  will  not  be  addressed  directly  by  any  observation,  but 
processing  them  will  nevertheless  be  necessary  as  a prerequisite  to  successful 
processing  of  the  rest.  Processes  may  be  involved  that  only  contribute  indirectly  to 
accounting  for  observations.  (For  the  categories  described  below,  parsing  processes 
are  such.)  These  processes  c«.n  be  developed  and  their  execution  contexts  and 
consequences  identified.  Therefore  they  can  he  verified  just  as  if  they  were  directly 
accounting  for  varieties  of  observation. 

So  the  particular  observation  categories  chosen  are  influential,  but  ultimately 
arbitrary.  They  are  not  primitives,  and  they  do  not  necessarily  combine  to  give  a 
complete  picture  of  human  communication.  Experience  may  suggest  that  one  or  all  be 
replaced. 

There  is  actually  very  little  risk  that  the  present  formulation  will  fail  to  get  at  the 
key  communication  phenomena.  If  there  were  some  basic  sort  of  process  whose  effects 
were  not  represented  directly  in  the  scope  of  the  observations,  it  would  be  modeled 
anyway  if  it  had  major  consequences  in  the  scope  of  the  observations,  which  is  just 
what  we  would  expect  of  any  such  basic  process. 


Categories  of  Observation 

The  Observer  is  trained  to  identify  seven  more-or-lers  independent  kinds  of 
phenomena: 

1.  Repeated  Reference 

2.  Requests 

3.  Expression  of  Comprehension 

4.  Tooic  Structure 

5.  Correction  Actions 

6.  Similar  Expressions  - (two  kinds)* 


* All  of  the  work  of  the  Observer  is  described  in  detail,  with  definitions,  instructions  and 
examples,  in  a recent  report  ISI/RR-75-33,  (Mann,  Moore,  Levin  and  Carlisle  1975). 


, ' ■ 1 ~ - • — - 


Repeated  Reference  deals  with  what  is  mentioned  or  referred  to  It  includes  the 
actions  of  nouns,  pronouns  and  verbs  in  English.  We  deal  with  two  kinds:  ordinary 
reference  and  text  reference.  In  order  to  get  reliable  observations,  we  ask  the 
Observer  to  identify  multiple  mentions  of  the  same  thing,  rather  than  requiring  him  to 
spell  out  just  what  is  referred  to. 

For  example,  we  would  expect  the  Observer  to  note  that  "RUNOFF"  and  the  first  2 
occurrences  of  "it"  refer  to  the  same  thing  in  the  example  dialogue  above. 

Requests  deals  with  all  kinds  of  real  and  apparent  behavior-seeking  in  dialogue. 
The  Observer  makes  detailed  annotations  about  5 subcategories: 

1.  Questions  --  request  immediate,  verbal  response. 

2.  Orders  — request  immediate,  nonverbal  response. 

3.  Directives  --  request  certain  behavior  in  the  future. 

4.  Rhetoricals  — look  like  Requests  but  are  not. 

5.  Prohibitives  — request  to  not  do  something. 

The  Observer  annotates  how  the  Request  occurs,  and  also  how  in  most  cases  how 
the  partner  responds.  In  the  example,  "can  I get  it  to  go  to  a file?"  is  one  of  the 
Questions  the  Observer  would  find,  and  he  would  note  that  eventually  it  was  answered. 

Expression  of  Comprehension  deais  with  the  direct  and  indireci  evidences  given  by 
one  partner  to  tuc  other  that  he  has  comprehended  something  which  has  gone  before. 
In  the  example,  O’s  way  of  speaking  of  “output"  indicated  that  he  comprehended  what  L 
said. 


Topic  Structure  deals  with  the  way  topics  of  conversation  are  begun,  acknowledged, 
carried  on,  suspended  and  dropped.  The  short  example  above  has  only  one  topic, 
which  persists  over  the  whole  dialogue. 

Correction  actions  are  parts  of  the  dialogue  in  which  one  party  cancels  or  changes 
some  previous  part  of  the  dialogue  that  has  already  been  understood  by  each  party 
(often  in  two  different  ways.)  There  are  no  correction  actions  in  the  example  above. 


The  idea  of  Similar  Expressions  is  related  to  the  idea  of  paraphrase,  but  is  looser. 
The  Observer  scores  alternative  ways  of  saying  what  was  said,  judging  whether  they 
would  be  suitable  substitutes  under  some  imaginable  circumstances.  The  intent  here  is 
to  force  the  model  to  represent  underlying  functional  equivalences  rather  than  making  it 
responsive  only  to  surface  similarities  between  expressions  in  communication.  The  two 
kinds  of  Similar  Expressions  arise  because  under  one  condition,  the  Observer  is  not 
shown  the  text  preceding  thj  fragment  in  question,  and  in  the  other  condition  he  sees 
the  entire  preceding  dialogue. 


In  the  example  above,  0 might  as  well  have  said  "RUNOFF  sends  ds  output  to  the 
printer"  in  the  second  turn.  In  some  contexts,  "Get  it  away  from  you  by  throwing  it” 
might  function  as  well  as  "Throw  it  away”  , but  in  this  context  it  woulJ  not.  These  are 
representative  findings  from  the  observation  of  Similar  Expressions. 


nouaaau 


21 


In  every  category,  the  Observer  is  instructed  to  assert  only  on  cases  that  he  feels 
are  clear  and  easy  to  decide.  We  want  to  avoid  putting  much  attention  on  marginal 
cases. 

Experiment  Step  .1 

The  next  major  step  (Step  3 in  the  single-experiment  figure)  is  to  create  a process 
model  (a  new  computer  program  for  this  specific  dialogue)  that  can  cope  with  the 
dialogue  transcript.  Informally,  this  means  that  the  model  must  maintain  a simulated 
knowledge  state  for  each  participant  that  is  adequate  for  supporting  continuing 
interpretation  of  the  dialogue.  The  adequacy  of  this  continuing  interpretation  is 
assessed  by  the  Fidelity  evaluation  and  Recurrence  evaluation  methods  described  in 
later  sections. 

The  program  must  follow  the  dialogue  in  enough  detail  so  that  references  of 
pronouns  gnd  noun  phrases  are  identified,  requests  and  how  they  are  resolved  are 
identified,  correctioi  s are  correctly  carried  out,  topic  flow  is  correctly  assimilated  and 
so  forth. 

The  model  is  not  attempting  to  simulate  the  Observer.  It  is  simulating  the  receptive 
acts  of  the  participants  in  the  dialogue.  The  model  takes  as  input  the  transcript  of  the 
dialogue,  with  the  text  produced  by  each  party  identified.  It  his  a portion  of  its 
memory  allocated  as  a simulated  memory  for  each  of  the  participants.  A participant’s 
memory  indicates  provision  for  general  knowledge,  what  is  relatively  static,  and  current 
awareness,  which  changes  with  each  turn.  The  model’s  task  is  simply  to  keep  these 
memories  up  to  date. 

This  step  is  the  crucial  step  toward  general  communication  processes.  Here,  all  of 
the  issues  O'  "How  can  we  cope  with  this  kind  of  thing?"  are  raised  in  a context  in  which 
there  is  enough  information  on  tne  specific  use  to  suggest  solutions.  Like  any  serious 
design  task,  the  creation  of  a proven  model  is  an  obscure  tangle  of  specifications, 
conjectures,  revisions  and  tests.  An  idealized  sequence  of  steps  is  shown  below. 


22 


********** 

STEPS  IN  MODELING  A DIALOGUE 


1.  Write  approximate  memory  states  that  would  be  adequate  as  the  starting 
point,  ending  point,  and  as  various  intermediates,  based  on  the  dialogue 
transcript  and  the  Observer’s  commentary. 

2.  Represent  the  Knowledge  which  is  relied  upon  in  the  dialogue. 

3.  Write  processes  that  will  collectively  move  through  the  memory  states  if 
correctly  invoked. 

A.  Create  invocation  conditions  on  the  processes  which  will  cause  them  to  get 
invoked  at  Only  and  all  the  right  times. 

ITERATE  WITH  SUCCESSIVE  APPROXIMATIONS 
********** 


We  do  not  wring  any  dialogue  dry.  The  modeling  is  pursued  to  some  level  of  detail 
at  which  the  generality  of  the  process  being  built  is  in  serious  doubt.* 

The  simulated  memories  of  the  participants  will  be  structured  to  represent  different 
kinds  of  knowledge  and  knowledge  status.  Current  awareness  will  be  distnguished 
from  other  available  ..nowledge.  Knowledge  which  a participant  believes  is  not  known 
to  the  other  participant  will  be  distingu.shed  from  knowledge  which  he  regards  as 
shared.  Linguistic  knowledge,  facts  about  the  world,  and  knowledge  about  the 
environment  of  the  dialogue  will  be  distinguishable.  Each  simulated  participant  will  have 
in  memory  a mudel  of  the  other  party  and  of  himself.  Each  party's  goals  ana  abilities 
will  be  represented.  Of  course,  the  depth  of  rep'esentation  will  depend  in  each  case 
On  the  demands  of  the  dialogue. 


* This  is  another  control  on  immediate  task  difficulty. 


23 


The  subprocesses  of  a process  model  will  include  at  least  the  following: 

1.  E.iglish  Parser 

2.  Inference  Processes 

3.  Object  Completion  Processes 

4.  Processes  Which  Perform  Corrections 

5.  Hypothesis  Comparison  Processes 

6.  Evidence  Propagation  Methods 

7.  Time-knowledge  Manager 

8.  Awareness  Manager  (selective  forgetter) 

9.  Processes  Which  Use  and  Modify  Own  Goals 

10.  Processes  Which  Maintain  knowledge  of  Partner’':  Goals 


For  all  of  these  parts,  there  are  available  ideas  in  current  and  past  work  cited  herein. 

We  have  a strong  advantage  here  Over  most  programming  activity  in  that  all  of  the 
performative  demands  on  the  program  to  be  produced  are  explicit  and  available  when 
the  orogram  is  written.  Tne  input  (the  dialogue  transcript)  and  the  standard  of 
evaluation  (the  Observer’s  commentary)  are  open  to  inspection.  (Hindsight  is  clearer 
than  foresight.) 

People’s  ability  to  anticipate  the  contingencies  of  program  input  is  rather  limited. 
This  is  one  reaso'n  that  debugging  is  the  major  cost  component  of  commercial 
programming.  Having  the  input  at  hand  is  much  more  efficient. 

Also,  we  can  make  use  of  methods  that  are  known  to  be  inadequate  for  the  general 
case.  We  can  explore  their  function  for  specific  successful  cases,  and  either  generalize 
after  gaining  experience  or  find  a set  of  methods  that  jointly  cover  the  requirement. 

Another  advantage  is  that  each  dialogue  is  a fresh  problem.  There  is  not  a backlog 
of  design  commitments,  habits,  and  development  cost  which  must  be  accommodated. 
From  dialogue  to  dialogue,  we  can  keep  what  works  and  drop  the  rest.  The  amount  of 
work  carried  forward  from  one  dialogue  to  the  next  depends  on  their  underlying 
similarity.  This  is  another  controllable  Mature,  since  we  select  dialogues  and  dialogue 
sources  as  we  go  along.  From  the  point  of  view  of  scientific  method,  we  are  being 
driven  by  the  data  rather  than  by  anticipations  of  what  the  data  might  be,  or  by 
anticipations  in  the  form  of  system  specifications.  We  expect  that  this  practice  will 
keep  the  focus  away  from  peripheral  and  artificial  problems. 

Experiment  Step  4 

Step  4 of  the  experiment  is  called  Fidelity  Evaluation.  It  is  a comparative  evaluation 
Of  'he  process  model  relative  to  the  Observer’s  commentary.  The  purposes  of  the 
evaluation  are: 

• To  identify  program  states  and  actions  which  are  in  agreement  with  the 
Observer’s  comments. 


24 


• To  identify  Observer’s  comments  for  which  the  corresponding  process 
states  and  actions  are  either  absent  or  disagree  with  the  observations. 

• To  identify  the  directly  contributing  processes  whose  states  and  actions 
are  in  agreement  with  the  Observer’s  comments. 


The  comparison  is  between  the  observations  of  a dialogue  and  the  trace  of  the 
model  ‘or  that  dialogue.  (The  trace  is  a sequential  record  of  all  of  the  actions  of  the 
model  during  the  interpretation  of  the  dialogue.)  For  each  observation  which  the 
Observer  asserted,  the  trace  is  examined  to  see  whether  there  is  a corresponding 
action  or  partial  state  of  the  model.  If  so,  then  the  observation  is  counted  as  having 
been  successfully  modeled.  The  time  (in  the  -ace)  at  which  the  observation  was 
fulfilled  is  identified. 

For  each  successfully  modeled  observation,  the  trace  is  examined  to  identify  the 
directly  contributing  processes.  These  are  usually  those  which  are  active  (in  the  stack) 
at  the  time  of  fulfillment  of  the  observation,  together  with  the  processes  which 
produced  the  cond'tions,  knowledge  or  data  which  controlled  the  branching  of  the 
model’s  control  flow  immediately  preceding  the  time  of  fulfillment. 


Multi  pie- Experiment  Comparisons 


The  Need  for  Comparison 

A successful  accounting  for  a single  dialogue  yields  a set  of  processes  of  essentially 
unknown  value.  The  value  of  the  processes,  both  as  a scientific  account  and  as 
components  of  future  systems,  depends  on  their  generality,  i.e.,  their  effectiveness  on 
different  commun'cations,  different  environments  and  communication  goals.  The 
high-value  processes  are  those  which  have  high  coverage  of  the  scope  of  human 
communication  (illustrated  in  Figure  3 below).  There  is  a spectrum  of  values  from  the 
totally  ad-hoc  process  which  can  cope  with  only  one  dialogue,  to  the  totally  general 
process  which  copes  with  every  case  in  its  domain.  The  next  step,  Multi-experiment 
comparison,  is  intended  to  identify  processes  which,  in  our  sample  of  experiments,  have 
been  found  repeatedly  effective. 

We  identify  our  high  value  processes  as  those  which  are  reasonable  on  a variety  of 
dialogues.  A diversity  of  dialogue  sources,  media  and  goals  in  our  experiments  is 
necessary  in  order  to  get  a good  measure  of  value  for  our  processes.  This  diversity 
also  serves  the  system  designer  who  will  use  the  processes,  since  it  gives  him  the 
evidence  that  the  processes  are  reliable  and  transferable. 


w 


26 


Recurrence  Evaluation  Method 


The  Recurrence  Evaluation  method  is  quite  simple.  At  the  end  of  each  experiment, 
we  identify  those  processes  that  have: 

• been  used  unaltered  from  previous  experiments,  or  could  be  retrofitted  into 
previous  experiment^ 

• been  identified  as  contributing  to  successful  accounts  of  the  Observer’s 
comments. 

These  are  the  only  processes  that  are  considered  to  have  demonstrated  value. 


How  Recurrence  Evaluation  Drives  Algorithm  Development 


The  comparison  in  Recurrence  Evaluation  has  a pervasive  effect  on  the  whole 
modeling  process.  Any  processes  that  are  dependent  on  features  of  a particular 
dialogue,  or  that  work  in  a known-unreliable  way,  will  not  show  demonstrated  value  at 
this  step.  The  goal  in  modeling  if  to  mmitnize  the  product  of  this  comparative  step. 
This  leads  the  modelers  to  include  general  features  in  processes  whenever  it  is 
sufficiently  convenient  to  do  so,  to  seek  the  unifying  principles,  and  to  represent  them 
in  models.  It  avoids  the  problem  of  creating  many  Independent,  incommensurate  and 
finally  useless  single-case  models. 


Deriving  Valuable  Results 

There  are  several  approaches  to  the  products  of  this  methodology,  depending  on 
what  is  regarded  as  valuable.  The  activity  can  be  supported  from  various  viewpoints, 
of  which  we  will  consider  two  briefly: 

1.  Scientific  Knowledge 

2.  Application  in  Computer  Systems 


For  both  of  these,  the  primary  results  are  processes  rather  than  whole  systems, 
since  the  individual  process  is  a decisively  more  convenient  unit  of  investigation  or 
application  than  the  enclosing  system  in  which  it  occurs. 


Scientific  Values 


We  have  discussed  several  branches  of  science  above  which  express  their  theories 
in  terms  of  discrete  symbolic  processes  like  those  we  develop.  In  others  (e.g.,  the 
medical  theory  of  communication  disorders  and  brain  damage)  such  theories  are  possible 
but  seldom  found.  In  any  of  these,  the  process  we  develop  can  be  considered  as 


27 


theories  of  phenomena  of  that  branch.  There  is  very  widespread  interest  in  science  in 
understanding  human  symbolic  activity. 

The  evidence  for  the  effectiveness  and  generality  of  a process  is  explicit  and  easily 
examined  — it  is  the  dialogues  and  observations  which  the  process  has  contributed  to 
accounting  for,  and  the  model  traces  which  exhibit  the  manner  of  contribution.  The 
empirical  approach  of  this  method  is  intended  to  make  its  results  directly  relevant. 

Beyond  this,  we  anticipate  that  this  approach  will  eventually  have  an  integrating 
effort,  providing  common  representations  across  discipline  boundaries  and  coordinating 
knowledge  developed  in  the  separate  disciplines.  For  this  purpose,  the  general 
framework  and  its  processes  are  both  of  interest. 


Application  in  Computer  Systems 


One  reason  for  designing  the  methodology  so  that  it  produces  processes  is  that 
processes  are  primary  components  cf  computer  systems.  We  plan  relatively  direct 
tran~fer  of  convenient  processes  into  working  system  environments.  The  earliest 
applications  are  planned  as  modifications  of  existing  systems.  (For  example,  a process 
for  correcting  one’s  previous  statements  might  be  moved  from  a dialogue  model  into  an 
existing  text  editing  program  so  that  the  editor  could  understand  a method  that  people 
use  for  correcting  themselves,  applying  it  to  previously  entered  text. 

This  "Method  of  Embedding"  provides  a very  direct  transfer  of  the  technical  results 
into  applications,  which  was  one  of  the  goals  described  above.  Algorithms  are  selected 
informally  for  embedding. 

Of  course,  the  process  can  be  designed  into  new  systems  as  well.  Again,  the 
transfer  is  very  direct,  especially  relative  to  research  that  produces  only  factors  for  the 
designers’  consideration. 


Experience  with  Thix  methodology 

The  research  effort  usi  g this  methodology  has  been  under  way  less  than  a year  at 
this  writing.  Results  so  far  are  extremely  encouraging,  but  inconclusive*.  One  major 
progress  report  is  available,  (Mann  et  al.  1975)  and  more  are  forthcoming.  By  the  time 
this  paper  is  published  we  expect  much  more  to  be  known. 


Stimmaiy 

The  approach  described  above  includes  several  innovations  in  man-machine 
communication  research.  Human  dialogue  is  used  as  the  primary  data  sourca. 
Communicating  processes  are  derived  from  communicalion  transcripts  by  a case  analysis 
method.  The  method  develops  explicit  processes  for  use  in  systems  which  include 
man-machine  communication. 


28 


REFERENCES 

Abelson,  Robert  P.,  "The  Structure  of  Belief  Systems,"  Computer  Models  of  Thought  and 
Language,  W.  H.  Freeman  and  Company,  San  Francisco,  1973,  pp.  287-340. 

Anderson,  Richard  C.  and  Andrew  Ortony,  "On  Putting  Apples  into  Bottles  --  A 
Problem  of  Polysemy,"  Cognitive  Psychology,  Vol.  7,  No.  2,  pp.  167-180,  April 
1975 

Austin,  J.  L,  How  to  do  Things  with  Words,  The  William  James  Lectures  delivered  at 
Harvard  University  in  1955,  Harvard  University  Press,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts, 
1962. 

Bales,  R.  F.,  Interaction  Process  l lnolysis , Addison-Wesley  Press,  Inc.,  1951. 

Brown,  John  Seely,  Richard  R.  Burton,  and  Alan  G.  Bell,  "SOPHIE:  A Sophisticated 
Instructional  Environment  for  Teaching  Electronic  Troubleshooting  (An  Example  of  Al 
in  CAI)",  Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Report  2790,  (A.I.  Report  12),  March  1, 
1974,  pp.  24-25,96. 

Carbonell,  J.  R.,  Mixed-Initiative  Man-Computer  Instructional  Dialogues,  Bolt,  Be’anek 
and  Newman,  Inc.,  May  31,  1970. 

Charniak,  E.,  Toward  a Model  of  Children's  Story  Comprehensions,  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology,  December  1972. 

Chase,  W.  G.  and  Clark,  H.  H.  "Mental  Operations  in  the  Comparison  of  Sentences  and 
Pictures."  in  L.  W.  Gregg  (ed.),  Cognition  in  Learning  and  Memory,  Jo'in  Wiley  & 
Sons,  Inc.,  New  York,  1972. 

Chomsky,  Noam,  Aspects  of  the  Theory  of  Syntax,  The  M.l.T.  Press,  1965,  pp.  19-20. 

Colby,  Kenneth  M.,  "Simulations  of  Belief  Systems,"  Computer  Models  of  Thought  and 
Language,  W.  H.  Freeman  and  Company,  San  Francisco,  1973,  pp.  251-286. 

Cole,  Peter  and  Jerry  L.  Morgan,  (ed.),  Syntax  and  Semantics,  Vol.  3,  Academic  Press, 
New  York,  1975. 

Collins,  A.,  E.  H.  Warnock,  and  J.  J.  Passafiume,  "Analysis  and  Synthesis  of  Tutorial 
Dialogues",  Report  2789,  Bolt,  Berar.ek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  March  1974. 

Collins,  A.  M.,  J.  J.  Passafiume,  L.  Gould,  and  J.  G.  Carbonell  Improving  Interaction 
Capabilities  in  Computer- Assisted  Instruction,  Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  BBN 
Report  2631,  August  31,  1973. 

Elliott,  Roger  W.,  "A  Model  for  a Fact  Retrieval  System",  the  University  of  Texas 
Computation  Center,  TNN-42,  May  1965. 


■WBBfWaffW^ItU  IWMIIIMIS^^  IlfiBPfflf 


29 


FiKes,  Richard  E.  and  Nils  J.  Nilsson,  "STRIPS:  A New  Approach  to  the  Application  of 
Theorem  Proving  to  Problem  Solving,"  Artificial  Intelligence,  II,  1971,  pp.  189-208. 

Friend,  Ken,  "An  Information  Processing  Approach  to  Small  Group  Interaction  in  a 
Coalition  Formation  Game,"  Psychology  Department,  Carnegie-Mellon  University, 
1973. 

Grice,  H.  Paul,  "Logic  and  Conversation",  Syntax  and  Semantics,  Vol.  3,  Academic  Press, 
New  York,  1975,  pp.  41-58. 

Grimes,  Jnseph  E.,  "The  Thread  of  Discourse",  Cornell  University,  1972,  Ithaca,  N.Y., 
Department  of  Modern  Languages  and  Linguistics, 

Grignetti,  M.  C.  and  E.  H.  Warnock,  "Mixed-Initiative  Information  System  for 
Computer-Aided  Training  and  Decision  Making",  Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc., 
Report  1971,  September  15,  1973. 

Hendrix,  Gary  G.,  Craig  W.  Thompson,  and  Jonathan  Slocum,  "Language  Processing  Via 
Canonical  Verbs  and  Semantic  Models,"  The  Department  of  Computer  Sciences  and 
CAI  Laboratory,  The  University  of  Texas,  Austin,  Texas.  Appearing  in  Advance. 
Papers  of  the  Third  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence, 
August  20-23,  1973,  Stanford  University,  Stanford,  California,  pp.  262-269. 

Hendrix,  Gary  G.,  "Question  Answering  Via  Canonical  Verbs  and  Semantic  Models:  A 
Model  of  Textual  Meaning,"  University  of  Texas  at  Austin,  Computer  Science 
Technical  Report  NL12,  January  1973. 

Hewitt,  C.,  P.  Bishop,  and  R.  Steiger,  "A  Universal  Modular  ACTOR  Formalism  for 
Artificial  Intelligence,"  Advance  Papers  of  the  Third  International  Joint  Conference 
on  Artificial  Intelligence,  August  20-23,  1973,  Stanford  University,  Stanford, 
California,  pp.  235-245. 

Kaplan,  Ronald  M.,  "A  General  Syntactic  Processor,"  Courant  Computer  Science 
Symposium  8:  Natural  Language  Processing,  New  York,  December  20-21, 
Algorithmics  Press,  Inc.,  1971,  pp.  193-24? 

Kay,  Martin,  "The  MIND  System,"  Courant  Computer  Science  Symposium  8:  Natural 
Language  Processing,  December  20-21,  1971,  Algorithmics  Press,  Inc.,  New  York, 
pp.  155-188. 

Lindsay,  P.  H.,  and  D.  A.  Norman,  Human  Information  Processing,  An  Introduction  to 
Psychology,  Academic  Press,  1972, 

Malhotra,  A.,  "Design  Criteria  for  a Knowledge-Based  English  Language  System  for 
Management,"  Ph.D.  Thesis,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  February  1975. 


30 


Mann,  Wiliiam  C.,  "A  Memory-Process  Model  of  Symbolic  Assimilation,"  Ph.D.  Thesis, 
Department  of  Computer  Science,  Carnegie-Mellon  University,  Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania,  April  1974. 

Mann,  William  C.,  James  A.  Moore,  James  A.  Levin,  James  H.  Carlisle,  Observation 
Methods  for  Human  Dialogue,  Information  Sciences  Institute,  ISI/RR-75-33,  Marina 
del  Rey,  California,  June  1975. 

Moore,  James  and  A.  Newell,  "How  Can  Merlin  Understand9",  Department  of  Computer 
Science,  Carnegie-Mellon  University,  November  15,  1973. 

Moore,  James,  "The  Design  and  Evaluation  of  a Knowledge  Net  for  Merlin,"  Ph.D.  Thesis, 
Department  of  Computer  Science,  Carnegie-Mellon  University,  1971. 

Newell,  Allen,  and  Herbert  A Simon,  Human  Problem  Solring,  Prentice-Hall,  Inc., 
Englewood  Cliffs,  New  Jersey,  1972. 

Norman,  D.  A.,  and  D.  E.  Rumelhart,  Explorations  in  Cognition,  W.  H.  Freeman  and 
Company,  San  Francisco,  1975. 

Partee,  Barbara  H.,  "Linguistic  Metatheory,"  in  William  Orr  Dingwall,  ed.,  /)  Surrey  of 
Linguistic  Science,  Linguistics  Program,  University  of  Maryland,  September  1971, 
pp.  674-675. 

Quillian,  M.  R.,  "Semantic  Memory,"  in  M.  L.  Minsky,  (ed.),  Semantic  Information 
Processing,  M.l.T.  Press,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  196S. 

Quillian,  M.  R.,  “The  Teachable  Language  Comprehender:  a Simulation  Program  and 
Theory  of  Language,”  Communications  of  the  /) CM,  12,  pp  459-476,  1969. 

Raphael,  B.,  "SIR:  A Computer  Program  for  Semantic  Information  Retrieval,"  in  M.  Minsky, 
ed.,  Semantic  Information  Processing,  M.l.T.  Press,  Cambridge,  Mass  , 1968. 

Rulifson,  J.  F.,  Q/H:  /}  Procedural  Calculus  for  Intuitive  Reasoning,  Ph.D.EThesis, 
Computer  Science  Department,  Stanford  University,  November  1972. 

Rumelhart,  D.  E.,  P.  H.  Lindsay,  and  D.  A.  Norman,  "A  Process  Model  for  Long-term 
Memory,"  in  E.  Tulving  and  W.  Donaldson,  eds.,  Organization  of  Memory,  Academic 
Press,  1972. 

Sager,  Naomi,  "Sublanguage  Grammers  [sic]  in  Science  Information  Processing,"  Journal 
of  the  /American  Society  for  Information  Science,  pp.  10-16,  January-February 
1975. 

Sager,  Naomi,  "Syntactic  Formatting  of  Science  Information,"  Proceedings  of  Foil  Joint 
Computer  Conference,  AFIPS  Press,  Mont  vale,  N.J.,  1972,  pp.  791-800. 


31 


Schank,  Roger  C.,  "Identification  of  Conceptualizations  Underlying  Natural  Language," 
Computer  Model t of  Thought  and  Language,  W.  H.  Freeman  and  Company,  San 
Francisco,  1973,  pp.  187-248. 

Schank,  Roger,  "The  Conceptual  Analysis  of  Natural  Language,"  Courant  Computer 
Science  Symposium  8:  Natural  Language  Processing,  New  York,  Algorithmics  Press, 
fnc.,  December  20-21,  1971,  pp.  291-310. 

Searle,  John  R.,  "Indirect  Speech  Acts",  Syntax  and  Semantics,  Vol.  3,  Academic  Press, 
New  York,  pp.  59-82,  1975. 

Searle,  John  R.,  Speech  Acts:  An  Essay  in  the  Philosophy  of  Language,  Cambridge 
University  Press,  1969. 

Simmons,  R.  F.,  "Semantic  Networks:  Their  Computation  and  Use  for  Understanding 
English  Sentences,"  Computer  Models  of  Thought  and  Language,  W.  H.  Freeman 
and  Company,  San  Francisco,  1973,  pp.  63-113. 

Simon,  Herbert  A.,  "The  Functional  Equivalence  of  Problem  Solving  Skills,"  Cognitive 
Psychology,  Vol.  7,  No.  2,  April  1975,  pp.  268-288, 

Slocum,  J.,  "Question  Answering  Via  Canonical  Verbs  and  Semantic  Models:  Generating 
English  from  the  Model,"  University  of  Texas  at  Austin,  Computer  Science  Technical 
Report  NLI3,  January  1973. 

Srinivasan,  C.  V.,  "The  Architecture  of  Coherent  Information  System:  A General  Problem 
Solving  System,”  Department  of  Computer  Science,  Rutgers  University,  New 
Brunswick,  New  Jersey.  Also,  appearing  in  Advance  Papers  of  The  Third 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  August  20-23,  1973, 
Stanford  University,  Stanford,  California. 

Waterman,  D.  A.,  and  A.  Newell,  "PAS-II:  An  Interactive  Task-Free  Version  of  An 

Automatic  Protocol  Analysis  System",  Department  of  Computer  Science, 
Carnegie-Mellon  University,  June,  1973. 


Waterman,  D.  A.,  and  A.  Newell,  "Protocol  Analysis  as  a Task  for  Artificial  Intelligence", 
Department  of  Computer  Science,  Carnegie-Mellon  University,  May  24,  1971. 

Wilks,  Yorick,  "The  Stanford  Machine  Translation  Project,"  Courant  Computer  Science 
Symposium  8:  Natural  Language  Processing,  New  York,  December  20-21,  1972, 
Algorithmics  Press,  Inc.,  1971,  pp.  243-290. 

Winograd,  Terry,  "A  Procedural  Model  of  Language  Understanding,"  Computer  Models  of 
Thought  and  Language,  W.  H.  Freeman  and  Company,  San  Francisco,  California, 
1973,  pp.  152-186. 


32 


Wittgenstein,  Ludwig,  Philosophical  Investigations,  3rd  ed.,  Macmillan  Company,  1958. 

Woods,  W.  A.,  "An  Experimental  Parsing  System  for  Transition  Network  Grammars," 
Courant  Computer  Science  Symposium  H:  Natural  Language  Processing,  December 
20-21,  1971,  Algorithmics  Press,  Inc.,  New  York,  pp.  1 1 1-154. 


