AD-A012  589 


COMPUTER  APPLICATIONS  IN  THE  BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCES 


Federation  oh  American  Societies  for 
Experimental  Biology 


PREPARED  FOR 

Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 

February  1975 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


ADA012589 


AFOSR  -TR - 75  - 0 951 

211155 

COMPUTER  APPLICATIONS  IN  THE  BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCES 

February  1975 


Prepared  for 

Human  Resources  Research  Office 
Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
Arlington,  Virginia  22209 


by 


Kenneth  D.  Fisher,  Ph.  D, 
C.  Jelleff  Carr,  Ph.  D 
John  M.  Talbot,  M.D. 


' jC  Ii'i/tNoW i r/\L  TO  f)()C 


C.  Jelleff  Carr,  Ph.  D.  ? ^ 'p*  h,!S  bc  ! ^'J  and  is 


c r'-case'  IAW  Afti  190-12  (7M  I 


v ■ . i.iVLOR 


rtc'niicai  Information  0 


‘ficor 


This  research  was  supported  by  the  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency  of  the  Department  of  Defense  and  was  monitored  by  the 
Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research  under  Contract  No. 
F44620-74-C-0077  (ARPA  Order  No.  2808;  Program  Code4D20). 


51, 


T 1 1 " • •* 

4 5 J LslAuw, 


Life  Sciences  Research  Office 
Federation  of  American  Societies 
for  Experimental  Biology 
9650  Rockville  Pike 
Bethesda,  Maryland  20014 


D D C 


Taennora 


JUL  25  1975 


■lii*5Du  LSI 

B 


f 


(Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited) 


Reproduced  by 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 


US  Department  of  Com  narco 
Springfield,  VA.  22l5t 


YE 


1 


t I 


N._  UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PACE  fRTi.n  D. I.  Fnr.t.d) 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


I DEPORT  NUMBER 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 


AFOSR  -TR - 75"  0 951 


,2  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 


4 title  (ond  $ubt »ii*) 


Computer  Applications  in  the  Biological 
Sciences 


7 AUTHORft; 

Kenneth  D.  Fisher,  C.  Jelleff  Carr  and 
John  M.  Talbot 


* performing  organization  name  ano  address 

Federation  of  American  Societies  for 

Experimental  Biology-' 

9650  Rockville  Pike,  Bcthesda,  Maryland 


**  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  ANO  ADDRESS 

Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
Arlington,  Virginia  22209** 


M MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  6 ADORES Sf!/  dllltr.nl  Iron  Controlling  Olllc.) 

DEPARTMENTS  THE  AIR  F0°CF 

AIR  FORCE  OFFICE  OF  SCIENTIFIC  RESEARCH  \tfU) 

1400  WILSON  BLVD 

ARLINGTON,  VIRGINIA  

16  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (Ol  thl,  R.porl) 


S.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  6 PEI  IOO  COVERED 

Technical 


« PERFORMING  ORG  REPORT  NUMBER 


t contract  or  grant  numbers; 

F44620-74-C-0077 


10  PROGRAM  ELEMENT,  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  6 WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

6!  to  in 

ARPA  order  ti  2808 
S/A. 


12.  REPORT  DATE 

February,  1975 


13.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 


IS.  SECURITY  CLASS  f ol  Ihl.  r.porl) 

Unclassified 


IS*.  DECLASSIFICATION  'DOWNGRADING 
SCHEDULE 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


17  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  thm  obclrmct  entered  In  Block  20,  II  dlllmront  horn  R*porf; 


IB  supplementary  notes 


*Lifc  Sciences  Research  Office  **Human  Resources  Research  Office 


19.  KEY  WORDS  CConttnw  on  r*v*r**  c/d*  II  *v*c*t*«ry  mnd  identity  by  block  number) 


PRICES  SUBJECT  TO  CHANGE 

20  ABSTRACT  ( Confirm a on  t.v.t t.  .Id.  II  n.ct.ry  .nd  Id.nllly  by  block  numb.r)  ~ — — — 

The  computer  sciences  have  had  a major  impact  on  research  and  develop- 
ment in  the  physical  sciences  and  engineering  over  the  past  several  decade 
Their  influence  on  biological  research  has  developed  less  rapidly.  Com- 
puter sciences  have  assumed  a more  important  role  in  biological  and  medi-l 
cal  research  as  hardware  has  become  more  sophisticated,  more  widely 
available',  and  as  its  capabilities  have  been  appreciated.  The  applicability 
of  computers  to  many  facets  of  biological  research  is  on  the  threshold 


DD  1 JAN  73  1473  E0ITION  OF  I NOV  65  IS  OBSOLETE  UNCI  ASSI  FI  F I ) 


"SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  P AGE  (Mini  0.1.  Enl.l.iO 


UNCLASSIFIED __ 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  Of  ThU  PA0CfW7i«n  P»(,  Entered) 

of  further  advances  because  these  applications  appear  to  be  maximally 
efficient  and  useful  at  minimized  costs.  However,  monetary  constraints 
over  the  next  several  years  may  delay  the  extent  to  which  further  appli- 
cations are  pursued.  There  is  a need  for  improved  mechanisms  of 
communication  between  life  scientists  with  limited  computer  knowledge 
and  computer  scientists  with  the  expertise  required  to  address  topics  in 
biological  research.  More  emphasis  in  biomathematics  as  a bridge 
between  the  life  sciences  and  the  computer  sciences  could  lead  to 
significant  progress  in  the  next  several  decades.  However,  this  will 
require  emphasis  on  and  support  of  interdisciplinary  efforts  in  these 
two  research  fields. 


-A  - • 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  This  PAGE(T*7i«n  D»r • Fnf«r.«<) 


* 


FOREWORD 


The  Life  Sciences  Research  Office  (LSRO),  Federation  of  American 
Societies  for  Experimental  Biology  (FASEB),  provides  scientific  assessments 
of  topics  in  the  biomedical  sciences.  Reports  arc  based  upon  comprehen- 
sive literature  reviews  and  the  scientific  opinions  of  knowledgeable  investi- 
gators engaged  in  research  in  specific  areas  of  biology  and  medicine. 


This  technical  report  was  prepared  for  the  Human  Resources 
Research  Office,  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  (DARPA), 
Department  of  Defense,  under  contract  number  F44620-74-C-0077  monitored 
by  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research. 

The  Life  Sciences  Research  Office  acknowledges  the  contributions 
of  the  investigators  and  consultants  who  have  assisted  with  this  study.  The 
reporc  reflects  the  opinions  expressed  by  the  consultants  and  a judicious 
attempt  has  been  made  to  incorporate  their  different  views  and  opinions; 
however,  the  authors  accept  responsibility  for  the  contents.  The  listing  of 
the  consultants'  names  in  Section  VII  does  not  imply  that  they  endorse  the 
conclusions  of  the  study. 

The  report  has  been  reviewed  and  appreved  by  the  LSRO  Advisory 
Committee  (which  consists  of  representatives  of  each  constituent  society  of 
FASEB)  under  authority  delegated  by  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Federa- 
tion Board.  Upon  completion  of  these  review  procedures  the  report  has 
been  approved  and  transmitted  to  DARPA  by  the  Ex  cutive  Director,  FASEB. 

While  this  is  a report  of  the  Federation  of  American  Societies  for 
Experimental  Biology,  it  does  not  necessarily  reflect  the  opinion  of  all  of 
the  individual  members  of  its  constituent  societies. 


C.  Jelleff  Carr,  Ph.  D. 
Director 

Life  Sciences  Research  Office 
FASEB 


3 


SUMMARY 


I he  computer  sciences  have  had  a major  impact  on  research  and 
development  in  the  physical  sciences  and  engineering  over  the  past  several 
cecades.  Their  influence  on  biological  research  has  developed  lese  rapidly 
< omputei  sciences  have  assumed  a more  important  role  in  biological  and 
medical  research  as  hardware  has  become  more  sophisticated,  more  widely 
available,  and  as  its  capabilities  have  been  appreciated.  The  applicability  of 
computers  to  many  facets  of  biological  research  is  on  the  threshold  of  further 
advances  because  these  applications  appear  to  be  maximally  efficient  and 
useful  at  minimized  costs.  However,  monetary  constraints  over  the  next 
several  years  may  delay  the  extent  to  which  further  applications  are  pursued. 
Jheie  is  a need  for  improved  mechanisms  of  communication  between  life 
scient  'ts  with  limited  computer  knowledge  and  computer  scientists  with  the 
expertise  required  to  address  topics  in  biological  research.  More  emphasis 
on  nomathematics  as  a bridge  between  the  life  sciences  and  the  computer 
sciences  could  lead  to  significant  progress  in  the  next  several  decades. 
However,  this  will  require  emphasis  on  and  support  of  interdisciplinary 
ettorts  in  these  two  research  fields. 


Preceding  page  blank 


5 


tabi.e  of  contents 


I. 

II. 

III. 


IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 


Foreword  

Summary 

Introduction 

Overview  of  Current  Applications 

Some  Opportunities  for  Applications  of  Comp  iters  in  the 
Biological  Sciences 

A.  Pattern  Becognition 

Cell  Image  Analysis 

C.  Artificial  Intelligence 

D.  Environmental  Systems  Analysis 

12 ’ Computer  Networks  and  Component  Miniaturization 

I . Technology  Transfer 

Concluding  Statement 

Bibliography 

Key  Investigators 

Scientific  Consultants 

131)  Form  1473 


Page 

3 

5 

9 

11 

15 

15 

18 

18 

19 

19 

22 

23 

25 

29 

31 

32 


Preceding  page  Wank 


7 


r 


I.  INTRODUCTION 


Computer  scienee  has  expanded  at  a phenomenal  rate  over  the  past 
thirty  years  and  has  made  significant  impact  upon  virtually  all  facets  of 
modern  civilization.  The  ('volution  of  analog  and  digital  computers  and 
computer  systems  with  extensive  storage  and  retrieval  capacities  has 
influenced  substantially  research  and  development  in  the  physical  sciences, 
engineering,  and  technology.  However,  their  importance  in  biological 
research  lias  been  relatively  slow  in  developing  despite  the  observation  of 
I.edley  (1965)  that  perhaps  the  greatest  utilization  of  computers  would  be 
in  the  biomedieal  sciences. 

Computers  and  computer  systems  essentially  amplify  and  extend 
man's  capacity  to  proeess  information.  They  perform  operations  that  are 
not  otherwise  feasible  because  of  time  limitations;  and  onee  programmed 
they  can  operate  in  a self-direeted  manner.  Most  computers  and  computer 
systems  are  eoneeptually  similar  in  that: 

• they  manipulate  data  in  accordance  with  programmed 
instructions  involving  given  steps  and  procedures; 

• the  data  processed  by  the  hardware  have  evolved  from 
extensive  collection  processes  and  frequently  are 

^ subjected  to  prior  processing; 

• they  perform  logie  operations  at  high  speeds; 

• they  can  store  and  retrieve  data  and  the  capacity  to 
do  so  is  a function  of  their  size; 

• they  are  eapable  of  communication  with  their  operators 
as  well  as  with  other  computers; 

• they  are  accurate  and  the  error  rate  per  total  number  j 

of  operations  is  essentially  zero. 

An  excellent  example  of  how  computer  technology  assisted  in 
approaching  a biologieal  problem  is  the  analysis  of  amino  acid  eontent  of 
proteins.  Dayhoff  (1972)  has  eolleeted  data  on  57,  000  amino  acid  residues 
of  proteins  from  176  different  taxonomic  groupings  of  plants  and  animals. 

Computer  analyses  of  these  data  on  similarities  and  differences  in  amino 
acid  sequences  have  been  used  in  developing  patterns  of  possible  evolu- 
tionary relationships  among  organisms.  A computer  model  of  the  point 
mutation  process  has  been  developed  from  this  data  base.  Analysis  of  the 


A 


Pitted 


9 


similarities  and  differences  in  the  structure  of  cytochrome  C and  Ca  by  these 
computer  based  techniques  has  led  to  modifications  in  modern  concepts  of 
evolution  and  phylogeny  of  plants  and  animals. 

It  is  obvious  that  developments  in  computer  science  and  technology 
have  resulted  from  continued  massive  federal  support  by  numerous  agencies 
(Moraff,  lf)74).  A significant  percentage  of  this  support  evolved  from  the 
early  recognition  by  the  military  and  engineering  communities  that  computers 
increase  productivity  when  skilled  manpower  is  limited  and  that  they  have 
the  capacity  to  handle  otherwise  unmanageable  large-scale  programs  or 
data.  For  example,  development  of  minicomputers  and  microprocessors 
has  been  spurred  by  the  needs  for  portable  and  on-board  facilities  in  aero- 
space and  military  equipment.  More  recently,  these  types  of  hardware 
have  been  incorporated  into  larger  systems  as  modular  subunits  (e.g.,  the 
FLU  R I BUS  system  being  developed  by  Bolt,  Beraneck  and  Newman,  Inc., 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts).  The  advantages  of  such  systems  include  the 
relatively  low  cost  and  high  reliability  of  minicomputers  as  well  as  the 
ability  of  the  subunits  to  function  independently,  if  necessary. 

On  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  computer  networks  and  time- 
sharing central  facilities  were  first  proposed,  supported  and  developed  by 
the  military.  The  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  alone 
invested  approximately  20  million  dollars  to  set  up  one  of  the  first  network 
facilities  (ARPANET)  which  is  still  a model  for  computer  networks.  As  of 
1974,  ARPANET  is  limited  to  a number  of  ARPA -supported  research  groups 
and  several  Department  of  Defense  agencies  but  the  interest  in  the  potential 
of  this  system  in  life  sciences  research  has  been  recognised  (Heart,  1974). 
Other  federal  agencies  are  also  heavily  committed  to  use  of  computer  systems 
and  networks.  A compilation  of  all  data  bases  and  related  software  available 
from  60  federal  agencies  has  been  published  recently  (National  Technical 
Information  Service,  1974). 

Recognition  of  the  potential  utility  of  computers  in  biological 
research  is  demonstrated  by  the  number  of  conferences,  reports  and 
symposia  on  this  subject  in  recent  years.  Expanding  use  as  research 
tools  in  planning,  implementing,  and  analyzing  biological  studies  suggests 
that  even  more  new  vistas  are  emerging.  This  report  is  a review  of 
certain  current  applications  of  computer  science  and  large-scale  data 
handling  technology  to  research  in  the  life  sciences;  several  areas  of 
research  that  may  be  consistent  with  DARPA  research  goals  are  suggested. 

It  focuses  upon  the  use  of  computers  in  the  basic  areas  of  the  biological 
science;  however,  specific  applications  in  medical  research  and  develop- 
ment arc  outside  the  scope  of  this  report. 


10 


II. 


OVERVIEW  OF  CURRENT  APPLICATIONS 


In  computer  science,  as  in  other  disciplines  of  science  and  technology, 
three  conceptual  levels  of  activity  are  evident:  invention,  innovation,  and 
diffusion.  Invention  and  discovery  are  related  to  the  fundamentals  of  com- 
puter science  and  development  of  conceptually  new  types  of  hardware  that 
form  the  basis  of  the  ability  to  rapidly  manipulate,  store  and  retrieve  sym- 
bols. Innovation  refers  to  the  first  application  of  hardware,  a system  or 
specific  techniques;  diffusion  involves  continued  application  and  extension 
of  innovation  to  a broader  base  of  issues  and  problems.  It  seems  logical 
to  suggest  that  much  of  the  potential  for  computers  in  the  life  sciences  has 
involved  and  will  continue  to  include  innovation  and  the  subsequent  applica- 
tion, or  diffusion  of  knowledge,  into  more  aspects  of  biology  and  medicine 
at  many  levels. 

Computers  and  related  systems  have  made  significant  contributions 
to  experimental  and  theoretical  aspects  of  scientific  research.  Theoretical 
calculations  derived  from  a model  or  example  of  some  biological  phenomenon 
provide  a set  of  values  against  which  experimentally  derived  data  can  be 
compared.  Based  on  data  analysis,  either  the  theoretical  model  or  experi- 
mental design  can  be  manipulated  to  provide  a better  understanding  of  the 
bewildering  array  of  dependent  and  independent  variables  inherent  in  bio- 
logical systems.  Within  the  biological  sciences,  computers  are  being  used 
in  model  formulation,  analysis,  and  statistical  compilation  and  projection. 

In  experimental  protocols,  computers  are  used  widely:  1)  real  time 
automatic  control,  2)  sequencing  of  experimental  procedures,  3)  monitoring 
critical  steps,  and  4)  the  introduction  of  feed-back  control.  For  example, 
with  these  techniques,  simultaneous  analyses  of  multiple  enzyme  systems, 
numerous  physiologic  parameters,  and  complex  behavioral  patterns  are 
now  possible.  Such  areas  of  research  heretofore  impossible  because  of 
technologic  limitations  now  are  feasible.  In  addition,  both  analog  and 
digital  computers  are  useful  in  data  computation,  reduction,  analysis,  and 
comparison.  The  speed,  memory  capacity,  and  ability  of  these  instruments 
to  manipulate  artificial  symbols  such  as  numbers  in  "real  time"  have  mark- 
edly enhanced  the  ability  of  investigators  to  perform  accurate,  reproducible, 
and  complex  experiments.  Indeed,  the  concept  of  the  Laboratory  Instru- 
ment Computer  (LINC),  one  of  the  first  systems  developed  15  years  ago  by 
biologists  for  use  in  biological  research,  led  to  more  advanced  and  less 
expensive  computer  systems. 


11 


A substantial  portion  of  current  and  accomplished  research  efforts 
have  been  reviewed  in  the  multivolume  series.  Computers  in  Biomedical 
Research  (Stacy  and  Waxman.  1965,  1969,  1974).  Certain  applications  and 
potential  uses  of  computers  from  the  life  scientists'  viewpoint  were  reviewed 
ln  Biology  and  the  Future  of  Man,  a comprehensive  treatise  of  the  National 
Academy  of  Sciences  (Handler,  1970).  Finally,  the  Federation  of  American 
Societies  for  Experimental  Biology',  together  with  the  National  Science  Founda- 
tion and  the  National  Institutes  of  Health,  recently  sponsored  a comprehen- 
sive conference  on  many  aspects  of  the  use  of  computers  as  research  tools 
in  the  life  sciences.  In  his  summary  of  this  conference,  Siler  (1974)  con- 
cluded that  a number  of  significant  contributions  to  research  in  the  life 
sciences  had  been  made  through  use  of  computers.  These  include: 

• understanding  the  structure  and  function  of  biologically 
active  macromolecules  by  mcc.ns  of  computer  graphics, 
information  storage,  retrieval  and  analysis; 

• development  of  minicomputers  with  specific  functions 
in  controlling  and  sequencing  experimental  procedures; 

• availability  of  ramified  and  sophisticated  statistical 
programs  for  data  computation,  reduction,  analysis  and 
comparison; 

• development  of  computer  systems  with  random  access 
memory  and  error  correction  capabilities  for  study  of 
causality  and  intentional  activity  in  biological  systems; 
and. 

• production  of  systems  and  computer  networks  with 
human  speech  understanding  capabilities  for  a wide 
range  of  biological  studies. 

The  most  important  contributions  may  come  from  the  use  of  computer 
hardware  in  evolving  new  approaches  to  the  understanding  of  the  multifac- 
torial components  of  cell  life,  complex  interactions  at  the  organismal  and 
ecological  levels,  and  complex  aspects  of  human  behavioral  patterns. 
Considerable  experimentation  and  theoretical  modeling  can  be  done  most 
effectively  with  computers.  However,  the  costs  and  benefits  of  these 
approaches  must  be  justified.  The  eost  of  access  to  computer  networks  or 


_Lhc‘  Conference  on  the  Computer  as  a Research  Tool  in  the  Life  Seiences 
(Lindberg,  1974)  was  published  in  the  December,  1974  Federation  Proceed- 
ings. ( opios  were  provided  to  the  sponsoring  agency  with  the  report.  Addi- 
tional copies  arc  available  from  Federation  Proceedings,  Subscription 
Department,  9650  Rockville  Pike,  Bethesda,  Maryland  20014  at  $5.00  each. 


1? 


acquisition  of  minicomputers  must  be  considered  in  relation  to  their  utility 
in  enhancing  research.  Many  scientists  in  the  biological  disciplines  have 
limited  experience  in  this  aspect  of  research  planning.  Another  serious 
handicap  to  the  widespread  effective  use  of  computers  lies  in  the  lack  of 
adequately  trained  biomathematicians  who  can  bring  the  capabilities  of 
computer  science  to  bear  on  issues  confronting  the  life  scientist. 


13 


In*  OPPORTl  NITIES  FOH  applications  of  computers  in  tiif 

BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCES 


I he  following  paragraphs  outline  opportunities  for  research  annli 
cations  of  available  computer  technology  and  suggest  possible  research  h 
computer  techniques  in  the  biological  sciences.  The  order  of  presentation 


PATTERN  RECOGNITION 


^duiu  muiecuic 


in  general,  the  larger  th 

mak  THAQAgCr  m°leculcs  rocluires  additional  data  storage  capacity  To 

A related  area  of  interest  involves  molecular  model  building  hv 
computer.  Interactive  eranhics  „ . moaci  building  by 

provide  visual  display  of  not  nnl  t f pera  01  -computer  communication. 


15 


in  specific  proteins  (Dayhoff,  1974)  and  structure  of  nucleic  acids  and  their 
derivatives,  e.g. , the  calcium  salt  of  guanosine  3',  5'-cytodine  monophos- 
phate (Langridge,  1974).  Drug  concentrations  in  tissues  and  plasma  can 
be  predicted  from  single  or  multiple  measurements  by  computerized  solu- 
tion of  systems  of  differential  equations.  For  example,  IVlcInms  et  0.1. 

(1973)  have  developed  a multicompartment  model  by  computer  simulation  to 
establish  optimal  dose  regimens  for  the  drug,  digoxin.  The  interfacing  of 
computers  with  gas  chromatography  and  mass  spectrometry  provides 
another  opportunity  to  collect  meaningful  data  from  minute  biological  speci- 
mens. Accurate  qualitative  and  quantitative  assessments  of  substances  at 
the  subpicogram  level  are  now  feasible  with  such  instruments.  These  tech- 
niques could  be  used  to  monitor  or  predict  the  metabolic  fate  of  either  drugs 
that  affect  human  performance  or  naturally  occurring  substances  that  reflect 
changes  in  body  functions,  e.g.,  hormone  and  phospholipid  levels  in  the 
blood  during  stress. 

Sacco  et  al . (1972)  have  used  pattern  analyses  on  body  subsystems 
to  develop  time -sequence  projections  or  forecasts  of  patient  conditions.  By 
projecting  data  on  blood  pressure,  hematocrit,  fibrinogen,  as  well  as  blood 
serum  potassium,  creatinine  and  osmolarity,  they  were  able  to  develop  a 
set  of  projective  criteria  from  physiological  and  biochemical  parameters  that 
characterized  the  overall  deviation  from  normal  for  severely  injured  patients. 

While  the  authors  indicated  applications  of  their  techniques  to 
certain  medical  situations  such  as  triage,  it  is  evident  that  similar  approaches 
to  mathematical  analyses  of  changes  in  specific  physiological  parameters  may 
be  useful  in  studying  human  performance  and  response  to  stressful  situations. 
For  example,  changes  in  catecholamine  excretion  and  serum  phospholipid 
levels  are  known  to  follow  abrupt  alterations  in  work-rest  cycles  or  critical 
tactical  operations.  The  techniques  of  pattern  recognition  developed  by 
Sacco  et  al . (1972)  may  provide  an  opportunity  to  address  current  military 
needs  for  a fresh  approach  to  prediction  of  human  performance  from  bio- 
chemical and  physiological  data. 

A number  of  computer-assisted  studies  of  electrophysiological 
phenomena  have  provided  techniques  and  approaches  that  were  heretofore 
impossible.  For  example,  it  is  well  known  that  signals  from  the  electro- 
cardiogram (ECG),  electroencephalogram  (EEG)  and  elcctrooculogram  (EOG) 
provide  quantitative  and  qualitative  data  on  basic  biological  processes  as 
well  as  responses  to  external  stimuli.  A recent  report  (Anonymous,  1974b) 
noted  that  Mason  has  perfected  a procedure  for  estimation  of  the  eye  fixa- 
tion point  and  tracking  vigilance  over  time  from  the  EOG  of  sonar  operators. 
Computerized  data  processing  of  EOG  records  provides  a reproducible 
method  of  calculating  eye  fixation  time,  visual  field  sampling  patterns, 
target  fixation  data,  and  acquisition  speed  of  such  operational  skills. 


16 


Using  both  in-house  computer  facilities  and  ARPANET,  Vidal  (1974) 
investigated  the  possibility  of  using  electroencephalographic  data  in 
operant  conditioning  of  various  aspects  of  decision-making  in  man-machine 
communication  situations.  Recent  studies  have  focused  on  development  of  a 
model  for  the  phenomena  of  evoked  responses  in  the  EEG  based  on  sequential 
events  of  short  duration  in  the  bioelectric  potentials.  Computer  analyses  of 
EEG  records  have  identified  candidate  EEG  patterns  that  appear  to  reflect 
the  retinal  processing  of  red,  green,  and  blue  receptors.  These  observa- 
tions indicate  that  the  trichromatic  receptive  processes  of  the  foveal  cone 
cells  are  being  reflected  in  distinct  patterns  of  electrical  potential  in  the 
scalp  which  are  identifiable  in  topological  dimensionality  analyses.  Vidal 
(1974)  believes  that  a combination  of  short  event  detection  with  observations 
of  amplitude  changes  at  selected  times  will  provide  encoding  of  the  evoked 
response  in  a particularly  economical  manner.  If  this  model  is  accurate, 
then  components  of  the  EEG  could  be  reinforced  naturally  in  a man-machine 
communication  scheme  analogous  to  operant  conditioning.  Reinforcement 
could  be  useful  in  certain  aspects  of  training  for  critical  performance  in 
tasks  such  as  operation  of  sonar  equipment. 

Orr  et  0,1,  (1974)  have  identified  patterns  of  ultradian  rhythms  in 
heart  rate  and  performance  measurements  of  normal  subjects  required  to 
perform  a standardized  vigilance  visual-motor  response  task  for  periods 
as  long  as  48  hours.  Using  complex  demodulation  analyses  of  ECG  and 
motor  responses  developed  by  Orr  and  Hoffman  (1974)  they  observed  changes 
in  individual  ultradian  patterns  over  time  that  were  indicative  of  cumulative 
effects  from  stress  of  sleep  deprivation  and  continuous  vigilance.  The 
complex  demodulation  technique  is  essentially  computer-assisted  analog 
band-pass  filtering.  This  method  of  analysis  provides  both  phase  and 
amplitude  data  throughout  any  time  series  of  choice.  Modulation  of  a 
frequency  band  can  be  studied  in  the  time  domain  of  interest  for  the  duration 
of  the  measurement  period. 

referred  to  subsequent  studies  in  which  he  and  his  colleagues 
monitored  the  EOG,  EEG,  ECG,  and  the  electrogastrigram  of  normal  subjects 
and  drug  addicts  during  withdrawal.  Preliminary  data  analyses  by  related 
complex  demodulation  techniques  suggest  that  there  are  a number  of  normal 
ultradian  phenomena  with  a periodicity  of  50  to  120  minutes.  These  investi- 
gators believe  that  ultradian  rhythms  may  be  labile,  and  may  be  compressed 
in  time  with  stress.  If  this  hypothesis  is  correct,  then  ultradian  rhythmicity 
may  be  an  important  aspect  underlying  human  performance,  vigilance,  and 
sustained  activity.  Alterations  in  periodicity  of  ultradian  rhythms,  if 
measurable,  might  serve  as  an  indication  of  the  impact  of  stress  on  indivi- 
duals in  critical  operations  or  situations. 


Meeting  January  15,  1975  held  at  Life  Sciences  Research  Office,  FASEB. 


17 


B. 


CELL  IMAGE  ANALYSIS 


Automated  analyses  of  cell  populations  on  the  basis  of  size,  shape, 
surface  morphology  and  density  has  been  a goal  of  cytologists  for  several 
decades.  One  of  the  earliest  systems  developed  utilized  optical  density 
frequency  distribution  patterns,  but  was  limited  by  system  capacity  to  ade- 
quately classify  and  identify  the  cells  IFrewitt  and  Mendelsohn,  1966). 
Recently,  Lemkin  fit  di.  (1974)  and  Carman  6t  al.  (1974)  have  reported  the 
development  of  a real  time  picture  processor  for  use  in  cytologic  identifica- 
tion. The  major  component  of  this  system  is  the  processing  unit  that  pro- 
vides rapid  serial  digital  processing  of  digitized  gray  scale  images  by 
special  purpose  hardware  containing  image  buffer  memories  as  well  as 
fast  addressing  programs.  Because  this  system  handles  gray  scale  data, 
rather  than  binary  black  and  white  images,  a larger  set  of  image  patterns 
can  be  generated,  stored,  analyzed,  and  identified.  Such  systems  will  be 
extremely  useful  in  research  programs  requiring  extensive  analyses  of  cell 
populations. 


C.  ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE 


|(  Newe11  (1973)  has  recently  reviewed  the  subject  of  "artificial  intel- 
ligence" with  respect  to  the  development  of  this  area  of  computer  science  in 
the  past  several  decades.  He  suggests  that  the  concept  of  artificial  intelli- 
gence is  not  yet  firm  and  cannot  be  clearly  defined.  He  indicated  that  there 
are  three  conceptual  approaches  to  artificial  intelligence  that  prevade  con- 
temporary research.  These  include: 

• the  use  of  artificial  intelligence  to  model,  as  well  as 
explore,  intellectual  functioning; 

• the  use  of  artificial  intelligence  to  test  and  generate 
approaches  to  systems  of  cause  and  effect  or  rela- 
tionships; and, 

• the  theoretical,  psychological  approach,  which  involves 
theoretical  modeling  of  contemporary  theories  of 
human  behavior. 

One  practical  result  of  research  in  this  aspect  of  computer  tech- 
nology is  the  development  of  speech  understanding  systems.  According 
to  Reddy  (1974),  by  the  early  1980's,  systems  with  speech-understanding 
capabilities  such  as  the  Hearsay  system  being  developed  at  Carnegie- 
Mellon  T niversity  will  be  available  for  laboratory  and  field  use.  On  the 


18 


other  hand,  Birkhoff  (1975)  has  pointed  out  the  over-optimistic  predictions 
for  developments  in  "artificial  intelligence"  made  15  years  ago  have  yet  to 
be  fulfilled.  He  indicated  that  computer  programs  simulating  the  pattern 
recognition  capability  of  the  human  eye  have  been  written,  but  also  noted 
that  current  voice  processing  computer  systems  require  about  60  seconds  to 
process  one  second  of  human  speech. 


D.  ENVIRONMENTAL  SYSTEMS  ANALYSIS 


Lee  et  al.  (1974)  have  developed  a program  for  storage  and  retrieval 
of  environmental  impact  information  using  the  Systems  2000,  a generalized 
data  base  management  system  (MRI-Systems  Corporation).  The  program 
was  developed  initially  to  evaluate  the  environmental  impact  of  certain 
United  States  Army  military  prograr  ir;  however,  computer  systems  that 
can  analyze  and  potentially  predict  the  effects  of  large-scale  human  activ- 
ities on  the  physical  and  biological  aspects  of  the  environment  have  broad 
applications  in  many  areas  of  the  environmental  sciences. 

In  the  field  of  systems  ecology,  of  intense  current  interest,  com- 
puters are  playing  a decisive  role,  with  a relatively  up-to-date  survey 
provided  by  Patten  (1971,  1972).  Compartment  analysis,  originally  developed 
for  transport  of  metabolites  among  organs  of  humans  and  animals,  has  been 
extensively  applied  in  ecosystem  analysis.  The  DYNAMD  language,  developed 
originally  for  industrial  management  use,  has  achieved  important  applica- 
tions in  ecological  modeling,  notablv  the  Forrester-Meadows  World  Model; 
a special  "Energy  Language"  has  been  developed  for  ecosystem  simulation! 

The  field  is  currently  so  active  that  the  National  Science  Foundation  has  set 
up  a special  Systems  Ecology  Program  which  is  primarily  concerned  with 
the  use  of  computers  in  ecosystem  simulation  and  analysis.  The  importance 
of  environmental  data  management  was  a topic  of  discussion  a+  the  recent 
Stockholm  Conference  on  the  Environment  (Oppenheimer  and  Brogden,  1975). 


COMPUTER  NETWORKS  AND  COMPONENT  MINIATURIZATION 


The  development  of  systems  and  networks  with  larger  and  larger 
memory  capacity,  greater  operational  capability,  and  interconnected  termi- 
nals is  but  one  of  the  rapidly  expanding  areas  in  the  computer  sciences. 

At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  incorporation  of  microelectronic  circuitry 
into  computers  has  provided  an  impetus  for  production  and  innovation  with 
minicomputers  and  microcomputers.  The  handheld  calculators  designed 
with  multiple  functions  are  an  example  of  such  applications. 


19 


IU  iniaturization  of  components  and  expansion  of  microprocessor 
capabilities  have  already  made  significant  impact  in  the  computer  sciences 
(Ackley  and  Nardcllo,  1973;  Bogle  6t  <2 .Z . , 1973).  Initially  based  on  circuitry 
allowing  simultaneous  processing  of  four'  bits,  recent  advances  in  micro- 
processor technology  have  resulted  in  production  of  circuits  capable  of 
handling  8 and  16  bit  word  lengths.  Even  more  advanced  circuitry  is 
becoming  available.  These  developments  as  well  as  cost  reductions  in 
fabrication  suggest  that  a wide  range  of  applications  for  microcomputers  will 
become  more  feasible  as  initial  investment  costs  are  further  reduced. 

A1  iniaturized  computer  systems  have  already  been  incorporated 
into  sophisticated  laboratory  instruments  with  considerable  success. 

P or  example,  high  speed  general-purpose  oscilloscopes,  gas  chromatographs, 
and  listance  measuring  devices  and  microprocessing  capabilities  are  commer- 
ciall}  available.  The  development  and  wider  availability  of  such  microeom- 
puterized  research  instrumentation  will  have  considerable  impact  on  research 
in  the  biological  sciences  (Rooinson,  1974). 

However,  microprocessor  systems  arc  limited  currently  by  the 
i equii  cment  that  they  be  programmed  in  either  machine  or  assembly  lan- 
guage. There  is  a need  for  higher  level  symbolic  languages  such  as 
I OITl  RAN,  BASIC,  and  specialized  application  languages  such  as  SKED, 
that  can  be  used  with  cross  compilers  and  cross  assemblers.  Because  the 
majority  of  research  investigators  are  not  skilled  in  currently  available 
microprocessor  languages,  the  potential  benefits  from  use  of  these  systems 
is,  at  pi  esent,  closely  related  to  availability  of  programs  and  programmers. 

It  is  recognized  that  development  of  higher  level  symbolic  languages 
will  involve  considerable  cost  with  low  profitable  return  on  the  investment. 

1 he  same  issue  was  evident  during  the  development  of  minicomputer  language 
systems.  The  experience  gleaned  from  that  phase  of  development  in  computer 
science  should  be  applicable  to  the  current  situation  in  regard  to  micro- 
processor language  systems.  Experience  suggests  that  additional  federal 
or  industrial  support  will  be  required. 

rlhc  early  experiments  with  computer  networking  clearly  established 
that  scientists  can  use  program  systems  over  great  distances.  The  SUMEX 
machine  on  TYIV1SHARE  and  ARPANET  is  an  example  of  one  effort  to  get 
specific  programming  systems  ready  for  network  use.  Heart  (1974)  reported 
that  there  is  considerable  interest  in  using  the  ARPANET  by  life  science^ 
research  groups  both  within  the  government  as  well  rs  among  other  user 
organizations.  He  concluded  that  access  to  the  ARPANET  would  be  benefi- 
cial to  investigators  in  the  biological  sciences,  particularly  in  relation 
to  their  objectives  in  gaining  experience  in  sharing  a resource  such  as 
ARPANET . The  capacity  for  communication  within  this  system  is  currently 
unavailable  to  many  research  programs  in  the  biological  sciences. 


20 


Heart  (1974)  called  attention  to  the  possible  use  of  network  facilities 
such  as  ARPANET  in  ameliorating  the  duplicative  needs  for  expensive  and 
specialized  resources  that  are  becoming  essential  to  large-scale  research 
efforts  in  many  biological  disciplines.  A network  and  its  attendent  technology 
provides  a convenient  cost-effective  method  of  sharing  large  data  bases, 
storage,  retrieval  and  analyses  of  data  from  sources  isolated  in  time  or  by 
geography,  and,  specialized  software  packages  to  support  research  in 
particular  fields.  Programs  that  provide  information  exchange  among 
systems  within  networks  are  also  required.  Current  work  on  a graphics 
protocol  for  ARPANET  suggests  that  the  difficulties  may  be  due  to  hardware 
incompatibility.  Limitations  in  software  compatability  can  be  overcome  as 
sematic  protocols  are  developed  for  interaccessibility  of  data  bases  from 
different  disciplines  utilizing  network  facilities. 

It  is  recognized  that  a number  of  networks  and  shared  facilities  with 
impact  on  the  life  sciences  are  already  operational.  MEDLINE,  a network 
facility  of  the  National  Library  of  Medicine,  provides  a powerful  bibliographic 
system  for  the  medical  sciences.  There  is  no  such  extensive  network  system 
in  the  other  biological  disciplines  that  is  readily  accessible  to  so  large  a 
number  of  separate  terminals  and  users  at  minimal  cost.  Computer  systems 
such  as  PROPHET,  MIRACLE,  CHEMCON,  and  CRVSNET  are  examples  of 
advanced  technology  in  specific  areas  of  current  research  (Heart,  1974; 

Raub,  1974).  There  are  opportunities  for  use  of  networks  and  shared  facil- 
ities in  the  biological  sciences  and  the  financial  aspects  of  such  technology 
favor  widespread  development  of  these  types  of  computer  systems. 

In  summarizing  a recent  symposium  on  this  topic,  Wilson  (1974) 
concluded  that  additional  efforts  are  needed  in: 

• "making  networking  available  to  smaller,  less  sophis- 

ticated users,  which  will  require  handholding:  now, 
too  often,  the  rich  get  richer;  those  who  are  already  well 
endowed  with  computer  access  get  more  through  net- 
working; 

• overcoming  of  political,  organizational,  and  economic 
impediments;  encouragement  and  subsidy  of  protocol 
development  and  standardization  of  access,  even  across 
different  networks; 

• bringing  specialized  and  discipline-oriented  computing 
centers  into  sophisticated  networking,  for  example 
the  Health  Sciences  Computing  facility,  the  National 
Center  for  Atmospheric  Research,  Lawrence  Berkeley 
Laboratory,  Brookhaven  National  Laboratory,  and  so  on; 
in  addition,  serious  consideration  should  be  given  to 
implementation  of  new  discipline-oriented  centers  now 
made  practical  by  networking.  " 

- 21  - 


Ideally,  synthesis  of  the  advantages  of  networks  with  recent  develop- 
ments in  microcomputer  capabilities  could  lead  to  a handheld  personal  com- 
puter for  the  working  nonprogrammer  life  scientist.  Such  a terminal  could 
act  as  an  interface  with  multiple  laboratory  instruments  for  data  collection; 
run  routine  data  analysis;  function  as  a network  terminal  providing  access 
to  data  bases  and  other  information.  This  concept  of  a personalized  com- 
puter with  network  access  could  also  function  as  a point  of  origination  and 
reception  for  network  dissemination  of  scientific  publications. 


F.  TECHNOLOGY  TRANSFER 


The  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  (NASA)  and  the 
former  Atomic  Energy  C ommission  (now  a part  of  the  Energy  Research  and 
Development  Administration)  have  established  a Technology  Utilization 
Program  for  dissemination  of  information  on  technological  developments 
which  have  potential  utility  outside  the  aerospace  and  nuclear  sciences. 

The  Technology  Utilization  Program  monitors  a number  of  areas  of  research 
including  the  computer  sciences.  Because  NASA  has  long  played  a leading 
role  in  supporting  the  computer  sciences,  numerous  potential  applications 
are  frequently  identified  in  the  publications  of  the  Technology  Utilization 
Program  (National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  1974). 


22 


IV.  CONCLUDING  STATEMENT 


Siler  (1974)  indicated  that  there  is  a unanimity  of  opinion  that  the 
utility  of  computers  in  many  facets  of  biological  and  biomedical  research 
was  now  at  the  threshold  of  further  advances  because  such  uses  are  efficient 
and  fiscally  within  reasonable  costs  based  on  the  benefits  derived.  However, 
fiscal  constraints  over  the  next  several  years  may  significantly  affect  the 
extent  to  which  further  applications  are  pursued.  As  investigators  become 
more  aware  of  the  potential  of  computers  and  computer  systems  in  the 
biological  sciences,  research  administrators  should  recognize  the  impor- 
tance of  support  for  these  efforts  (Davis,  1974). 

The  scope  of  computer  science  is  so  broad  and  complex  that  it  is 
not  possible  for  any  one  individual  to  grasp  the  large  number  of  current 
research  efforts  in  this  field.  Knowledge  concerning  computers  and  their 
capabilities  is  dispersed  nonuniformly  among  a limited  but  growing  number 
of  experts.  The  discipline  needs  to  be  better  organized  in  ways  that  will 
permit  more  effective  education  of  life  scientists  capable  of  effectively 
utilizing  computer  science  and  technology. 

Experts  in  the  fields  of  computer  science  and  artificial  intelligence 
may  be  constrained  by  lack  of  knowledge  in  specific  disciplines  of  biology. 
Biologists  frequently  are  limited  by  lack  of  knowledge  or  facilities  to 
manipulate  concepts  and  data.  There  are  a number  of  instances  where 
careful  collaboration  between  computer  scientists  and  bioscientists 
have  produced  results  which  neither  could  attain  individually.  This  points 
to  the  need  for  individuals  who  see  as  their  scientific  function  the  bringing 
together  of  computer  techniques  and  biological  problems.  The  constraints 
of  network  use  and  the  personal  computer  lead  to  not  only  special  problems 
but  also  unique  benefits. 

The  individual,  functioning  as  a scientific  interfacer,  should  be 
capable  of  drawing  on  the  resources  of  the  network  to  synthesize  for  the  bio- 
scientist an  environment  which  is  a combination  of  capability  in  the  personal 
computer  of  the  bioscientist  and  capability  in  the  network.  In  its  full 
development,  this  type  of  synthesis  would  yield  specially  adapted  programs 
in  the  personal  computer  for  data  collecting,  purifying,  and  modeling;  and, 
protocols  for  accessing  network  aata  searches,  bibliographic  searching,  data 
validation  and  dissemination,  and  scientific  result  publication.  In  addition 
such  a program  could  produce  documentation  or  publication  mechanisms 
specifically  generated  to  reflect  the  needs  of  bioscientists. 

Saltzberg  (1974)  noted  that  much  of  the  current  work  with  computers 
in  the  life  sciences  was  being  done  by  groups  of  investigators  skilled  in 


23 


omputer  science.  He  concluded  that  a need  exists  for  mechanisms  and 
procedures  whereby  life  scientists  with  limited  computer  knowledge  could 
communicate  with  computer  scientists  who  might  offer  solutions  to 
particular  problems  in  biological  research.  It  has  been  pointed  out 
i epeatedly  that  even  with  knowledge  of  computer  programming,  hardware, 
and  interfacing  of  equipment,  choosing  a system  to  meet  specific  research 
needs  is  difficult  and  requires  interdisciplinary  efforts  and  support. 

Successful  merging  of  the  common  interests  of  these  two  gro  jps 
remains  a challenge  to  both  research  communities  (Saltzberg,  1974).  This 
challenge  includes  both  diversion  from  productive  research  activities  and  the 
funding  of  initial  costs.  There  appears  to  be  a need  for  more  emphasis  in 
biomathematics  per  3e  as  a bridge  between  the  biologists  with  little  computer 
expertise  and  computer  scientists  who  can  apply  their  background  in  mathe- 
matical modeling  to  the  life  sciences. 

Siler  (1974)  reiterated  this  thought  in  his  concluding  remarks  at 
the  symposium,  stating  that  if  the  use  of  computers  in  the  life  sciences  is 
to  be  successful  as  a science  rather  than  an  art  form,  then  training  of  life 
scientists  should  include  training  in  biomathematics  and  biostatistics  as 
well  as  in  computer  techniques.  Further,  he  noted  that  there  is  a critical 
need  for  training  of  biomathematicians  knowledgeable  in  the  basic  principles 
of  the  life  sciences,  deterministic  and  stochastic  mathematical  techniques, 
and  in  computei  methods  because  these  scientists  u'ould  be  competent  to 
train  life  scientists  in  these  quantitative  techniques. 

T here  are  a number  of  obstacles  to  such  extensive  and  expensive 
training  programs  and  to  supporting  financially  further  applications  of 
computers  to  problems  in  biology.  However,  many  experts  have  pointed 
out  that  it  is  not  possible  to  assess  what  this  lack  of  opportunity  for  such 
training  cr  absence  of  fiscal  support  are  costing  the  nation  in  terms  of 
missed  discoveries,  inadequately  interpreted  data,  and  time  lost  in  tedious 
and  perhaps  unnecessary  experimentation. 


V.  BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Ackley,  P.R.  andR.A.  Nardello.  1973.  Cross  tabulations  applicable  to 
minicomputers.  J.  Amer.  Soc.  Info.  Sci.  24:  437-444. 

Anonymous.  1974a.  Choosing  chemical  routes.  [Reviews  work  of  Dr.  E.J. 
Corey]  Mosaic  (Fall):  21-26. 

Anonymous.  1974b.  Eye  sampling  study.  [Reviews  work  of  Dr.  R.  L.  Mason] 
Naval  Res.  Rev.  28(8):  22-23. 

Birkhoff,  G.  1975.  Mathematics  and  computer  science.  Amer.  Sci.  63: 

83-91. 

Bogle,  R.,  J.  Zarembo  and  A.  D.  Bender.  1973.  Factors  to  consider  in  the 
financial  evaluation  of  minicomputers  for  R&  D.  Lab.  Manage.  11:  58-62. 

Carman,  G.,  P.  Lemkin,  B.  Shapiro,  M.  Schultz  and  P.  Kaiser.  1974. 

A real  time  picture  processor  for  use  in  biologic  cell  identification. 

II.  Hardware  implementation.  J.  Histochem.  Cytochem.  22:  732-740. 

Davis,  R.M.  1974.  Meeting  the  real  costs  of  the  computer  as  a research 
tool  in  the  life  sciences.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33: 
2409-2411. 

Dayhoff,  M.E.,  editor.  1972.  Atlas  of  protein  sequence  and  structure, 
vol.  5.  National  Biomedical  Research  Foundation,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Dayhoff,  M.E.  1974.  Computer  analysis  of  protein  sequences.  Fed.  Proc. 
Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2314-2316. 

Handler,  P.,  editor.  1970.  Digital  computers  and  the  life  sciences.  Pages 
531-584  in  Biology  and  the  future  of  man.  Oxford  University  Press,  New 
York,  N.Y. 


Heart,  F.  E.  1974.  Networks  and  the  life  sciences:  the  ARPA  network  and 
telenet.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2399-2402. 


Langridge,  R.  1974.  Interactive  three-dimensional  computer  graphics  in 
molecular  biology.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2332-2335. 

Ledley,  R.S.  1965.  Use  of  computers  in  biology  and  medicine.  McGraw 
Hill  Book  Company,  New  York,  N.Y.  965  pp. 


25 


I < t , L.  ^ . S. , R . K . .Iain,  L.  K . C . Leo  and  B.  Goettel.  1974.  Environm ontal 
impact  computer  systems.  CERL-TR -E-37,  Army  Construction  Engineering 
Research  Laboratory,  Champaign,  111.  113  pp.  AD-787  295/5WJ,  National 
Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield,  Va. 

I. rmkin,  P. , G.  Carman,  L.  Lipkin,  B.  Shapiro,  M.  Schultz  and  P.  Kaiser. 
1974.  A real  time  picture  processor  for  use  in  biologic  cell  identification. 

II.  Hardware  implementation.  J.  Ilistochem.  Cytochem.  22:  725-731. 

Lindbei  g,  I).  A.B.,  Conference  Chairman.  1974.  Conference  on  the  computer 
as  a research  tool  in  the  life  sciences:  keynote  address.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed. 
Amor.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2311  -2321. 

Mclnnis,  B.C.,  S.  El-Asfouri  and  T.  E.  Bynum.  1973.  Modeling  and 
computer  simulation  to  determine  digoxin  dosage.  Pages  69-70  inlFAC- 
APS  Int.  Symp.  Physiol.  Control,  Rochester,  N.Y. 

Moraff,  II.  1974.  Sponsorship  of  computing  research  in  medicine  and 
biology.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed.  Amer,  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2413-2414. 

National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  Technology  Utilization 
Program.  1974.  Computer  programs:  special  applications;  a compilation. 
NASA  SP-5967(01),  National  rI  echnical  Information  Service,  Springfield, 

Ya. 


National  Technical  Information  Service.  1974.  Directory  of  computerized 
data  files  and  related  software  available  from  Federal  agencies  1974. 
NTIS-SR-74-01,  National  Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield,  Va. 

f cn0*11’ oA'  1973’  Artificial  intelligence  and  the  concept  of  mind.  Pages 
1-60  ik  Computer  models  of  thought  and  language,  K.  C.  Shank  and  K.M. 
solbye,  eds.  W.H.  Freeman  Co.,  San  Francisco,  Calif. 

Oppenheimer,  C.H.  and  W.  B.  Brogden.  1975.  Meeting  report:  international 
conference  on  environmental  data  management.  Bioscience  25:  113  and  115. 

Orr,  \\  . C.  andH.J.  Hoffman.  1974.  A 90-minute  cardiac  biorhythm: 
methodology  and  data  analysis  using  modified  periodograms  and  complex 
demodulation.  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  BME-21(2):  130-143. 


Orr,  W.C.,  II.  J.  Hoffman  and  F.W.  Hegge.  1974.  Ultradian  rhythms  in 
extended  performance.  Aerospace  Med.  45:  995-1000. 


Patten, 
vol.  1. 


B.  C . editor.  1971.  Systems  analysis  and  simulation  in  ecology 
Academic  Press,  New  York,  N.Y.  597  pp. 


26 


I 


Patten,  B.C.,  editor.  1972.  Systems  analysis  and  simulation  in  ecology, 
vol.  2.  Academic  Press,  New  York,  N.Y.  592  pp. 

Prewitt,  J.1V1.S.  and  M.M.  Mendelsohn.  1966.  The  analysis  of  cell  images. 
Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  128:  1035-1053. 

Raub,  W.F.  1974  The  PROPHET  system  and  resource  sharing.  Fed. 

Proc.  Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2390-2392. 

Reddy,  D.  R.  1974.  Computer  as  a research  tool  in  speed-understanding 
systems  research.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2347-2351. 

Robinson,  A.  L.  1974.  Computers:  first  the  maxi,  then  the  mini,  no  v it's 
the  micro.  Science  186:  1102-1104. 

Sacco,  W.J.,  R.A.  Cowley  and  W.S.  Capes.  1972.  Pattern  recognition 
analysis  of  shock  trauma  data  and  its  application  to  Army  problems.  Report 
prepared  for  Army  Material  Systems  Analysis  Agency,  University  of 
Maryland,  Baltimore,  Md.  12  pp.  AD-784  129,  National  Technical  Informa- 
tion Service,  Springfield,  Va. 

Saltzberg,  B.  1974.  Session  II-computer  applications  II:  rapporteur's 

summary.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2420-2421. 

Siler,  W.  1974.  Conference  summary  and  conclusions.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed. 
Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2420-2421. 

Stacy,  R.  and  B.  D.  Waxman,  editors.  1965  (vol.  1 and  2),  1969  (vol.  3) 
and  1974  (vol.  4).  Computers  in  biomedical  research.  Academic  Press, 

Inc.,  New  York,  N.Y. 

\ idal,  J.J.  1974.  Biocybernitic  control  and  man-machine  interaction: 
technical  reports  number  one.  UCLS-ENG-7430.  Prepared  under  contract 
no.  DAIIC-15-73-C-0303,  School  of  Engineering  and  Applied  Science, 

I niversity  of  California,  Los  Angeles,  Calif.  91  pp.  AD  777  720,  National 
Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield,  Va. 

Wilson,  K.R.  1974.  Session  \ -networks  and  shared  facilities:  rapporteur's 
summary.  Fed.  Proc.  Fed.  Amer.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  33:  2407-2408. 


27 


VI.  KEY  INVESTIGATORS 


Margaret  O.  Dayhoff,  Ph.  D. 

National  Biomedical  Research  Foundation 
Georgetown  University  Medical  Center 
Washington,  I).  C.  20007 

Frank  E.  Heart,  M.S.E.E. 

Director 

Computer  Systems  Division 
Bolt,  Beraneck  and  Newman,  Inc. 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts  02138 

Donald  A.  B.  Lindberg,  M.D. 

Director 

Information  Science  Group 
University  of  Missouri  Medical  Center 
Columbia,  Missouri  65201 

Peter  G.  Lykos,  Ph.  D. 

Director 

Computer  Center 

Illinois  Institute  of  Technology 

Chicago,  Illinois  60616 

Arnold  W.  Pratt,  M.D. 

Director 

Computer  Research  and  Technology 
National  Institutes  of  Health 
Bethesda,  Maryland  20014 

John  A.  Starkweather,  Ph.  D. 

Director 

Computer  Center 

University  of  California 

San  Francisco,  California  94143 

William  Siler,  Ph.  D. 

Chairman 

Department  of  Biomathematics 
University  of  Alabama  Medical  College 
Birmingham,  Alabama  35294 


Preceding  page  blank 


29  - 


VII.  SCIENTIFIC  CONSULTANTS 


Richard  J.  Feldman,  Ph.  D.  Tyron  E.  Huber,  M.D. 

Computer  Research  and  Technology  6002  Roosevelt  Street 
Computer  Center  Branch  Bethesda,  Maryland  20014 

National  Institutes  of  Health 
Bethesda,  Maryland  20014 


Frederick  W.  Hegge,  Ph.  D.  Herbert  Pollack,  M.D. 

Chief  Route  1,  Box  70 

Department  of  Experimental  Upperville,  Virginia  22176 

Psychophysiology 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


William  Siler,  Ph.  D. 

Chairman 

Department  of  Biomathematics 
University  of  Alabama 
Medical  College 
Birmingham,  Alabama  35294 


Preceding  page  blank 


31 


