bbeUMEHt RESUME 



ED 244 253 



CS 007 553 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



INSTITUTION 



SPONS AGENCY 
PUB DATE 
eONTRAet 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESGRIPTORS 



Bruce, Bertram ----- - 

Robot Plans and Human Plans: Implications for Hbdels 

of eommunicatioh . Technical Report No. 314. 

Boit^ Beranek and Newman , I nc Cambridge , Mass . ; 
Illinois Univ., Urbaha. Center for the Study of 
Reading. 

National Inst i of Education (ED) , Washington , DC. 

Jun 84 

400-81-0030 

42p. _ 

Reports - Research/Technical (143) — Information 
Analyses (070) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

*Artificial Intelligence! Behavior Patterns; 

*Cbmmunicati6n (Thought Transf er);*Di scour se 

Analysis; *Interaction; *Learning Theories; *Models; 
Planning; Reading Research; Robotics; Social 
Behavior 



ABSTRACT _ _ . . 

People in interact ion with others organize their 
perceptions of a social situation in terms of plans even. when the 
others' plans are poorly formulated^ They use their models of others' 
plans in formulating their own. Much of what occurs iridigcburse 
centers on a continual eommunicatioh about and reformulation of one's 
own plans and one^s own models of others ' plans Formal methods for 
describing and analyzing plans are how available arid make it possible 

to be more explicit ih fbrmulatihg hypbtheies about social 

interaction. Uhfortuhately , the classical formulations for planning 
are derived from a rbbbtwbrld model that fails to generalize 
sufficiehtly to accbuht fbr typical human planning situations. By 
pushing the classical mbdel, it is possible to create a model of I 
plahhing that embbdies cbnceptssuch as "mutual belief^" "social ; 
episbde," ahd "gbal conflict." In applying this model to a simple^ 
dialbgue^ it becomes clear that elements of the model are necessary 
fbr mbdelihg such dialogues, but not sufficient^ More complex^ ; 
dialogues and texts will undoubtedly require further ejaboratibh of 
the model. (Author/FL) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the brigihal dbcument. * 

*********************************************** 

i 



ERIC 



CKNTER FOR THE STUDY OF READING 
Technical Report No. 314 

cxi 

Q ROBOT PLANS AND HUMAN PLANS: 

LU IMPLICATIONS FOR MODELS OF COMMUNICATION 

Bertram Bruce 
Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc. 



June 1984 



University of Illinois 

at Urb ana-Champaign 
51 Gerty Drive 
Champaign, Illinois 61820 



Bolt Beranek arid Newman Inc. 

10 Moultori Street 

Cambridge, Massachusetts 02238 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EbUCAtlON 

NATiONAL iNSTfTUtE OF EOUCAtlON 

EDUCAtiONAL RESOURCES iNFORMATiON 




' CENTER (ERiCl 

this documnn! has been fcproriuceri as 
f«»cc(vi?d from the p«;rson or or{ii»hi>ntihn 



ongmiMing it 

Minor !:hiin<j«>s hnv«> ()fM>n m.idi* to iniprove 
r«>p((i(hrrti()n rjiitility 



• Points oi vtfi^v uf opinions s!at(<ri in this Hocu 
ment Ho not n».'c(;ssdftiy rep'esiJni oHiciji NiE 
position Of policy 



The research reported herein was supported in part by the National 
Institute of Education under Contract No . NIE-400-81-0030 . I would 
like to thank Andee Rubin, Behrooz Tavakbli, arid Harry Blanchard 
for connnents on this paper; also, Kathleeri Starr for her artwork 
and Charyi Przekwas for preparing the manuscript. 



ERIC 



» 1 



EDITORIAL BOARD 



Wiiiiam Nagy 
Editor 



R, togan fiickford 
Harry Blahchard 
Nancy Bryant 
Pat Chrosriiak 
Avon Crismore 
David Dunning 
Linda Fielding 
Dan Foertsch 
Meg Gallagher 
Paul Hardin 
Patricia Herman 
Gabriella Hermon 
Asghar Iran-Nejad 



Steve Levine 
Margie Leys 
Paul Mayberry 
Mary Moeis 
Carol Peterman 
Michael Reddix 
Theresa Rogers 
Judith Scott 
Ileaiia SiBda-Santana 
Fernando Senior 
Marcy Stein 
Janice Stewart 
fiehrooz Tavakoli 
Paul Wilson 



EKLC 



3 



Planss and Cotoffiunication 2 



Abistract 

This paper examines the roie of plan recognition and plan 
generation in coramunication. It argues that people in 
interaction with others organize their perceptions of a social 
situation in terms of plans even when the others' plans are 
poorly formulated. They use their models of others' plans in 
formulating their own. Much of what occurs in discourse centers 
on a continual communication about and reformulation of one's own 
plans and one's lujdels of others' plans. Formal methods for 
describing and analyzing plane are now available. Such methods 
allow us to be more explicit in bur hypbthiases about social 
interaction. Uhf brturiately , the classical formalisms for 
planning are derived frbm a robot world model that fails to 
generalize sufficiently to account for typical human planning 
situatibns. By pushing the classical model we come to a model bf 
planning that embodies concepts such as mutual belief , social 
^pls^ode , and goal conflict . Using the mutual belief mbdel we 
look at a simple dialogue. It is clear frbm the analysis that 
elements of the model are necessary fbr modeling such dialogues, 
but not sufficient. Mbre complex dialogues and texts will 
undoubtedly require further elaboration of the modeii 



4 



Plans and eommanication 3 

Robot Plans and Human Plans: 
implications for Models of Gonunanication 

The Peanuts comic strip has a character named Lucy who Is 
always trying to take advantage of one named Charlie Brown, 
Because Charlie is very trusting, her tricks often succeed. One 
of her favorite tricks occurs in the fall when football season is 
getting underway: Lucy holds a football arid says^ "Come on 
Charlie Brown! 1*11 hold the football for you. You come and 
kick it." Charlie runs as fast as he can, swings his leg back 
arid tries to kick the ball. At the last second Lucy yanks the 
ball away, Charlie's feet fly up in the air and he lands on his 
back; His pride is wounded as well as his bottom. 

One year, Charlie started thinking, 

"She says she's going co hold the ball so 1 can run up and 
kick it, but I know she's going to pull it away. She always 
pulls it away. She thinks that I don't kridw what she's 
planning to do^ but, iri fact^ I do. I also kridw that she 
thinks that I ddri't kridw. I'm gdirig to trick her. Iristead 
of runriing up arid kickirig the ball I'll just run up and 
stop. Theri she cari't pull the ball away and make me fall on 
my back. " 
But theri he goes further, 

"She can figure out that I know what her plan is. She*s 
probably not going to yank the ball away after all. I'll 



5 



I r 



Plans arid Cdmmunication 4 



run up, stop, and be embarrassed, this time because there'll 
be no tricki" 

Following this line of reasoning he finally concludes that the 
best strategy is just to run as bard as he can and kick the baiii 
He runs right up and swings his leg back. Lucy jerks the ball 
away; he tries to kick it and lands flat on his back; and, of 
course, sets himself up for next year's football season. 

We live in a world cf interitionality ^ a world in which we 
assign meaning to objects^ relations, and events. One of the 
primary kinds of meaning that we assign is planful behavior. 
That is ^ we look at what people do and say, *'What are their 
goals? What are the actions that they are going to carry but to 
achieve those goals? What aria their plans?" Vie seek 
interpretations of actions in terms of plans even in cases where 
behavior may not be all that planful i Referring to an action as 
aimless highlights the fact that it is very unusual for people to 
act without some goal in mind. 

This paper discusses the role of plans in understanding 
discourse. It looks briefly at ah example of what might be 
called a "robot models" or perhaps the "standard AI model" for 
plans ^ a model used widely in Artificial Intelligence, as well as 
in a wide variety of other disciplines. It then presents some 
problems that arise when this standard model is liised to account 
for general human action. A contrasting model , the "mutual- 
belief model,'" is then presented by means of an example from a 
corpus (Hail, Linn, & Nagy, 198^0 of children's conversations i 



EKLC 



jfxans ana uommunicacion 



III a simple episode^ we see something of the richness of human 
plariftilriess. Finally, some dperi queistidnis ale presented; 

The S tarida^^ Model Plannlnj ^ 
Plans have beeti used iti a wide variety of ways in the study 
of discburse: to look at interactions of characters in stories 
(Bruce & Newman, 1978; Wiletisky, 1981), to look at the 
interactions of the plans and purposes of an author with the 
plans and purposes of a reader (Brewer & tichtenstein, 1982; 
Brace, 1981), to look at the various plans of participants in 
conversation. Most of these analyses have relied on some form of 
information processing model that provides ah iaxplicit 
represehtatibri of actions^ states bf the wbrldj gbals and the 
process 6f plarihing. There is a Ibrig traditibri tb this work, 
going back tb Miller, Galanter, and Pribram (1960). The example 
tb fbllow is a bit bf a caricature of this view of planning and 
prbblem sblvirig, but it suggests how people have been using terms 
like ^operators" and "states" and the kinds of problems that can 
be solved; 
Robot Uxxctds 

First of ail, one needs to have some way tb represent a 
state of the world. Typically what's done is to define a world 
state by a list of propositions. Figure 1 shows a simple world 
in which there are five points, or places where sbmethirig can be; 
there are boxes A, B and C; and there is a robot ^ whb can mbve 



7 

o 

ERIC 



the boxes aroundi To represent a state of this world we might 

ase a set of prbpbsltlbris like the fbllbwirig: 

Ihitial State 

[On (Box-A, Flbbr)] 
[On (Box-B^ Flbbr) j 
[On CBox-C, Bpx-B)] 
[At (Bbx-A^ PI)] 
[At (Bbx-B, P2)] 
[At (Robot, P3)] 

This says that Bdx-A is on the Floor at point Pi, the Robot 
is at point P3, and so on. 

f 

Insert Figure 1 about herei 



Planning becoffies relevant when we have operators which can 
change states of the world. An example of an bperatibn in the 
micro-world might be for the robot tb pick up a bbx. Operators 
are typically defined in terms bf enabling cbriditibris, arid 
outcomes, or effects: 

Operator: pick-up (X) 

Enabling conditions: (eP) [At (Robot, P) & At (X, P)] 

(eZ) Hold (Z) 
(eZ) On (Z, X) 

Effects: Hold (X) 

The pick-up operator can be used only in certain states, fb 
example, the robot and the thing to be picked up have to be in 
the same location. Also, the robot cannot be hbldirig ariythirig 
and there can be nothing on the thing tb be picked up. If the 
pick-up operator is applied, the effect is that a prbpbsitiori is 



8 



Plans and Gomihuriicatibri 7 



added to bur description of the world: The robot how holds the 
box. 

Now, let*s set up a goal state (see Figuris 2), say, to have 
Box C on Box A and the robot at Pi, This looks like the initial 
state with the exception of a couple of propositions: 

Goal State 

[On (Box-A, Floor)] 
[On (Box-B, Floor)] 
[On (Box-C, Box-A)] 
[At (Box-A, Pi)] 
[At (Box-B, P2)] 
[At (Robot, Pi)] 



Insert Figure 2 about here. 



A planner can how operate to generate a sequence of 
operators i such as: "the Robot moves to P2^ picks lip Bbx-C, 
moves to Pi, piits ddwri Bdx-C." We call this sequence of 
operators a "plan. 

The Blaa 

Move (P2) 
Pick-up (Box-e) 
Move (PI) 
Put- down (Box-e) 

More- elaborate examples than this can easily be constructed^ 
such as planning programs to write computer software or to solve 
complex assemiy tasks. In various fields, people have used 
similar models to examine problem solving, cbnipbsition^ the 
reader ihteractibh with characters in stories^ conversations and 



S 



i Plans and Communication 8 

so oni It's fair to say that most planning research has relied 
on models of this general form. 
Limitations of the S tandar d AI Model 

Unfortunately, there are limitations to the standard AI 
model that appear when we try to account for human planning 
behavior. (Most of these are acknowledged by those who have used 
such a model in their research.) 

The first problem is that robot piarinirig is basically 
planning for an individual. There is brie robot mdvirig ardurid in 
its micro-world. Iri cbritrast, human plans ate essentially 
social^ that is, people operate in a social environment in which 
they compete or cooperate with others; Even if there is another 
robot in the robot's world, the plan constructed is an individual 
plan; the other robot is an aspect of a passive environment. For 
human plans, many apparently individual actions — a teacher at 
home preparing a lesson for the next day — are still inherently 
social (the teacher must imagine social contexts for his/her 
actions). 

Secondly, the robot operates iri a world of facts. There is 
a set of prbpositiuris each bf which are simply true or false. 
There may be some liricertairity abour. the prbpbsitibris , arid they 
may charige biit they're essentially treated as solid facts i In 
contrast, in hutnan planning situations virtually everything has a 
belief status; People act on the basis of what they believe to 
be true, and what they believe about others' beliefs. In 
conversations, for example, the operators are defined in terms bf 

o 

ERIC 



Plans and Cbminuhl cation 9 



changes to others' beliefs or questions about what they believe. 
Moreover, these beliefs are recursive: It's riot just your 
beliefs i arid your beliefs about sdmeorie else's beliefs^ but your 
beliefs about what they believe about you. For example^ Charlie 
Brown is tryirig to figure but his beliefs about Lucy's bialiefs 
about his beliefs. 

Third ^ tf?e standard AI model presupposes a fixed set of 
bpeiatbrs, state variables^ arid goals. Neither the bperatbrs ribr 
the state variables change in the prbciass of planning. Thiare is 
rib way tb add riew Ibcatibris or new bbxias. Also, the goal is 
fixed. The robot works to achieve the goal and either succeeds 
or fails. in the human planning situation, there is an on-going ^ 
and even* a retrospective establishment of meaning. For example, 
Gearhart and Newman (1980) report nursery school iriteractibns , iri 
which a teacher talks tb kids iri the riursery schbbl abbut the 
pictures they have drawn. She says, "Here, let me see your 
picture." Uritil that mbmerit the child might have heeti drawing 
with the craybri bri the papery bri the desk or dri the wall. By her 
statemerit the teacher seeks tb establish that the object iri 
questibri is a picture arid that the activity that the child was 
doing was drawing a picture; When she points to an orange giob 
bri the paper and says, '*0h, that must be the sun," that orange 
circle suddenly takes on a new status i This establishment of 
miBaning through interaction is a typical feature of human 
interactions; we define the rules of the game as we go along. 




Plans arid Cbniinunicatibn 10 



Fourth, the istandard AI model teridis to focus on the des: k^*^ 
and execution of plans. Given an initial state, a goal state and 
operators, tl' task is to construct the most efficient plan to 
get from the initial state to the goal state, or, given a plan, 
to execute it; in contrast, in human planning situations, 
explicit planning is unusual, and there are few times when one 
Just carries out a plan. More often, people talk about plans; 
they coimnuriicate plans to one another; and they use plans to 
achieve other goals. Plans becbnie part of what one cbmunicates: 
A r^^^ 1^ aririburiced because bf the effect that irifbrmatibri is 
likely to have bri sbraiaorie else. These ways bf dealing with plans 
require mbre sophisticated representations than those provided by 
the standard models . 

Fifth, the standard AI model tends to separate the 
generation process from the recognition ptocess.. Producing a 
plan is one problem: How can we take an initial state and a 
sequence of operators and get to a goal state? Recognizing a 
plan is a separate problem: How can we infer a plan from a 
sequence of actions? For human p^^^^ models ^ these processes need 
to be considered together. Generating a plan is done while 
recognizing what plans others are carrying out. One's own plan 

may have to change in light bf the recbgriitibn bf v/hat others are 

- _ _ » 

planning. Similarly^ if bthers recognize your plan in a certain 
way, their plans may alter while you are in the prbcess bf 
recognizing them. Recognition may depend upon siraulativig the 



12 



Plans and Communication ii 



generation of a plan, understanding why somebody might have 
produced the kind of plan they didi 

Finally, in the standard AI model plans are generally 
reversible. In the box example, we can switch the goal state and 
initial state and make the same point. Exceptions occur drily 
when the domain introduces a directionality, say, iri breaking ari 
egg. In contrast, human plans are basically historical. Actions 
are non-reversible because they interact with and are even 
defined in terms of a complex history of previous actions. 

Mutual Belief Model 

A number of people have been trying to find ways to 
represent iriteritibns arid beliefs arid to model social plans as 
well as individual plans. Some of this work has been done with 
computer modelling (Cohen, 1981; Perrauit & Alien, 1986; Sidner & 
Israel, 1981); some through analysis of conversations, stories, 
and skits. This section presents one such attempt based on the 
centrality of mutual belief (cf. Clark & Marshall, 1981; Cohen S 
Perrauit, 1979; Schiffer, 1972). We mention here the major ' 
elements of a notation system that is beirig used iri these 
analyses. For further details ^ see Bruce (1980) or Bruce arid 
Newman (1978). 

The ribtatibri system assumes atl underlying facility for 
representatibri bf actibris arid states. Every prbpbsitibn is 
represented as embedded within a belief . A set of beliefs is 
iridicated by a beliei ^ space . Figure 3 shows equivaifnt 



13 



Plans and Commanicatton 12 



representations of a proposition within the beliefs of some 
character' or participant. We also need to represent intentions 



Insert Figure 3 ab< t here^ 

of at least two kinds. One is the intention to achieve 
something, to bring about a new state of affairs (Figure 4). The 
second is the intention to maintain some state (Figure 5). 



Insert Figures 4 arid 5 about here. 



Ari important concept built out of individual beliefs is that 

of mutual belief . Mutual belief means not only that one person 

believes something that the other person : believes , but also that 

each believes that the other person believes it and that the 

other believes that the first believes it, and so on indefinitely 

(Schiffer, 1972). Using the notation presented thus far we can 

define motaal. belief (^ffl) of a proposition, X, between two 

actors, F and R, as follows: 

MB (F, R, X) <==> FB X 

RB X_ 

FB RB X 

RB FB X 

FB RB FB X 

RB FB RB X 

« 

Closely related to the mataal belief concept is that oF the 
social episode (Figure 6). People can create a frame for their 



Plans and Conimunlcatldn 13 



interactions within which they establish social facts to be true 
for the duration of that episodes Within the episode, 
participants have well defined roles i There are many 
conventional social episodes: For example, in a supermarket, 
there is a checkout clerk and a customer, with corresponding 
expectations about what each should do and know. 



The more interesting case is when people create new social 
episodes. There is then a set of ihitiatirig actions to establish 
the episode and a set of actions to close it. A social episode 
is represented as a mutual belief state with the participants' 
roles specif iied. Each side holds one participant's beliefs, 
intentions and actions^ The entire episode resides within the 
larger belief space of one of the participants. 

There are also rules for operating on these representations. 
For example, we have found it useful to allow the represeritatibh 
of a belief about one's own belief. But in general we collapse 
this represeritatibri by invoking a rule of the form: 

SB SB X ===> SB X 

Figure 7 shows how using this rule arid the defiriitibri bf 
mutual belief brie cari derive various equivalerices i^ithiri the 
ridtatidri system, e.g., that although "P believes it is mutually 
believed that X" ^toit equivalent to "Q believes it is mutuaiiy 



Insert Figure 6 about here. 




Plans and Cdromiinication 14 



believed that X^" the cbrijiinctidri of these two is- equivalent to 
mutiial beliisf. Such manipulations are useful isince one of the 
most interesting things that has emerged in the examples that we 
have looked at is a shifting in and out of mutual belief — 
successive establishments of mutual belief, breakdowns, and then 
re-establishments . 



Todd and the toys 

In this section we look at a formal rep>resehtatibh of a 
dialogue to see how mutual belief is established and manipulated 
in order to achieve personal goals. This analysis is not some 
magical device to see into the participants' heads, but rather a 
way to represent one observer's interpretation (mine) which might 
be compared then to someone else's. Thus the analysis is 
necessarily limited to a point of view; 

The example, taken from a corpus of natural conversations 
(Hall, Linn & Nagy, 1984), is part of a conversation between a 
mother and her four and a half year old son. Let's call the boy, 
"Todd," and the mother, "Susan." Todd is in the living rbbm 
playing with his father's tools and his mbther is in ah adjbihihg 



insert figure 7 about here. 



room: 



1. 



Siisah: Gb ihtb your rbbin arid play, Todd, arid . 



2. 



[She comes into the room, 



3. 



and helps Todd put his father's tools away; 




Platis arid Cbimniiriicatibri 15 



4. Todd holds a tool.] 

5. S: What have you got now? 
6i That's not a toy! 

7. Todd: We're patting them back; 

8. S: Yoa're putting it back? Very . . . 

9. T: Can i have these batteries? 

10. S: No, 

11. yeah, the batteries . . . 

12. and how many times did Daddy say not to go in his kit? 
Our analysis will allow us to address certain puiszling 

features of the dialogue. For example^ notice that in lines 5, 
6, arid 8, Susari refers iri the singular^ whereas Tbdd^ iri lirie 7 
uses the plural to refer to the same dbject(s). Note also that 
iri lirie 7 Todd says that the two of them ("we") are piittirig away 
the objects, whereas, Susan iri line 8 says that it is Todd's 
("you") action which is in question. Are these examples of mis- 
coramunication? Do they just represent "noise" that one should 
expect in normal conversation? Do Todd and Susan see the 
object(s) in question as respectively singular and plural? Do 
they have different views about who is carrying but the actions 
in question? 

The arialysis to follow will make the case that^ far from 
beirig ribise^ such apparerit mis -matches are crucial tb 
uriderstaridirig what the dialogue is all about* In particular, the 




Plans arid Cbmmuriicatibri 16 



diffiarerice arises because of siihiiltariebus ^ but cbriflictirig 
attempts to manipulate mutual belief* 
Establishing Mutual Belief 

Consider the dialogue at the point at which Susan says, "Go 
into your room and play^ Todd." The essential thing Suisan 
believes at this pbirit is that they are iariteririg into a social 
episbde^ working together fbr a cbmmbri goal, which involves on 
TbHd's part, getting the tools in the box. Figure 8 shows her 
belief that Todd wants to achieve the state, "tools in boxi" 
Meanwhile, Todd believes that Susan believes that it's a mutual 
belief that that's exactly what they are doing. But he is still 
playing with th^ tooisi He also realizes that there is a 
conflict (represented by the dotted arrow) between his iriteritibri 
to play and the intention she wishes him to have — to get the 
tools into the box (Figure 9). 



Insert Figures 8 and 9 about here. 



Now let's consider Susan's view of the world in more detail i 
She believes Todd has the intention to play in his room, which 
means he must go In the room and play with his toys there i But 
she also wants him to get the tools in the boxi Achieving that 
intention will take away the toys Todd is playing with, which^ 
Susan understands, would be a Conflict fbr Todd if he were^ in 
fact, intending to play. But that cbriflict wbuld be resblved by 



^8 



Plans arid Cbmmuriicatibri 17 



the fact that brice he gets iritb his rbbm^ there will be bther 
toys to play with. 

Todd is holding a tool in a mariner that suggests play. He's 
clearly riot puttirig it away. When Susan realizes that Todd 
doesn't have the iriterition of putting away the tools her belief 
about their mutual belief changes . The social episode starts to 
dissolve, and she must re-establish it as a social fact. Figure 
10 says that Susan waits to re-achieve the mutual belief space 
that corresponds to this social episode; Within that intention 
is re-establishing Todd's intention to get the tools in the boxi 



- Insert Figure 10 about here. 



Recbgnizing the cbnflict between the iriteritibri she wants him 
tb have and the one she believes he has leads her tb act. She 
says (lines 5 and 5)^ "What have ybu gbt hbw? That's riot a toy!" 
This is an attempt to change his iriteritibri by a retrospective 
establishmerit of meariirig — defiriirig what counts as a toy. Shia ' s 
also redefining the action, saying that what they are doing is 
not just putting tools away, it is putting non-toys away. These 
assertions directly address Todd*s plan to play with^the tools. 
Susan is sayirig; "If you look at what ybu are tryirig tb db, 
ybu '11 see that it's contradictory tb the actual state bf 
affairs." Nbte that Susan is acting bri the basis bf her 
interpretatibri bf Tbdd's goals ^ fbrmirig hypotheses iri the same 
way that we^ as observers ^ are dbirig. 



IB 



Plans and Conunuriicatibri 18 



Todd (line 7) replies ^ "We're putting them back." He 
affirms that he wants to get the tools into the box; but to 
achieve that state he has to have the tddls in his hand. Having 
a tool in his hand is a necessary subgbal to achieve the goal 
that Susan wanted all along. He may still have the intention of 
playing^ but he clearly wants to achieve the state in which his 
mother believes that it's mutually believed that he iis putting 
the tools away (see Figure 11). More precisely, his use of "we" 
in line 7 suggests that he either believes, or more likely, Wants 
his mother to believe that they are engaged in a true social 
action in which they are both putting tools awayi Regardless of 
whether he really wants to be putting them away, he wants to make 
his mother think that that's what's happening. 



Susan continues (line 8) with a skeptical, "You're putting 
it back? Very ..." She wants to keep things moving along so 
she confirms his reassurance despite her doubts about his true 
intentions. Using "you" to refer to Todd and "it" to refer to 
the tool she focuses on the specific act of putting a dangerous 
tool awayi In effect, she asserts that if his statement and his 
physical actions support the assumption that the mutual belief 
state has been re-established, she will hot question him further. 
She asserts that it is mutually agreed they are putting the tools 



Insert Figure 11 about here. 




Plans arid Commurii cation 19 



awpy (as in Figure 8), even though she may believe at some ]evel 
that Todd still has the beliefs shown in Figure 11. Later (line 
12) she reinforces this settlemerit arid turris it into a teaching 
activity regarding what things count as toys. 
Apparent Miscbminunicatibn 

With the fbregoirig analysis in mind we can return now to 
consider the "them" versus "it" problem inentioned above. It may 
help in doing this to consider two hypothetical dialogues: 

(A) Susan: Let's put these 4:ools^ away. 

Todd: OK. Where should we put them ? 



Susan: Put the big ones on the table and the little 

ones in the boxi 

(B) Todd: Let's play with the hammer . 

Susan: OK. What should I do with it ? 

Todd: Use ±t^ to pound the table. 

Dialogue (A) manifests the Put-Away view of the world. Note 
that under this view all the references are plural^ i.e.^ they 
are to "tools" as a collection of undifferentiated objects ^ all 
of which are to be put away. Diaibgue (B) manifests the Play 
view. In contrast tb (A)^ the referenceis in (B) are to a 
singular bbject ("the hammer")* Playing implies assigning 
singular, significant status to the objects used in the play* 
How Todd thinks of the tool may be more important than its 
nominal function, in fact, its usual function is only one idea 
for how it might be used in play. 



21 



Planis and Communication 



20 



Our analysis of the real dialogue suggests that it is Todd 
who has the Play view and Susan who wants to Put-Away^ But 
notice how each refers to the tool(s). It is Todd who says, 
"We're putting them back,"; Susan who says^ " That ' s riot a toy" 
and "You're putting ±t^ back?". Thus they seem to switch roles* 

There are two levels of reference to consider here. First, 
whether the, let's say, hammer, is one of mariy tools or a 
singular, interesting toy is a matter of individual beliefs and 
intentions. Thus^ reference to it/ them is conditioned by what 
participants believe. In the social world we must hypothesize 
about a person's beliefs even to infer what objects are 
physically available for reference. 

Second, Susan and Todd are in a true dialogue in which they 
are each attempting to understand and alter each other's beliefs 
and intentions; What appears as a talking past each other is in 
fact a reflection of their coinciding attempts to take account of 
the other's beliefs. Thus, Susan^ who wants the two to be in a 
Put-Away social episode^ uses the singular reference ^ riot because 
she sees the hammer as a plaything^ but because she sees that 
Todd does ^ arid wishes by her focus bri it in his terms to more 
effectively alter his iriteritibris. Similarly, Tbdd, who is 
undoubtedly in Play mbde^ prbbably has specific plans for the 
hamffler as a singular, significant object. Nevertheless, he 
refers to ±t as part of a "them" because he sees that Susan is 
viewing it that way, and moreover, he sees that she intends for 
him to view it likewise i independent of his decision whether to 




Plans and Cbnununicatidri 21 



go along with her desires^ he decides it is liiseful strategically 
to appear to cooperate with her intention about what he should 
intend. His action appears in his form of reference. 

The strategic use of reference to the "tools" — Susan'js 
saying "it" because she believes Todd is thinking "they" when she 
wishes him to think otherwise (vice versa, in Todd's case) — is 
paralleled in the reference to the actor(s) involved^ Tnus, Todd 
says "we" because he believes Susan believes he is not engaged in 
the desired plan (i.e., that she believes that he doesn't intend 
to put away the tools) and he wants to have her change this 
belief about his ihtehtibhs. Susan says "you" for converse 



From this we see a resolution of the questions presented 
previously. Effective communication is not a function of exact 
refeience, even if such a thing were possible i Instead, apparent 
mis-reference may actually ref lect^ a high degree of coordination 
and understanding between participants who are operating in a 
dynamic social setting in which references are actions to 
communicate about and change one another's beliefs, intentions, 
and plans. 



The approach presented here has been applied in studies of 
natural conversations, stories, and Seisame Streei: skits. These 
studies raise a number of important questions about the role of 
the author (in the case of presented social interactions), the 



teas oris • 



Open Questions 




Plans and Commuhicatibri 22 



effects of modality, discourse conventions^ represehtatibh of 
process, the size of planning units, complexity and background 
knowledge. One interesting pheribmeridri that emerges in the 
studies dbne thus far coricerriirig the role of the author (or lack 
thereof). We saw this in our analysis of "Hansel and Gtetel" 
(Bruce & Newtnan, 1978): Hansel goes along a path dropping 
pebbles. But he stops each time he drops one so that his mother 
and father became suspicious and say, "What are you stopping for 
now?" Hansel replies, *"bh, I'm looking at the cat that's on the 
roof;*' They say "that's not a cat, that's just the sunlight 
reflecting on the roofi" 

This interaction is unnecessary from the point of view of 



just marking a trail. One reason it happens is that the authors 
are trying to highlight the impbrtaace bf Hansel's actibns fbr 
the reader, and alsb to indicate whb believes what. They show 
(1) that Hansel is deliberately dropping pebbles, (2) that he 
knows what's going on, and (3) that his parents don't. When 
we're analyzing ''Hansel and Gretel" we might temporarily ignore 
the author and just look at Hansel and Gtetel in their 
interartion with their parents; But such an analysis is 
necessarily tentative^ in general, one must integrate the 
character level analysis with analysis of the irjteraction of 
plans and beliefs between the author and the reader. 

We need cb investigate the extent tb which models bf 
planning can be used in rhetorical theory (see Brewer S 
Lichtensteiri^ 1982)^ in particular^ the relationship between 




Plans arid Cbrnmuriicatlbh 23 



aiithdt and reader iri terms of author* is goalis and reader's goals, 
author's beliefs about reader's beliefs, reader's beliefs about 
what the author believes about the reader, and so on. When there 
are stories within stories each of the levels adds two more 
participants, each of whom has beliefs about each other, and also 
about characters in their stories (Bruce, 1981). 

Closely related to questions about author/reader 
relationship ar^questions about discourse structure and 
r.onventioni How much does the carrying out of a plan by a 
character cons train the discourse structure that can be produced? 
How do we separate the conventional aspects of a story (e.g., 
setting^ character stereotypes^ and so oh) from the uriderlyihg 
plans? 

There have been some efforts at computer simulation of 
social planning (Cohen & Perrauit, 1979; Perrauit & Alien, 1980). 
This work addresses many of the limitations of the robot model 
work (see Sidner, Bates, Bobrow, Goodman, Haas, Ingria, Israel, 
McAiiester, Moser, Schmoize, & Viiain, 1983)^ Designing systems 
that can cope with belief-based models is a formidable task. 

Another question concerns the size of planning units: To 
what level should we break down actions? For example, should the 
action of putting away tools be taken as a unit? It is a subpart 
ox the action of going into the bedroom to play has subparts 

such as picking up tools and putting them in a box. The 
appropriate level of representation appears to be a consequence 



V 




Plans and Connnunication 24 



of the interactibri itself. This raises important questions about the 
formal representation of plans; 

Another interesting question regards complexity: Prdducirig 
plans arid recognizing plans are both complex tasks, but what is 
the main contributor to complexity? Newman (1982) has analyzed 
several Sesame Street skits (starring Bert and Ernie) showing 
various degrees of complexity in the skits themselves arid in 
viewers' interpretations. For example^ brie skit has six distinct 
interpretations. From this work it appears that the degree of 
embedding of interitibris and beliefs is riot the primary source of 
complexity differences. What appears more salient is the 
complexity bf beliefs that need to be maintained outside of the 
mutual belief space. 

A firial question is how background knowledge comes into 
play. In the Sesame Street skits it helps to know that Ernie 
typically tricks Bert, despite Bert's greater knowledge abbut 
some ddmairis. Similarly, in "Hansel and Gretel," beliefs about 
cutting wood, building fires, and so on, are crucial both fbr 
characters in the story and the reader. 

Summary 

This paper has examiried the role bf plari recognition and 
plan generation iri cbmmUriicatibri. Orie idea that emerges from 
this examiriatibri is that people in interaction with others appear 
tb brgariize their perceptions of a social situation in terms of 
plans. They do this even when the others' plans are poorly 
fbrmulated. Tht;y use their models of pthers' plans in 

2G 

o 

ERIC 



Plans arid Cbmihuriicatibri 25 



f btmulatirig their own plans. Much of what occurs in discburse 
centers on a continual communication about arid ref drinulatibri of 
dile's own platis and one's models of others* plans, 

A second idea that emerges is that formal methods for 
describing and analyzing plans are now available. Such methods 
allow us to be more explicit in oar hypotheses about social 
interaction i Unf or tunateiy ^ the classical formalisms for ^ 
planning are derived from a robot world model that fails to 
generalize sof f icient3:y to account for typical human planning 
situations • 

By pushing the classical model we come to the third main 
idea of this chapter, namely, that a model of planning with 
cbncepts such as mutual belief at its core may take us further in 
bur studies bf discburse arid bther fbrms of social interaction. 

In particular, such a model addresses a number of 
characteristics central to human planning: Plans are essentially \^ 
social, involving cooperation and/or conflict between t \ 

: , : \ -\ 

individuals i They operate in a space of social facts, not just \ / 

physical states i As such, tfsey are built upon participants* 

beliefs and their beliefs about each others* beliefs. The 

classical model's state variaW.es, operators and goals are then 

beliefs of participants that evblve throughout the interaction. 

This is brie reason why the humari plaririirig wbrld emphasizes talk 

about plaris ^ ribt just design arid execution of them. Horebver^ 

generatibn and recogriitibri of plaris becbme necessarily 



EKLC 



Planis and Cbmiauriicatibh 26 

iritermirigled since each indtviduai's plan is only part of a 
larger social plan. Finally, the human plan hais a historical 
character to it. Each action produces irreversible changes in 
others' beliefs^ including, of coarse ^ the belief that the given 
action was carried but. 

Using a mutual belief model that attempts to take account of 
these characteristics bf human plans we looked at a simple 
dialogue; It is clear frbm the analysis that elements of the 
model, e.g., mutual belief, social episode, goal conflict, and so 
on, are necessary for modeling such dialbgues^ but nbt 
sufficient. More complex dialogues and texts will uhdbubtedly 
require further elaboration of the model. 



Plans and Cbminuhlcatlbh 27 



References 

Brewer, W. F. , & Lichtenstein, E. H. (1982). Stories are to 

entertain: A structural-effect theory of stbriias. Journal of 

Pragmatics ^ 5^, 473-486. 
BrucCi B. C. (1980). Analysis of iritiaractirig i^^aris as a guidia to 

the uriderstaridirig of story striicturia. Po etics , 3^, 295-311. 
Bruce^ B. C. (1981). A social iriteractibri mbdial bf riaadirig. 

Discburse Prbcesses ^ 4^^ 273-311. 
Bruce, B. C. , & Newman, D. (1978). Interacting plans. Cogniti ye 

Science , 195-233. 
Clark, H. H. , & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite reference and 

mutuai knowledge i in Ai Ki Joshi, ii Sag, & B. Webber 

(Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding . Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press. 
Cohen, P. R. (1981). The heed fbr idehtif icatibh as a planned 

actibh. Prbceedihgs bf the Ihterhatibhal Jbiht Cbhf erehce an 

Artificial Inte!L14g^nce . Varicbuver, B.C. 
Cbheh, P. R., & Perrault, C. R. (1979). Elements bf a plari-based 

thebry bf speech acts. Cognitive Science , 3-, 177-212. 
Gearhart, M. , & Newman, D. (1980) . Isearning to draw a picture: 

The social context of an individual activity. D i scour s e 

Processes , 3-, 169-184. 
Hail, W. S., Linn, R. , & Nagy, W. (1984). Spoken words: Effects of 

sttaation and social group on oral word usage and frequency c 

Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 



29 



Plans and Connnanication 28 

Miller, G. A., Gaianter, E; , & Pribram, K; Hi (i960)i Plans and 

the stractare of behavior * New York: Holt. 
Newman, D. (I98i). Children's unders tahding of strategic 

interaction ^ Unpublished doctoral dissertation. City 

University of New York. 
jPerrault, C. R. , & Allen, J. F. (1980). A plan-based analysis of 

indirect speech acts. American Journal of C bmpu t a t i ohal 

Linguistics , ^, 167-182. 
Schiffer^ S. R. (1972). Meaning . Ldnddri: Oxford University Press. 
Sidrierj C. , Bates, M. , Bdbrow, R. , Goodman, B., Haas, A., ingria, 

R. , Israel, D. , McAllester, D. , Moser, M. , Schmolze, J., & 

Villain, M. (1983). Researc h ±n know ledge representation for 

natural language wxder-^tanding . Cambridge, MA: Bolt fieranek 

and Newman, Inc., Report No. 5421, August. 
Sidner, C. L. , & Israel, D. J. (1981). Recognizing intended 

meaning and speaker's plans. Proceedings of the 

International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence ^ 

Vancouver, B.C., August. 
Wilensky, R. (1981). Meta-plahriirig. Representing arid using 

knowledge about plaririirig iri problem sdlvirig arid riatural 

language uriders taridirig. Cognitiv e Scieric i e , ^, 197-234. 



30 



Plans and eommunication 29 



Figure- Captions 

Figure J_. Initial state in the robot world. 

Figure _2, Goal state in the robot world. 

Figure _3. Represehtatibh of beliefs: Person P believes 

prbpbsitibh X. 

Figure 4. Represiahtatibn of iritiaritidns : P intends to achieve X. 

Figure 5. Represehtatibri bf iritehtibhs : P iritiands to maintain 
X. 

Figure 6_* A social episode. 

Figure X. Equivalences among belief representations. 

Figure -8-. Susan's initial model: Cooperative action; 

Figure 9. Todd's initial model: Goal conflict. 
Figure 10 * Susan's recognition of the goal conflict. 
Figure 11 . Todd's goal of conflict resolution. 



31 




V 



32 




33 




34 




35 

o 

ERIC 




ERIC 



3B 



P's role 



VB 



PB X 
QB X 
PB QB X 
QB PB X 



QB X 

PB X 
QB PB X 
PB QB X 



PB X 

QB X_ 
PB QB X 
QB PB X 



PB 


PB 


X 


QB <QB 


X 


PB 


QB 


X 


/QB iPB 


X 


PB 


PB 


QB X 


iQB QB 


PB X 


PB 


QB 


PB X 


QB; PB 


PB X 




• 











1 




ERIC 




39 

• / 

t * i 

o 

ERIC 




41 



ERIC 




42 



ERIC 



