A  SURVEY  OF  ARCHITECTURES 
FOR  DISTRIBUTED  ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 


Technical  Note  424 


June  1988 


By;  Todd  R.  Davies,  Computer  Scientist 

Representation  and  Reasoning  Program 
Artificial  Intelligence  Center 


APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE: 
DISTRIBUTION  UNLIMITED 


This  paper  was  written  during  the  first  three  months  of  1987,  and  was  included  in  a  study 
of  the  feasibility  of  constructing  distributed  artificial  intelligence  testbeds,  funded  by  an 
IR&D  authorization  to  Tom  Garvey.  Its  purpose  was  to  list  various  activities  undertaken 
through  early  1987  in  the  eirea  of  DAI  systems.  Because  of  interest  expressed  by  persons 
outside  of  that  project,  the  report  is  released  here  as  a  technical  note  with  very  little 
revision.  Because  of  the  time  delay  it  does  not  for  the  most  part  include  research  done 
during  the  last  year  and  a  half. 

This  research  was  also  supported  in  part  by  the  Office  of  Naval  Research  under  Contract 
No.  N00014-85-C-0251,  SRI  Project  8342. 

The  views  and  conclusions  contsdned  in  this  document  cire  those  of  the  author  and  should 
not  be  interpreted  as  representative  of  the  official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of 
the  Office  of  Naval  Research,  or  the  United  States  Government. 


333  Ravenswood  Ave.  •  Menlo  Park,  CA  94025 
i415j  326-6200  •  TWX:  910-373-2046  •  Telex:  334-486 


Report  Documentation  Page 

Form  Approved 

0MB  No.  0704-0188 

Public  reporting  burden  for  the  collection  of  information  is  estimated  to  average  1  hour  per  response,  including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  data  sources,  gathering  and 
maintaining  the  data  needed,  and  completing  and  reviewing  the  collection  of  information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  aspect  of  this  collection  of  information, 
including  suggestions  for  reducing  this  burden,  to  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  Information  Operations  and  Reports,  1215  Jefferson  Davis  Highway,  Suite  1204,  Arlington 

VA  22202-4302.  Respondents  should  be  aware  that  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  no  person  shall  be  subject  to  a  penalty  for  failing  to  comply  with  a  collection  of  information  if  it 
does  not  display  a  currently  valid  0MB  control  number. 

1.  REPORT  DATE 

JUN  1988 

2.  REPORT  TYPE 

3.  DATES  COVERED 

00-06-1988  to  00-06-1988 

4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

5a.  CONTRACT  NUMBER 

A  Survey  of  Architectures  for  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence 

5b.  GRANT  NUMBER 

5c.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT  NUMBER 

6.  AUTHOR(S) 

5d.  PROJECT  NUMBER 

5e.  TASK  NUMBER 

5f.  WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

SRI  International, 333  Ravenswood  Avenue, Menlo  Park, CA, 94025 

8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 

REPORT  NUMBER 

9.  SPONSORING/MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

10.  SPONSOR/MONITOR’S  ACRONYM(S) 

11.  SPONSOR/MONITOR’S  REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12.  DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 

13.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

14.  ABSTRACT 

15.  SUBJECT  TERMS 

16.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF: 

17.  LIMITATION  OF 
ABSTRACT 

18.  NUMBER 
OF  PAGES 

46 

19a.  NAME  OF 

RESPONSIBLE  PERSON 

a.  REPORT 

unclassified 

b.  ABSTRACT 

unclassified 

c.  THIS  PAGE 

unclassified 

standard  Form  298  (Rev.  8-98) 

Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std  Z39-18 


Contents 


1  Introduction  to  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  2 

1.1  Motivations  and  Distinction  from  Parallelism .  2 

1.2  Varieties  of  DAI  .  3 

1.3  Survey  of  Approaches  to  DAI  Problems  .  6 

1.4  DAI  Research  at  SRI .  9 

1.5  Traffic  Monitoring  a.s  the  Prototype  Domain .  11 

1.6  Summary  of  Main  Issues  and  Problems . 12 

1.6.1  Issues: . 12 

1.6.2  Problems: . 13 

2  Testbeds  and  Development  Tools  for  DAI  15 

2.1  Survey  of  Testbeds .  15 

2.1.1  University  of  Massachusetts’  “Distributed  Vehicle  Monitoring 

Testbed”  . 16 

2.1.2  Rand  Corporation’s  Framework  for  Distributed  Pvroblem  Solving  20 

2.1.3  DREA’s  CNET . 21 

2.1.4  WPI’s  Distributed  Sensor  Networks  Testbed . 22 

2.1.5  GTE’s  Experimental  Testbed . 22 

2.1.6  Stanford’s  Formal  Framework  for  Rational  Interaction . 23 

2.1.7  InteUicorp ’s  Distributed  Expert  System  Simulation  Testbed  ...  24 

2.1.8  Clarkson  University’s  Testbed  for  Monitoring  and  Controlling 

Large  Communications  Systems . .  24 

2.1.9  Boeing’s  Experiments  on  Optimal  Cooperation  of  Knowledge 

Sources . 24 

2.2  Survey  of  Development  Tools . 25 

2.2.1  AGORA  (CMU) . 25 

2.2.2  MACE  (USC) . 26 

2.2.3  Concurrent  GESBT  (SAIC) . 26 

2.2.4  ABE  (Teknowledge) . 27 

2.2.5  AF  (WPI) . 28 

2.2.6  Advanced  Architectures  Project  (Stanford) . 28 

2.2.7  Connectionist  Simulator  (Rochestor) . 29 

2.3  Conclusions  About  Testbeds  and  Environments . 29 


1 


Abstract 


This  report  surveys  literature  and  research  in  the  field  of  distributed  artificial 
intelligence  (DAI)  and  provides  an  overview  of  computer  architectures  particularly 
suited  to  such  research.  It  concentrates  on  work  to  date  that  has  involved  the 
construction  of  testbeds  and  development  tools  for  DAI.  It  tries  to  draw  some 
lessons  from  these  efforts  and  suggests  ways  in  which  testbeds,  which  heretofor 
have  been  used  primarily  for  experimentation,  might  be  used  in  the  full  course  of 
system  development. 


1 


1 


Introduction  to  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence 


This  report  surveys  literature  and  research  in  the  field  of  distributed  artificial  intel¬ 
ligence  (DAI)  and  provides  an  overview  of  computer  architectures  particularly  suited 
to  such  research.  It  concentrates  on  work  to  date  that  has  involved  the  construction 
of  testbeds  and  development  tools  for  DAI.  It  tries  to  draw  some  lessons  from  these 
efforts  and  suggests  ways  in  which  testbeds,  which  heretofor  have  been  used  primarily 
for  experimentation,  might  be  used  in  the  full  course  of  system  development. 

1.1  Motivations  and  Distinction  from  Parallelism 

The  most  general  thing  that  can  be  said  about  research  to  which  the  term  DAI  is  ap¬ 
plied  is  that  it  aU  involves  the  attempt  to  understand  and  program  intelligent  behavior 
in  some  distributed  context.  For  the  most  part,  the  nodes  of  the  distributed  system  are 
processors  or  computers  that  axe  viewed  as  “agents.”  The  agents  interact  with  each 
other,  and,  in  some  cases,  respond  to  a  centralized  controlling  agent,  but  the  “intelli¬ 
gence”  in  the  system  may  be  displayed  by  the  whole  system,  by  the  individual  agents, 
or  at  both  levels.  There  seems  to  be  an  implicit  distinction  in  the  literature  between 
work  on  parallel  processing  and  work  on  distributed  processing  and  problem  solving. 
Use  of  the  term  ‘parallel’  to  describe  am  approach  to  a  problem  indicates  that  the 
emphasis  is  on  performance  goals,  i.e.  eliminating  the  bottlenecks  of  serial  processing. 
When  an  approach  is  instead  described  as  “distributed,”  one  can  usually  infer  that 
the  motivation  is  an  increase  in  functionality  of  some  type.  For  instance,  a  distributed 
system  for  solving  a  problem  may  be  more  reliable  than  a  centralized  system,  because 
in  the  distributed  case  the  effects  of  a  failure  are  to  a  greater  extent  limited  to  just  the 
node  at  which  it  occurs.  A  distributed  design  may  be  better  in  other  ways  for  solving 
a  particular  problem,  e.g.  by  providing  a  better  fit  to  a  partitioned  problem,  by  being 
more  extensible  should  the  problem  change  or  grow  in  scale,  or  by  being  more  modu¬ 
lar  and  therefore  easier  to  design  and  debug  [102,111,33,19,21].  Improved  efficiency  is 
often  one  of  the  goals  as  well — but  the  motivations  usually  go  beyond  efficiency  alone 
when  one  speaks  of  “distributed,”  as  opposed  to  “parciUel,”  processing. 

Much  of  the  motivation  for  studying  DAI  comes  from  a  desire  to  build  intelligence 
into  systems  that  are  already  distributed.  Distributed  databases,  networks  of  work¬ 
stations,  and  the  like,  already  exist,  because  localized  computers  provide  guaranteed 
response  times  and  dedicated  power  [102,69].  Getting  these  systems  to  communicate 
intelligently  is  a  DAI  problem.  So  in  some  cases,  a  DAI  approach  is  a  necessity  rather 
than  a  choice  if  one  is  to  apply  AI  to  a  problem  at  aU. 


2 


1.2  Varieties  of  DAI 


The  various  problems  being  worked  on  under  the  rubric  of  DAI  can  be  confusing 
to  the  uninitiated.  Work  reported  at  the  seven  DAI  workshops  held  through  1986 
[19,21,33,111,41,112]^  has  ranged  in  its  focus  from  neural  networks  to  small  numbers 
of  workstations.  Sometimes,  the  distributed  nature  arises  from  decomposing  a  single 
problem  into  multiple  subproblems,  and  sometimes  the  distributed  ness  is  the  main 
problem  that  arises  from  multiple  agents  or  processes  with  different,  possibly  conflicting 
goals.  Sometimes,  the  theory  or  techniques  proposed  focus  on  how  an  autonomous 
agent  should  behave  in  an  environment  with  other  intelligent  agents,  and  sometimes 
they  focus  on  how  the  “society”  of  agents  should  be  organized  to  achieve  globally 
desirable  results.  The  agents  can  be  of  relatively  equal  status,  or  subservient  to  a 
central  controller  to  whom  they  report.  They  can  be  specialized  or  general  problem 
solvers,  simple  or  complex,  numerous  or  few,  benevolent  or  competitive,  tightly  coupled 
to  others  or  decoupled,  communicative  or  silent,  active  or  passive — in  short,  the  space 
of  possibilities  is  very  large.  What  is  common  to  all  the  approaches  is  only  that  they 
involve  multiple  processes. 

Nonetheless,  the  field  can  be  decomposed  into  a  manageable  number  of  subareas. 
The  following  list  of  nine  such  subareas  of  DAI  is  an  attempt  to  distinguish  between  the 
types  of  problems  being  worked  on  under  headings  that  have  emerged  in  the  literature. 
The  subfields  are  given  in  rough  order  (from  most  to  least)  of  how  representative  they 
are  of  work  that  has  been  called  “DAI.” 

1.  Distributed  Problem  Solving.  Much  of  the  work  in  DAI  has  involved  building 
systems  in  which  two  or  more  agents  work  together  to  solve  a  single  problem.  In  this 
subfield,  the  main  problem  is  therefore  how  to  achieve  cooperation  in  the  service  of 
a  common  goal.  The  agents  usually  have  complex  capabilities  of  their  own,  so  that 
much  of  the  processing  is  done  locally.  Typical  issues  include  when  and  from  whom 
agents  should  seek  help,  how  the  group  or  its  “director(s)”  (if  any)  decide  that  the 
problem  is  solved,  how  different  agents  can  work  on  separate  parts  of  the  problem 
semi-independently,  when  an  agent  should  interrupt  its  own  problem  solving  activities 
and  answer  a  request,  when  it  should  volunteer  information,  who  should  have  control 
over  what,  and  so  forth.  Examples  of  systems  that  have  been  built  for  (and  theories 
of)  the  cooperative  solution  of  problems  include  [20,22,11,38,34,81,24]. 

2.  Distributed  Processing.  Randy  Davis  distinguishes  the  distributed  problem¬ 
solving  paradigm  discussed  above  from  that  of  distributed  processing.  Davis  writes, 
“Typically,  for  instance,  most  of  the  processing  in  such  [distributed  processing]  systems 
is  done  at  a  central  site  and  remote  processors  are  limited  to  basic  data  collection.  Con¬ 
trol  is  not  distributed  and  the  processors  do  not  cooperate  in  a  substantial  manner.”[19] 
The  goal  for  such  systems  is  often  to  achieve  fault  tolerance  in  information  gathering. 

*The  1983  conference,  held  at  the  University  of  Massachusetts,  was  not  reported. 


3 


In  addition  to  issues  such  as  how  to  combine  evidence  and  otherwise  integrate  data 
from  multiple  “knowledge  sources”  (esp.  sensors)  that  can  have  different  capabilities 
and  varying  reliability,  there  has  been  a  growing  interest  in  this  subfield  in  doing  more 
of  the  interpretation  processing  at  the  site  of  the  data  collection  [102].  This  makes  for 
more  of  a  DAI-flavored  problem.  Still,  the  distinction  from  distributed  problem  solving 
is  worth  noting:  The  knowledge  sources  work  independently  of  one  another  and  report 
their  results  to  a  central  agent  who  tries  to  make  use  of  these  results,  or  to  a  central 
representation  like  a  blackboard.  Examples  of  this  work,  most  of  which  has  been  in 
the  domain  of  perception,  include  [36,37]. 

3.  Multiagent  Planning  (Distributed).  Much  of  the  work  in  this  subfield  could 
also  be  called  distributed  problem  solving.  However,  whereas  distributed  problem 
solving  may  include  tasks  like  monitoring  in  which  agents  are  passive  observers  of 
the  environment  and  other  agents,  in  distributed  planning  problems  the  agents  can 
take  actions  that  affect  the  world  and  thereby  change  it  for  other  agents.  Another 
distinction  from  the  distributed  problem  solving  paradigm  described  above  is  that  the 
problems  of  multiagent  planning  exist  also  in  contexts  in  which  the  agents  are  not 
necessarily  cooperating  to  solve  a  common  goal.  The  focus  is  on  an  individual  agent’s 
goals  and  how  they  can  be  achieved  when  other  agents  and  processes  are  around.  The 
traditional  problems  of  planning  are  therefore  of  interest,  including  how  to  compute 
the  effects  (and,  importantly,  the  noneffects)  of  one’s  actions,  how  to  know  when  an 
action  is  possible,  and  how  to  plan  to  achieve  a  goal  when  there  axe  other  agents  to 
factor  in  and  to  make  use  of.  Examples  of  research  is  this  subfield  include  [50,70,20]. 

4.  Planning  for  Multiple  Agents  (Centralized).  In  this  paradigm,  the  planning 
process  itself  is  not  distributed.  The  issues  rather  focus  on  how  an  agent — either  a 
controller  or  the  designer — can  coordinate  multiple  agents  to  suit  particular  needs. 
Typical  problems  include:  how  to  decompose  a  problem,  aissign  tasks,  allocate  re¬ 
sources,  and  schedule,  and  also  who  should  be  allowed  to  communicate  with  whom, 
and  how  much.  Examples  of  work  addressing  these  issues  include  [45,46,75,76].  This 
differs  from  distributed  processing  (see  above)  because  the  agents  perform  actions 
rather  than  just  gathering  information  and  interpreting  it. 

5.  Multiagent  Domain  Modeling.  Just  as  there  is  a  subfield  of  distributed  systems 
that  deals  with  formalisms  and  specification  languages  for  concurrent  processing  (e.g. 
Petri  nets,  data  flow  graphs)  [88],  one  of  the  problems  to  be  addressed  in  DAI  is 
how  to  describe  temporal  and  causal  relationships  between  actions  and  events  in  the 
multiagent  context.  This  area  complements  work  in  multiagent  planning  by  addressing 
problems  faced  by  the  designer  of  a  distributed  planning  system  (or  the  scheduler  in 
the  centralized  case),  given  reasoning  and  planning  capabilities  on  the  part  of  the 
agents.  Typical  issues  include  how  to  avoid  interference  between  concurrent  actions, 
what  constraints  should  hold  across  agents  for  particular  actions,  how  to  represent 
these  constraints  and  detect  interference,  and  how  the  global  behavior  of  the  system  of 


4 


agents  can  be  predicted  from  facts  about  local  behavior  at  different  nodes.  Examples 
of  this  work  include  [77,48,92,23,116]. 

6.  Intelligent  Communication  Between  Agents.  Work  in  this  subfield  addresses  the 
planning  and  interpretation  of  communication  acts  that  take  place  between  agents.  In 
this  subfield  especially,  one  of  the  agents  might  be  a  person  who  is  either  the  generator 
of  an  utterance  to  be  interpreted  by  a  computer,  or  the  recipient  of  a  communication 
initiated  by  the  computer.  The  “communication”  subfield  therefore  encompasses  most 
research  in  computational  linguistics,  though  the  problems  involved  when  all  of  the 
parties  in  a  communication  are  artificial  makes  it  especially  pertinent  to  DAI.  Typical 
issues  include  what  message  to  send  to  convey  an  intention,  desire,  or  belief,  how 
to  understand  a  received  message  in  such  terms,  and  how  to  plan  speech  acts  and 
reason  about  the  effects  of  these  on  the  receiver.  Some  examples  of  this  research  are 
[12,13,1,95,96]. 

7.  Reasoning  About  Other  Agents.  This  subfield  overlaps  substantially  with  that 
of  intelligent  communication  between  agents,  but  also  includes  reasoning  that  is  not 
based  on  communication  from  an  agent  (e.g.  reasoning  based  on  observed  behavior  or 
on  beliefs  about  the  agent  and  the  situation)  as  well  as  reasoning  about  the  effects  on 
other  agents  of  actions  other  than  communicative  ones — for  example,  believing  that 
another  agent  has  an  intention  and  knowing  that  a  particular  action  will  interfere  with 
that  intention.  Both  this  and  the  subfield  above  apply  especially,  but  not  exclusively, 
to  distributed  planning  (they  could  also  be  problems  in  distributed  interpretation  or 
monitoring  tasks,  for  instance).  Some  typical  issues  are  how  to  infer  things  about 
the  plans,  beliefs,  and  goals  of  other  agents,  how  to  compute  the  effects  of  actions  on 
these,  and  how  beliefs  about  other  agents  and  their  plans  should  affect  the  agent’s  own 
reasoning.  Examples  of  work  in  the  area  include  [72,95,96]. 

8.  Rational  Interaction.  This  subfield  gets  its  name  from  Jeff  Rosenschein’s  Stan¬ 
ford  Ph.D.  thesis  [102].  Unlike  distributed  problem  solving,  this  work  assumes  that 
agents  do  not  have  a  common  goal  or  problem  to  solve,  but  rather  must  find  ways  to 
resolve  conflicts  between  their  goals  by  negotiation  and  compromise.  Some  issues  that 
arise  are  what  is  rational  (e.g.,  in  a  game- theoretic  sense)  for  an  agent  to  agree  to,  and 
what  mechanisms  for  agreement  and  deal  enforcement  should  be  used.  Some  papers 
on  this  topic  include  [102,44,42,43,100,101]. 

9.  Massively  Parallel  Processing,  Some  work  on  systems  with  thousands  of  nodes, 
e.g.  relaxation  labeling,  neural  networks,  and  semantic  networks,  has  been  deemed 
to  be  a  part  of  DAI.  In  general,  the  “agents”  in  such  systems  are  extemely  simple 
homunculi,  and  the  intelligence  is  intended  to  arise  from  the  ways  in  which  they  are 
connected  and  changed  at  each  iteration.  For  this  reason,  the  philosophy  behind  this 
approach  is  often  called  “connectionism.”  Typical  issues  involve  how  the  network 
topology  should  be  set  up,  how  each  node  should  respond  to  its  inputs,  how  connections 
should  adapt  to  the  data  over  time,  and  how  to  get  convergence  to  an  optimal  state. 


5 


The  literature  in  this  area  is  very  large,  and  growing.  The  work  that  has  appeared  in 
the  DAI  workshops  includes  [3,94,117,106]. 

Most  of  the  papers  that  have  appeared  in  DAI  over  the  last  decade  and  a  half  can 
best  be  categorized  as  being  in  one  of  these  nine  subareas  of  the  field.  But  projects 
and  systems  often  involve  tackling  more  than  one  of  them  at  a  time.  In  the,  next  two 
subsections,  specific  projects  are  surveyed  that  have  given  rise  to  important  ideas  in 
each  of  the  subfields. 

1.3  Survey  of  Approaches  to  DAI  Problems 

The  literature  of  DAI  is  much  too  large  to  summarize  in  a  way  that  mentions  all  of 
the  projects  that  have  been  undertaken.  Instead,  this  subsection  are  lists  what  might 
be  considered  the  major  results  in  the  field — programs,  techniques,  and  findings  that 
have  had  an  impact  beyond  the  projects  from  which  they  arose.  The  presentation  is 
chronological,  but  it  omits  all  work  on,  and  findings  from,  testbeds  and  development 
environments  for  DAI  (covered  in  greater  detail  in  section  2)  as  well  as  the  work  that 
has  been  done  at  SRI  (see  subsection  1.4).  Other  summaries  of  DAI  include  [64]  and 
[102]. 

The  first  paper  in  AI  to  address  distributed  systems  of  agents  appears  to  have  been 
that  of  V.  L.  Stefanuk  [114],  which  discussed  theoretical  aspects  of  systems  whose  main 
characteristics  are  “the  antagonism  of  aims  of  different  elements  of  the  system  and  com¬ 
paratively  small  information  concerning  the  actions  of  other  elements.”  However,  work 
that  both  embodied  the  spirit  of  DAI  and  had  important  subsequent  influence  did  not 
appear  until  two  years  later,  in  1973  [26,59].  This  initial  research  at  Carnegie  Mellon 
and  at  MIT  concerned  viewing  systems  implemented  in  single  computers  as  collections 
of  multiple  agents,  with  the  clear  intention  of  making  the  abstract  description  reflect 
concrete  implementations  at  a  later  point.  There  followed  a  period  of  developing  more 
general  techniques  and  designs  for  multiagent  systems,  using  multiple  processors,  and, 
later,  frameworks  for  experimenting  with  and  reasoning  about  these  techniques  and 
designs,  as  well  as  principles  for  building  distributed  AI  systems.  There  is  still  much 
work  to  be  done.  What  follows  is  a  listing  and  summary  of  the  major  developments 
(excluding  testbeds  and  work  done  at  SRI)  in  DAI. 

1.  HEARSAY  and  Its  Successors  (CMU,Rand,  UMass,  WPI).  HEARSAY  was  a  sys¬ 
tem  for  speech  understanding  originally  implemented  as  a  small  number  of  coroutines 
realized  as  separate  jobs  in  a  PDP-10  [26,97].  The  different  “processes”  communicated 
with  each  other  on  a  shared  data  structure,  which  in  HEARSAY-II  became  known  as 
the  “blackboard”  [27,28].  The  idea  of  the  blackboard  was  that  its  contents  represented 
the  system  of  knowledge  sources’  (KSs’)  hypothesis  about  the  received  signal  at  any 
given  moment.  The  hypotheses  existed  at  different  levels,  so  for  instance  a  “phoneme 


6 


hypothesizer”  knowledge  source  would  post  on  the  blackboard  alternative  pronuncia¬ 
tions  of  a  word  hypothesized  at  the  lexical  level  but  not  yet  supported  by  hypotheses 
at  the  level  of  surface  phonemes.  The  blackboard  has  become  an  important  commu¬ 
nication  device  for  distributed  processing  systems,  allowing  multiple  “expert”  agents 
to  work  in  parallel  on  a  given  problem  and  to  work  from  each  others’  hypotheses.  The 
approach  of  blackboards  has  been  extended  by  others  (e.g.  [57])  to  active,  planning 
systems,  and  has  been  employed  in  the  expert-system-building  tool  HEARSAY-III  [29]. 

2.  Actors  and  Sprites  (MIT).  “Actors”  are  Carl  Hewitt’s  metaphor  for  program¬ 
ming  objects,  emphasizing  “the  inseparability  of  control  and  data  flow”  [59].  He  and 
his  colleagues  have  argued  that  all  behavior  can  be  analyzed  in  terms  of  the  fundamen¬ 
tal  action  of  one  object  (actor)  sending  a  message  to  another.  Act2  [60]  is  an  attempt 
to  combine  the  descriptive  character  of  declarative  languages  with  the  active  character 
of  procedural  ones.  Hewitt  believes  that  logic,  with  its  “truth-theoretic  semantics,”  is 
an  insufficient  language  for  building  what  he  calls  “open  systems”  [61],  which  appears 
to  be  a  synonym  for  distributed  systems.  As  an  alternative  he  advocates  “due  pro¬ 
cess  reasoning”  and  “message  passing  semantics,”  in  which  actors  construct  arguments 
and  build  cases  for  hypotheses  to  be  presented  to  an  “arbiter,”  and  the  meaning  of 
a  message  is  the  set  of  effects  it  has  on  other  actors.  Hewitt  and  W.  A.  Kornfield’s 
“scientific  community  metaphor”  [73]  advocates  a  form  of  distributed  problem  solv¬ 
ing  that  is  modeled  on  the  scientific  community,  with  proposals  and  sponsors,  and  in 
which  the  KSs  are  called  “sprites.”  Although  Hewitt’s  terminology  is  often  confusing, 
his  views  find  expression  in  the  work  of  many  others  in  DAI  and  connectionism,  and 
he  has  been  advocating  them  for  a  long  time.  A  problem  that  remains,  even  if  he  is 
right  about  how  to  go  about  solving  DAI  problems,  is  that  of  actually  solving  them. 

3.  Beings  and  Agendas  (Stanford).  The  antecedent  to  Doug  Lenat’s  AM  program 
(described  below)  was  one  called  PUPfi,  which  consisted  of  “a  community  of  inter¬ 
acting  modules,”  (with  more  complex  structure  than  Hewitt’s  actors)  called  “beings.” 
The  beings  had  a  uniform  architecture  but  were  each  designed  “to  simulate  a  partic¬ 
ular  expert  in  some  small  domain”  [79].  PUP6  tried  to  use  modules,  who  were  each 
“expert”  in  some  aspect  of  programming,  to  synthesize  Lisp  programs.  In  the  subse¬ 
quent  Automated  Mathematician  (AM)  program  [80],  Lenat  introduced  the  additional 
notion  of  “agendas”  as  a  global  data  structure  in  the  same  vein  as  blackboards.  Using 
agendas  as  a  communication  scheme  for  distributed  systems  allows  each  agent  or  mod¬ 
ule  to  “share  evidence  about  the  merits  of  performing  various  tasks,”  although  “no 
module  need  have  any  knowledge  of  how  the  other  modules  work  or  what  knowledge 
they  contain”  [99]. 

4.  Contract  Nets  (Stanford, DREA, MIT).  Contract  nets  were  proposed  by  Reid 
Smith  [107]  as  an  organizing  strategy  for  distributed  problem  solving.  The  idea  is  that 
the  problems  to  be  solved  are  announced  to  all  the  agents,  who  bid  to  solve  them, 
an  idea  later  echoed  in  the  “scientific  community  metaphor”  of  Kornfield  and  Hewitt. 


7 


Some  problems  that  have  been  or  might  be  pointed  out  for  this  approach  are  the  lack 
of  fault  tolerance  if  the  central  dispensor  becomes  disabled,  and  the  lack  of  redundancy 
in  the  resulting  assignment  [102],  the  communication  overhead  [64],  and  the  lack  of 
automatic  dispensation  when  such  dispensation  is  appropriate.  Jeff  Rosenschein  has 
pointed  out  that  all  of  these  problems  axe  solvable  if  the  formalism  is  modified  [102]. 

5.  Anarchy  versus  Hierarchy  (Rand).  An  interesting,  nonobvious  result  from  ex¬ 
periments  with  human  subjects  was  shown  by  Wesson,  Hayes-Roth,  Burge,  Stasz,  and 
Sunshine  [121].  The  study  was  described  by  V.  Jagannathan  and  Rajendra  Dodhiawala 
in  their  annotated  bibliography  of  DAI,  as  follows:  “Experiments  were  conducted  first 
involving  human  subjects  trying  to  solve  a  dynamic  crossword-like  puzzle  task.  They 
note  that  the  ‘anaxchic’  human  committee  organization  performed  much  better  than 
the  hierarclrical  organization.  The  yard  stick  was  an  omniscient  single  expert.  The 
machine  version  of  the  experiments  involved  a  blackboard  to  model  the  anarchic  com¬ 
mittee.  In  order  to  minimize  communication,  they  note  that  the  individual  KS  (expert) 
should  have  knowledge  about  what  other  experts  know”  [64].  Clearly,  this  one  result 
does  not  establish  the  nonefRcacy  of  hierarchies,  but  it  provokes  thought,  and  further 
experiments  in  this  mode  might  help  to  debug  our  intuitions  further  about  what  works 
in  human  groups.  Such  research  may  be  of  use  to  DAI  if  the  communication  and 
control  factors  leading  to  the  results  can  be  elucidated  and  synthesized  into  principles 
that  would  apply  to  computer  systems. 

6.  Principles  of  Cooperation  (MIT).  Jeff  Rosenschein  summarizes  this  work;  “An¬ 
other  area  examined  by  scientists  at  MIT  has  been  ‘principles  of  cooperation,’  the 
notion  that  there  are  heuristic  guidelines  to  be  followed  by  computer  systems  that 
will  be  interacting  with  one  another.  The  desire  is  to  develop  plans  that  are  ‘robust’ 
(insensitive  to  other  agents’  actions)  and  ‘cautious’  (minimizing  the  chances  for  other 
agents  to  interfere).  Towards  these  ends  they  have  identified  principles  such  as  behav¬ 
ing  predictably,  generating  simple  plans,  and  using  task  domain  knowledge  to  predict 
other  agents’  (future)  plans  [[20,109]].  A  planning  system  was  to  be  built  using  these 
principles,  but  it  is  not  known  whether  such  construction  took  place”  [102]. 

7.  Neural  Networks  (Rochester,  UCSD,  CMU,  Toronto,  Caltech,  AT&T,  BostonU). 
A  great  deal  of  work  in  neural  networks  has  been  done  over  the  last  five  years,  and 
anything  close  to  a  summary  would  not  be  possible  here.  For  distributed  AI,  the  ideas 
of  central  importance  seem  to  be  the  organizing  principles  shared  by  these  adaptive 
systems.  Locally,  at  each  processing  element  (“neuron”)  in  such  a  system,  the  im¬ 
portant  unifying  characteristic  is  that  the  state  of  the  element  is  determined  at  each 
instant  by  a  nonlinear  function  of  a  weighted  summation  of  the  states  of  the  elements 
connected  to  it  as  inputs,  as  well  as  of  (sometimes)  its  own  previous  state  [105].  For 
the  whole  system,  which  may  consist  of  millions  of  these  elements,  the  central  results 
show  that  global  summarizing  functions  for  the  states  and  connection  weights  have  ac¬ 
cessible  local  minima,  starting  from  initial  states  and  weights  [62,105].  A  near-optimal 


8 


solution  can  be  reached  if  simulated  annealing  is  employed  [66,58].  The  weights  may 
be  set  adaptively  to  minimize  a  summarizing  function  of  error  relative  the  patterns 
of  states  that  arise  or  are  specified  as  acceptable  by  an  oracle,  and  the  networks  can 
very  quickly  classify  input  patterns  to  the  desired  output,  with  varying  accuracy,  when 
equilibrium  is  reached.  Weighted  voting  networks  may  be  useful  for  reasoning  systems 
by  making  probabilistic  and  evidential  inference  more  tractable  [62]  and  by  allowing  a 
designer  merely  to  specify  what  factors  are  relevant  to  believing,  desiring,  or  intending 
something,  without  requiring  the  designer  to  specify  probabilistic  relations  between 
propositions.  The  numerical  relations  can  then  be  induced  adaptively  by  the  system. 
So  the  local  model  of  a  neuron  used  most  often  in  these  networks  also  seems  useful  for 
reasoning  and  representation  of  a  more  symbolic  nature.  This  description  does  not  do 
justice  either  to  the  capabilities  or  to  the  limitations  of  this  approach.  A  good  refer¬ 
ence  for  the  latter  is  the  “Epilogue”  of  the  recently  expanded  edition  of  Percepirons 
by  Marvin  Minsky  and  Seymour  Papert  [91]. 

8.  Reasoning  about  Knowledge  (IBM).  The  work  of  Joe  Halpern  and  his  colleagues 
at  IBM’s  Ahnaden  Research  Center  has  yielded  important  results  in  the  theory  of 
distributed  systems.  In  particular,  the  logical  modeling  of  distributed  systems  eases 
the  design  of  efficient,  fault-tolerant  protocols  that  solve  the  problem  of  Byzantine 
Agreement  [74]  as  well  as  it  can  be  solved,  i.e.  that  guarantee  the  earliest  performance 
of  simultaneous  actions  possible  assuming  some  maximum  possible  number  of  failures 
[93,56].  What  is  important  to  note  about  this  work  for  DAI  is  that  these  researchers 
have  found  success  in  using  possible  worlds  models  for  multiple  agents  to  analyze 
what  each  agent  “knows”  in  each  cycle  or  block  of  time  about  the  states  of  the  other 
processes,  and  that  various  models,  depending  on  the  application,  can  be  useful  for 
describing  and  reasoning  about  the  knowledge,  ignorance,  and  “beliefs”  of  agents  [65, 
31,32].  This  work  connects  quite  intimately  with  that  of  researchers  at  SRI  concerning 
the  relation  between  knowledge  about  other  agents,  communication,  and  planning. 

1.4  DAI  Research  at  SRI 

Over  the  years,  the  Artificial  Intelligence  Center  at  SRI  has  produced  a  good  deal  of 
work  in  distributed  artificial  intelligence,  particularly  at  the  theoretical  end. 

In  the  area  of  natural  language  and  communication,  Doug  Appelt  wrote  a  planner 
called  KAMP  whose  actions  were  utterances.  The  input  to  the  program  was  a  goal 
for  changing  the  beliefs  and  desires  of  another  agent  [l].  More  recently  Phil  Cohen 
has  teamed  with  Hector  Levesque  of  the  University  of  Toronto  in  developing  a  formal 
theory  of  speech  acts,  beliefs,  desires,  and  intentions,  that  can  be  used  to  reason  about 
“rational”  agents  [12,13].  The  interest  in  underlying  principles  of  rationality,  both  for 
planning  and  for  interpreting  the  actions  and  utterances  of  others,  is  an  important 
characteristic  of  much  of  the  DAI  work  at  SRI.  In  particular,  these  principles  are  often 


9 


thought  to  include  design  principles  for  agents  with  Kmited  resources  who  must  cope 
with  a  changing  environment  in  real  time.  Martha  Pollack’s  work  [95,96]  has  concerned 
how  agents  can  infer  the  plans  of  other  agents  from  their  utterances  combined  with 
beliefs  about  the  other  agent’s  beliefs  and  goals. 

Much  research  has  concerned  planning  in  multiagent  domains.  In  the  early  years 
of  this  research,  Kurt  Konolige  and  Nils  Nilsson  attempted  to  extend  STRIPS-Hke 
planners  for  single  agents  to  planning  in  the  multiagent  case  [70].  a  recent  summary, 
“Over  time,  however,  it  was  discovered  that  the  underlying  models  of  action  for  single 
agent  planning  were  not  sufficiently  rich  to  capture  the  complicated  synchronization 
properties  of  multiagent  worlds.  Subsequent  research  then  began  to  explore  richer 
action  representations,  and  in  particular  tried  to  make  use  of  work  that  had  been  done 
in  computer  science  concurrency  theory”  [47].  has  been  done  by  Michael  Georgeff  and 
Amy  Lansky.  Georgeff  has  developed  a  means  for  handling  the  “frame  problem”  for 
planning  agents  (i.e.  the  problem  of  knowing  what  is  and  is  not  affected  by  an  action) 
that  takes  advantage  of  the  fact  that  there  are  other  agents  in  the  environment,  where 
the  environment  itself  can  be  viewed  as  an  agent  or  process  [50].  Both  Georgeff  and 
Lansky  have  worked  on  coordination,  plan  specification,  and  how  to  avoid  interference 
between  the  actions  of  different  agents  [45,46,75,76].  Subsequent  work  has  involved 
building  representations  of  the  concurrent  actions  and  events  in  multiagent  domains 
[77,48].  Most  recently,  Lansky  and  David  Fogelsong  have  applied  her  Group  Element 
Model  (GEM)  for  concurrency  and  domain  representation  in  an  actual  multiagent 
planning  system  known  as  GEMPLAN,  which  uses  locality  constraints  in  order  to 
insulate  agents  planning  for  independent  subregions  of  the  planning  space  from  having 
to  consider  changes  that  apply  only  to  the  tasks  or  regions  assigned  to  other  agents 
[78]. 

Reasoning  about  other  agents  in  multiagent  domains  is  the  topic  of  current  work 
by  Kurt  Konolige,  Martha  Pollack,  and  Todd  Davies.  Konolige’s  past  work  on  how 
an  agent  can  reason  about  the  cognitive  states  of  other  agents  using  “experimental 
robot  psychology”  [72]  and  on  how  it  can  reason  introspectively  about  its  own  behefs 
[71],  Pollack’s  work  on  plan  inference  from  communication  acts  [95,96],  and  Davies’ 
work  on  reasoning  by  analogy  [16,17]  may  be  able  to  be  combined  to  form  a  general 
methodology  for  how  an  agent  can  reason  about  the  intentions  of  other  agents,  their 
beliefs  and  their  goals,  in  part  by  analogy  to  its  own  processes  [49]. 

Part  of  the  focus  ‘for  the  DAI  research  at  SRI  is  on  problems  arising  from  the 
interaction  of  autonomous,  mobile  robots,  both  with  other  robots  and  with  people. 
A  group  headed  by  Stan  Rosenschein,  which  also  includes  Stan  Reifel,  Leslie  Kael- 
bling,  Nathan  Wilson,  Stuart  Shieber,  and  Sandy  Wells,  has  built  one  robot  (named 
FLAKEY)  that  has  sonax  sensors,  tactile  sensing  bumpers,  and  a  camera  for  percep¬ 
tion,  a  speech  synthesizer  and  wheels  for  effectors,  and  a  small  on-board  keyboard  with 
display  for  receiving  typed  instructions  and  displaying  data.  Further  features,  such  as 


10 


an  arm,  may  be  added,  as  well  as  additional  robots  with  whom  FLAKEY  can  interact. 
Rosenschein,  Kaelbling,  and  Fernando  Pereira  have  been  working  on  the  theory  belund 
the  design  of  interacting  automata  embedded  in  an  environment  [103,104,65]  ajid  on 
modeling  concurrent  interacting  automata  [92]. 

In  the  area  of  perception,  Marty  Fischler  and  Oscar  Firschein  have  advocated  a 
“parallel  guessing”  approach  to  distributed  processing  for  image  understanding.  In 
this  approach,  they  “envision  a  parallel  set  of  computers,  each  of  which  carries  out  a 
computation  on  a  data  set  using  some  random  or  guessing  process,  and  communicates 
the  ‘goodness’  of  its  result  to  its  co-workers  through  a  ‘blackboard’  mechanism”  [36]. 

In  the  area  of  massive  or  small-grained  parallelism,  Todd  Davies  has  been  explor¬ 
ing  the  ways  in  which  neural  network  architectures  could  be  constructed  that  embody 
knowledge  that  is  described  in  a  combinatorial  language  at  the  metalevel.  Some  pre¬ 
liminary  results  are  reported  in  [18]. 

In  short,  research  in  DAI  at  SRI  covers  the  full  spectrum  of  varieties.  Much  has 
been  developed  in  the  form  of  techniques  and  theories  for  making  distributed  planning, 
communication,  and  processing  computationally  feasible.  At  this  point,  there  is  an 
especially  strong  interest  in  testing  many  of  these  techniques  on  realistic  problems 
involving  multiple  robots  and  computers. 

1.5  Traffic  Monitoring  as  the  Prototype  Domain 

Many  of  the  programs  written  by  DAI  researchers,  particularly  the  testbeds  described 
in  section  2,  have  as  their  application  one  form  or  another  of  traffic  monitoring  or  con¬ 
trol,  largely  because  this  domain  has  many  of  the  characteristics  of  militciry  problems, 
such  as  battle  management,  automated  guidance  systems,  and  automated  assistants 
for  phots.  In  addition,  there  is  potentially  a  more  direct  application  of  these  systems 
to  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration’s  Advanced  Automation  Program  (AAP)  [40], 
which  is  expected  to  lead  to  “highly  automated  air  traffic  control  by  the  turn  of  the 
century”  [63].  The  major  goals  of  this  program  are  to  develop  a  system  that  will  “be 
very  reliable,  be  operational  24  hours  a  day,  and  be  capable  of  beng  upgraded  without 
impeding  the  control  of  the  air  traffic”  [63].  Obviously,  the  testing  the  software  devel¬ 
oped  for  this  system  (which  is  viewed  as  being  functionally  decomposed  and  partitioned 
into  a  distributed  architecture  [63])  in  a  very  realistic  simulation  is  of  paramount  im¬ 
portance  [9,2].  The  future  for  traffic  control  automation  is  not  confined  to  aircraft; 
architectures  for  railroads  and  space  vehicles  axe  also  being  researched,  developed,  and 
manufactured  [119]. 


11 


1.6  Summary  of  Main  Issues  and  Problems 

The  concerns  of  DAI  researchers  may  be  divided  into  “issues,”  that  is,  questions  of  the 
form  “What  approach  should  be  taken  along  a  particular  dimension  in  building  a  sys¬ 
tem?,”  and  “problems,”  i.e.  questions  of  the  form  “How  can  a  particular  desideratum 
be  achieved?”  The  listing  of  issues  and  problems  in  this  subsection  owes  a  great  deal 
to  previous  lists  provided  in  [102]  and  [112]. 


1.6.1  Issues: 

The  main  issues  appear  to  be  the  following. 

1.  Control.  Agents  may  take  all  of  their  orders  from  a  single  directing  agent,  in 
which  case  control  is  centralized.  At  the  opposite  end  of  the  spectrum,  each  agent 
can  be  completely  autonomous,  so  that  control  is  distributed  throughout  the  entire 
system.  There  are  various  intermediate  possibilities,  including  hierarchical  control 
(like  a  business)  and  partitioned  control  (like  an  industry). 

2.  Cooperativeness.  If  agents  always  let  the  goals  of  others  take  priority,  they 
might  be  called  “benevolent”  [44],  or,  to  use  a  technical  term,  “nice.”  Alternatively, 
they  may  be  negotiating  agents,  or  they  may  be  competitive  or  even  hostile.  Clearly, 
as  is  the  case  with  most  of  these  issues,  the  amount  of  cooperativeness  will  depend  on 
the  application — there  is  no  single  right  level  that  covers  all  cases. 

3.  Complexity.  The  capabilities  and  architectures  of  earh  agent  may  range  from 
simple  to  very  elaborate,  the  advantages  of  the  former  being  the  possibility  of  having 
greater  numbers  of  agents  and  ease  of  design,  while  for  the  latter  the  advantages  are 
greater  processing  power  at  each  node  and  more  opportunity  for  specialization  among 
the  agents. 

4.  Communicativeness.  How  much  agents  say  to  those  with  whom  they  communi¬ 
cate  can  vary  greatly  from  system  to  system.  Agents  can  be  completely  silent,  or  they 
can  communicate  profusely.  The  cost  of  communication  and  the  bandwidth  impinge 
on  this  issue. 

5.  Specialization.  Whether  the  agents  should  be  homogeneous  or  very  heteroge¬ 
neous  depends  in  large  part  on  the  task  decomposition  strategy.  This  is  an  important 
issue  in  the  design  of  any  system,  since  there  is  a  traHe-off  between  the  ease  of  coor¬ 
dinating  agents  who  share  the  same  architecture,  and  the  efficiency  of  specialization 
when  the  problem  can  be  decomposed  functionally. 

6.  Redundancy.  In  designing  a  system,  one  needs  to  evaluate  how  much  the  solution 
to  a  problem  should  depend  on  any  one  agent.  Building-in  redundancy  makes  the 
system  fault-tolerant,  but  it  can  also  result  in  less  efficient  use  of  a  community  of 
agents. 


12 


7.  Information  Sharing.  There  is  a  variety  of  possibilities  for  whom  agents  should 
share  information  with,  as  opposed  to  how  much  they  should  share  (see  Communica¬ 
tiveness).  At  one  extreme,  agents  may  share  nothing.  They  may  share  information 
only  with  their  nearest  neighbors,  or  with  the  next  agent  up  in  the  hierarchy,  or  only 
with  a  centralized  controlling  agent,  or  with  every  other  agent  in  the  system. 

8.  Number  of  Agents.  Obviously,  the  number  of  agents  in  a  multiagent  system  can 
range  from  2  or  3  to  many.  The  important  consequences  are  for  communication  and 
overall  system  complexity.  The  number  of  connections  required  to  maintain  a  constant 
communication  time  between  arbitrary  processors  grows  exponentially  in  the  number 
of  processors,  but  the  spatial  region  defined  by  the  processors,  assuming  no  increase 
in  the  distance  between  nearest  neighbors,  grows  at  most  only  polynomiaUy — as  the 
square  or  the  cube  of  the  number  of  processors,  depending  on  whether  the  agents  live 
in  a  two-  or  a  three-dimensional  world.  So  communication  between  arbitrary  agents  in 
the  system  becomes  harder  as  the  number  is  increased.  This  makes  the  arrangement 
of  agents  important,  so  that  they  are  close,  for  communication  purposes,  to  the  agents 
they  need  to  talk  to.^ 

9.  Decomposition.  Agents  may  inhabit  a  world  or  solve  a  problem  based  on  func¬ 
tion,  object  (as  in  man-to-man  coverage  in  football),  or  space  allotments.  Another 
possibility  is  to  assign  tasks  based  on  what  agents  are  available  by  virtue  of  having 
completed  their  more  recent  assignments. 

10.  Independence.  Similar  but  not  identical  to  the  issue  of  information  sharing  is 
the  issue  of  how  much  of  an  agent’s  actions  should  be  determined  independently  from 
those  of  other  agents.  A  high  degree  of  interdependence  can  magnify  the  effects  of  one 
agent’s  failure  or  of  wrong  information  percolating  through  the  system. 

11-  Coherence.  A  more  abstract  issue  is  the  degree  to  which  the  system  should 
appear  to  behave  as  a  unified  whole.  In  some  systems  a  high  degree  of  coherence  is 
the  aim,  but  in  others  the  agents  may  be  viewed  as  rather  like  a  team,  committee,  or 
society.  . 

1.6.2  Problems: 

The  main  problems  appear  to  be  the  following. 

1.  Coordination.  Agents  must  respond  to  each  other’s  actions  at  the  right  times 
and  in  the  right  way  if  a  distributed  system  is  to  function  properly.  The  focus  for  this 
problem  is  the  set  of  mechanisms  used  by  the  individual  agents  to  detect  actions  on 
the  part  of  other  agents  and  to  control  their  own. 

^This  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  Stan  Rosenschein. 


13 


2.  Conflict  Resolution.  Two  agents  may  have  opposing  goaJs.  It  is  important,  if 
conflicts  are  possible,  that  there  be  a  means  for  detecting  this,  replanning  in  light  of 
the  conflict,  and  resolving  known  conficts  in  future  intentions. 

3.  Noninterference.  Even  when  agents  share  some  goal,  their  intended  actions  may 
interfere  with  each  other.  This  can  be  a  problem  both  for  the  individual  agents  and 
for  a  central  planner. 

4.  Dealing  with  Incomplete  Knowledge.  Because  the  cognitive  states  of  other  agents 
are  underspecified  by  their  actions,  and  because  eaoh  agent  has  only  a  limited  percep¬ 
tual  view  of  the  world,  an  agent  must  infer  what  it  does  not  know. 

5.  Obeying  Causal  and  Temporal  Constraints.  In  addition  to  avoiding  interference, 
the  actions  of  agents  must  be  such  that  constraints  of  the  form  “A  must  occur  before 
B  occurs”  and  “C  and  D  must  occur  simultaneously  to  cause  E”  are  met  by  their 
collective  plans  or  plan. 

6.  Reliability.  Some  systems  require  high  levels  of  reliability,  and  others  require 
less.  To  the  extent  that  it  is  required,  factors  that  affect  it,  such  as  failures  at  individ¬ 
ual  processor  sites,  and  interdependence  between  components  of  the  system,  must  be 
minimized. 

7.  Communicating  with  Limited  Bandwidth.  When  agents  are  restricted  to  any¬ 
thing  less  than  core-dumps  broadcast  to  the  whole  system  at  every  tick,  they  must 
communicate  only  partial  information  about  their  beliefs,  goals,  and  intentions.  This 
leads  to  a  concern  with  how  the  important  information  can  be  selected. 

8.  Allocating  and  Using  Limited  Resources.  Apart  from  communication  channels, 
there  are  often  other  resources  that  are  in  short  supply  in  a  distributed  system,  such 
as  tools,  shared  memory,  and  space.  This  is  obviously  related  to  the  noninterference 
problem,  but  differs  in  that  it  emphasizes  how  priorities  should  be  set  given  that  a 
possible  interference  condition  has  been  identified. 

9.  Reacting  to  a  Dynamic  Environment.  Agents  in  a  DAI  system  must  be  prepared 
for  the  possibility  that  their  original  plans  could  go  awry,  either  because  of  unantici¬ 
pated  changes  in  the  environment  or  because  of  unanticipated  actions  on  the  part  of 
other  agents;  they  must  react  in  reasonable  time  and  change  their  plans  if  necessary, 

10.  Evaluating  a  Group  Solution.  In  distributed  problem  solving,  an  important 
question  to  be  answered  is  when  the  agents  should  stop  working  on  a  given  subgoal 
and  conclude  that  it  is  fulfilled.  This  is  difficult  without  some  objective  source  of 
information,  such  as  an  oracle  or  an  identifiable  criterion  for  success  about  which  the 
agents  can  agree. 

11.  Extensibility.  In  a  system  wth  a  substantial  lifetime,  there  is  bound  to  be 
a  need  to  add  more  agents  to  the  system,  more  capabilities  to  the  agents,  or  more 


14 


problems  for  the  system  to  solve.  If  these  possibilities  are  foreseen,  the  initial  design 
should  make  the  upgrading  as  painless  as  possible. 

12.  Reducing  Communication  Uncertainty.  Well-known  problems  in  distributed 
systems  theory  arise  from  uncertainties  about  whether,  or  at  what  time,  a  message 
from  one  processor  is  received  by  another.  The  protocols  for  communication  should 
minimize  the  probability  that  an  agent  will  act  with  unjustified  confidence  that  a 
message  has  gotten  through. 


2  Testbeds  and  Development  Tools  for  DAI 

In  the  last  section,  a  number  of  issues  and  problems  of  DAI  were  reviewed,  as  weU  as 
some  specific  approaches  and  findings  relating  to  these  issues  and  problems.  In  this 
section  the  part  of  research  in  DAI  that  has  involved  constructing  “testbed”  systems 
and  DAI  software  development  environments  is  explored.  Testbed  research  involves 
the  empirical  testing  and  evaluation  of  different  approaches,  and  development  environ¬ 
ments  ease  the  task  of  building  systems  with  multiple  agents,  under  a  potentially  wide 
variety  of  approaches. 


2.1  Survey  of  Testbeds 

Most  testbeds  for  DAI  can  be  described  as  instances  of  the  following  scheme.  An 
environment  module  is  either  simulated  or  actually  created.  The  environment  is  often 
highly  dynamic,  and  can  be  Vciried  in,  for  example,  the  difficulty  and  complexity  it 
poses,  by  adjusting  parameters  (in  the  simulated  case)  or  by  chanpng  the  setup  (in 
the  actual  case).  The  testbed  provides  for  a  number  of  agents  to  “populate”  this 
environment,  i.e.  to  receive  input  from  it.  The  number  of  agents  may  be  fixed,  or  it 
may  be  a  parameter,  as  may  other  aspects  of  the  agents  such  as  their  architecture, 
what  kinds  of  messages  they  send,  what  their  policies  for  response  are,  and  whom 
they  are  allowed  to  communicate  with.  The  agents  may  be  set  up  to  work  on  a  specific 
problem  posed  by  the  environment,  like  controlling  traffic,  or  they  may  each  be  capable 
of  being  given  different  goals.  The  problem  itself,  in  a  distributed-problem-solving 
testbed,  may  have  parameters  to  describe  what  agents  should  try  to  accomplish  in  a 
particular  testbed  run.  Other  parameters  for  the  testbed  may  be  how  the  problem  is 
decomposed  and  assigned  to  the  agents,  and  what  the  policies  of  the  scheduler  are,  if 
one  is  present.^  A  search  of  the  literature  has  revealed  nine  known  testbed  projects 
that  have  been  initiated  to  date.  Each  of  these  is  reviewed  below.  Of  the  eight,  the  first 

®The  description  of  this  general  framework  comes  largely  from  Tom  Garvey  (personal 
communication). 


15 


two  projects — those  at  the  University  of  Massachusetts  and  at  the  Rand  Corporation — 
have  been  the  most  extensively  reported,  and  are  thus  given  fuller  treatment  in  this 
survey. 


2.1.1  University  of  Massachusetts’  “Distributed  Vehicle  Monitoring  Testbed” 

The  construction,  use,  and  expansion  of  the  Distributed  Vehicle  Monitoring  Testbed 
(“DVMT”)  has  been  documented  over  the  last  eight  years  in  a  series  of  papers,  all  of 
them  written  in  part  by  the  testbed’s  chief  architects,  Victor  Lesser  and  Dan  CorkiU 
[82,83,84,85,15,86,24,25,87]. 

CorkiU  and  Lesser’s  primary  aim  has  been  to  explore  means  for  achieving  and  main¬ 
taining  global  coherence  in  a  distributed-problem-solving  network,  in  which  the  nodes 
share  a  common  overall  goal.  Aspects  of  design  that  minimize  the  total  time  required 
for  a  network  to  solve  a  problem  have  been  tested  in  many  variations.  The  focus  has 
therefore  been  on  performance,  which,  as  was  mentioned  earlier,  is  not  usually  consid¬ 
ered  by  others  to  be  the  main  problem  in  building  distributed  AI  sytems.  More  will  be 
said  about  this  below.  One  of  the  goals  in  building  the  testbed  was  to  discover  princi¬ 
ples  for  deciding  what  organization  schemes  are  most  efficient  for  particular  situations, 
with  the  ultimate  aim  of  programming-in  criteria  the  system  could  use  for  changing 
its  own  organization  to  suit  particular  capabilities  of  the  nodes  and  characteristics  of 
the  environment  and  problem.  Some  other  questions  to  which  experimentation  was 
addressed  included  the  following:  What  is  the  best  balance  between  reliability  and 
speed  of  the  knowledge  sources?  How  do  the  conditions  of  high  and  low  error  or  ncdse 
in  sensing  affect  what  control  regimes  are  most  effective?  To  the  extent  that  commu¬ 
nication  costs  and  reliability  considerations  preclude  having  a  central  controUer,  how 
ctin  local  decision  making  and  communication  achieve  adequate  levels  of  coordination 
between  nodes?  How  can  mechanisms  for  coordination  be  made  simple  enough  so  that 
their  cost  does  not  outweigh  their  benefits,  and  how  does  one  determine  this?  What 
defines  adequate  coverage  of  the  problem  space  by  the  network?  How  much  connec¬ 
tivity  is  necessary?  How  much  capability  should  each  node  have?  What  is  the  right 
mix  between  organizational  and  local  control  of  a  node,  i.e.  a  medium  between  being  a 
“company  node”  and  a  “lone  wolf”?  And  finally,  how  should  one  balance  the  overhead 
required  for  cooperation  between  nodes  against  requirements  on  local  processing?  All 
of  these  questions  may  be  best  asked  relative  to  a  particular  problem  and  environment. 

The  testbed  has  been  in  existence  since  the  beginning  of  this  decade.  The  number 
of  problem-solving  nodes  has  risen  from  between  2  and  4  to  between  10  and  13,  with 
about  the  same  number  of  sensors.  The  task  common  to  all  of  the  simulations  has 
been  distributed  traffic  monitoring.  SpaciaUy  separated  processor  nodes  receive  input 
from  multiple,  nearby  sensors.  The  processors  must  cooperate  to  identify,  locate, 
and  track  patterns  of  vehicles  moving  around  and  between  them  in  a  two-dimensional 


16 


field.  The  vehicles  generate  acoustic  signals  that  are  picked  up  by  the  sensors.  Each 
processor  node  was  originally  designed  as  an  architecturally  complete  HEARSAY-II 
system  [81]  with  capabilities  for  vehicle  monitoring,  and  the  processors  have  since 
been  given  planning  capabilities.  The  processors  transmit  to  other  processors  requests 
for  the  creation  of  hypotheses  with  specified  attributes,  as  well  as  their  own  hypotheses. 
Hypotheses  include  specifying  a  time-location  trajectory  for  an  identified  vehicle,  the 
identity  of  the  vehicle,  and  a  degree  of  confidence.  The  goals  to  make  certain  hypotheses 
are  also  given  importance  ratings.  There  is  an  oracle  that  computes  the  optimal 
solution  for  each  run  ahead  of  time,  and  that  is  used  for  comparing  the  system’s 
performance  to  the  best  possible  performance.  The  earlier  experiments  were  all  done 
on  four-  and  five- node  systems.  In  the  four-node  version,  the  processors  all  participated 
in  solving  a  problem,  whereas  in  the  five-node  version,  four  of  the  processors  sent 
their  hypotheses  to  a  fifth  node  that  constructed  the  answer.  The  nodes  in  each 
version  generate  hypotheses  consistent  with  their  roles  in  the  organization.  Indeed,  the 
hypotheses  upon  wich  each  processor  is  to  work  are  a  way  of  specifying  the  organization, 
but  Corkill  and  Lesser  make  it  clear  that  in  the  general  architecture  the  node’s  role 
is  just  a  guideline  rather  than  an  absolute — the  node  may  be  more  or  less  internally 
directed  depending  on  the  setting  of  parameters.  In  later  experiments  a  node  hiis 
sometimes  been  given  the  capability  to  communicate  “metalevel”  information  to  other 
nodes;  that  is,  information  about  what  hypotheses  it  is  working  on  rather  than  the 
hypotheses  themselves. 

Most  of  the  experiments  with  the  DVMT  have  been  tests  of  the  performance  of 
a  given  parameter  setting  for  the  network  and  its  nodes  given  a  particular  parameter 
setting  for  the  environment.  The  testbed  allows  many  parameters  to  be  varied  in  a 
simulation  run.  The  system  allows  arbitrary  node-node  and  node-sensor  connectivity, 
a.s  well  a.s  arbitrary  distributions  of  task  processing  capability.  The  accuracy  of  individ¬ 
ual  knowledge  sources  and  sensors  can  be  varied.  Control  policy  is  varied  according  to 
the  level  of  priority  each  node  gives  to  its  own  (internal)  goals  and  hypotheses  relative 
to  those  from  the  outside.  A  variety  of  communication  policies  can  be  invoked,  such 
as  transmitting  hypotheses  only,  goals  only,  both,  or  neither.  Within  hypothesis  com¬ 
munication  a  node  may  be  set  to  send  all  of  its  hypotheses,  only  its  completed  ones, 
only  those  judged  to  be  relevant  to  send,  only  its  first  and  last,  and  so  on.  Vehicle 
characteristics  can  be  varied,  as  can  those  of  the  communication  channels.  Placements 
of  the  sensors,  their  range,  the  number  and  size  of  the  vehicles  and  the  complexity  of 
their  signals,  the  hypothesis-forming  power  and  type  of  the  knowledge  sources,  consis¬ 
tency  constraints  on  the  number  of  legal  hypotheses,  and  the  amount  of  noise  in  the 
environment  can  all  be  varied  independently.  Transmissions  of  hypotheses  and  goals 
can  be  exclusively  voluntary,  exclusively  in  response  to  requests  from  other  nodes,  or 
mixed.  At  each  node,  one  can  set  parameters  for  the  weight  given  to  local  processing 
versus  communication,  weights  for  specifying  the  relative  importance  of  each  type  of 
hypothesis  and  goal  for  that  node  to  send  and  receive,  threshold  ratings  for  treinsmis- 


17 


sion  and  acceptance  of  hypotheses  and  goals,  where  to  transmit  to,  weights  for  the  use 
of  received  hypotheses  and  goals  in  processing,  and  for  the  priority  of  internal  versus 
external  goals.  (This  is  not  a  complete  list.) 

Experiments  have  been  run  with  the  DVMT  in  many  different  configurations.  The 
results  are  not  easily  summarized.  One  observed  phenomenon  was  that  when  a  node 
is  externally  directed,  it  can  be  distracted  from  productive  problem  solving  by  giving 
priority  to  a  received  goal  or  hypothesis  when  it  should  not.  This  led  to  degraded 
performance  in  some  of  the  early  simulations.  CorkiU  and  Lesser  advocate  “node  skep¬ 
ticism”  for  robustness,  that  is,  not  giving  full  weight  to  received  hypotheses  and  goals, 
but  there  do  not  appear  to  be  any  hard-and-fast  rules  for  how  much  skepticism  is 
the  right  amount.  The  idea  is  that  even  strong  organizational  responsibilities  can  and 
should  be  ignored  when  a  node  possesses  strong  information  to  the  contrary,  but  this 
creates  the  problem  of  how  a  node  should  judge  the  relative  value  of  its  own  informa¬ 
tion  (or  the  importance  of  its  own  goals  for  solving  the  problem)  versus  that  obtained 
and  generated  by  other  nodes  [15].  Another  general  finding  was  that  performance  is 
improved  if  only  higher-level  information  is  exchanged  between  nodes,  because  of  the 
heavy  cost  of  communicating  every  low-level  hypothesis.  CorkiU  and  Lesser  found  that, 
at  least  in  the  type  of  problem  solving  they  investigated  (finding  the  solution  and  then 
stopping),  the  overhead  required  for  cooperation  causes  diminishing  improvement  in 
performance  for  each  added  node,  although  they  appear  to  feel  that  improvement  could 
be  linear  for  continuous  problem-solving  systems.  Other  improvements  in  performance 
came  from  adding  planners  to  the  nodes  and  allowing  metalevel  communication  so  that 
nodes  can  coordinate  with  eanh  other  which  problems  they  work  on.  The  latter  finding 
was  more  ambiguous  in  its  scope.  CorkiU  and  Lesser  found  significant  performance 
improvements  with  metalevel  communication  among  nodes  with  overlapping  interest 
areas  and  capabilities,  but  only  if  the  performance  without  it  was  very  suboptimal 
and  if  the  bandwidth  was  sufficient  to  support  the  extra  commimication.  No  improve¬ 
ment  was  found  to  result  from  metalevel  communication  for  nonoverlapping  nodes.  In 
general,  CorkiU  and  Lesser  found  that  overlap  turned  out  to  be  a  very  good  thing, 
allowing  flexibility  among  the  nodes  and  improving  reUability,  and  their  mechanisms 
for  improving  performance  (planning,  metalevel  communication,  and  so  forth)  worked 
better  with  it  [24].  But  of  course  for  some  types  of  tasks,  more  speciaUzation  and  less 
overlap  seem  desirable.  Blanket  principles  are  very  hard  to  extract  from  this  work. 

It  seems  worthwhile  to  list  some  of  the  problems  that  have  arisen  in  the  course  of 
this  work  as  weU  as  some  possible  Umitations  of  the  methodology.  A  problem  that  was 
known  from  HEARSAY-II  and  that  persisted  in  the  earlier  three-  to  five-node  networks 
was  that  self-directed  nodes  led  to  wasted  effort,  global  incoherence,  misallocation  of 
tasks  (resulting  in  inaccuracy  and  untimely  solutions),  and  lost  processing  due  to 
waiting,  nodes  working  at  cross-purposes,  and  duplication  of  effort.  In  an  effort  to 
correct  this,  various  coordination  schemes  were  tried  to  make  nodes  more  responsive  to 


18 


the  rest  of  the  network,  but  this  resulted  in  a  concommitant  set  of  problems,  including 
distraction  and  inefficiency  due  to  overhead.  Finding  the  right  balance  in  this  trade¬ 
off  became,  apparently,  a  delicate  enterprise.  The  dominant  theme  in  the  findings 
seems  to  be  “It  all  depends.”  Metalevel  communication  is  useful  sometimes,  but  not 
always.  It  may  improve  performance  for  overlapping  nodes,  but  not  if  low  bandwidth 
makes  it  too  expensive,  unless  its  absence  causes  a  good  deal  of  waste,  in  which  case  it 
might  help — it  all  depends  on  the  particular  set-up,  and  the  designer  must  have  good 
intuitions  about  what  can  go  wrong.  These  intuitions  are  surely  aided  by  a  careful 
reading  of  this  work,  but  general  principles  are  far  less  common  in  Corkill  and  Lesser 
than  statements  like  “An  organization  that  is  specialized  for  one  short-term  situation 
may  be  inappropriate  for  another,”  and  ”No  single  static  communication  policy  appears 
appropriate  for  all  problem  solving  situations”  [24]. 

One  problem  that,  as  these  researchers  point  out,  has  not  yet  been  addressed 
concerns  when  a  node  or  network  should  decide  that  it  has  solved  a  particular  problem. 
DVMT  has  an  oracle,  and  problem  solving  continues  until  a  solution  is  reached,  but  of 
course  in  real-world  problem  solving  there  is  no  oracle.  Ideally,  one  would  like  it  to  be 
a  fact  about  the  system  that  its  proposed  solution  of  a  problem  in  some  fixed  amount 
of  time  is  guaranteed  to  be  correct.  This  is,  itself,  a  problem  that  seems  well  suited  to 
a  realistic  testbed,  since  correctness  can  be  empirically  tested  for  a  particular  design. 
Corkill  and  Lesser’s  findings  also  do  not  apply  to  what  they  call  “continuous”  problem 
solving  without  a  natural  terminus,  which  seems  more  likely  to  be  the  kind  required 
of  real  systems  [24]. 

Corkill  and  Lesser  have  worked  tirelessly  and  admirably  on  this  experimental  ap¬ 
proach  to  DAI,  and  their  papers  contain  a  wealth  of  insights  gained  from  their  years  of 
experience.  They  do  not  offer  a  prescription  for  building  DAI  systems  given  particular 
characteristics  of  the  problem,  environment,  and  possible  networks,  although  it  may 
be  possible  to  come  up  with  a  fairly  clear  set  of  guidelines.  They  may  well  be  planning 
to  attempt  this.  In  the  meantime,  the  main  benefit  of  this  work  seems  to  be  that  it 
hcis  illustrated  some  of  the  many  possibilities,  trade-offs,  and  complexities  involved  in 
building  DAI  systems.  The  idea  of  building  a  testbed  is  also  highly  suggestive,  not  so 
much  for  its  power  in  doing  experimental  AI  but  for  its  potential  use  as  a  development 
tool  for  real  systems. 

As  was  mentioned  before,  CorkiE  and  Lesser’s  main  objective  has  been  to  find 
the  effects  of  design  changes  on  performance  in  a  DAI  system.  Their  results  are  of 
the  form,  “In  configuration  n,  with  this  particular  pattern  of  vehicles  and  ghost  data, 
agents  set  up  to  do  x  rather  than  y  achieved  solution  in  only  14  cycles  instead  of  19, 
where  optimal  is  10.”  An  alternative  approach  that  could  build  on  this  work  would  be 
to  forget  about  efficiency,  for  the  moment,  and  concentrate  on  giving  the  individual 
agents  the  knowledge  and  inferential  power  necessmy  to  make  intelligent  decisions 
about  what  to  do  under  a  reasonable  but  uniform  set  of  constraints  on  communication. 


19 


Later,  one  could  concentrate  on  making  the  inference  at  each  node  efficient  through 
parallel  processing  and  fast  algorithms.  The  reason  one  might  be  optimistic  about 
this  approach  is  that  it  conforms  more  to  our  experience  as  human  problem  solvers. 
We  axe  not  able  to  transmit  all  of  our  hypotheses  and  goals  to  everyone  else,  and 
receive  them  all,  so  it  should  not  be  seen  as  a  problem  that  computers  cannot  either. 
However,  we  can  make  very  fast  and  informed  local  decisions,  understand  our  place 
in  the  scheme  of  things,  decide  when  to  seek  help,  and  so  forth.  Perhaps  this  goal — 
focusing  on  the  individual  agent’s  processing  capabilities  in  a  way  that  takes  account 
of  other  agents — would  be  a  good  way  to  proceed. 

2.1.2  Rand  Corporation’s  Framework  for  Distributed  Pvroblem  Solving 

A  group  at  the  Rand  Corporation,  including  Robert  Wesson,  Randy  Steeb,  Freder¬ 
ick  Hayes-Roth,  Perry  Thomdyke,  David  McArthur,  Stephanie  Cammarata,  Sanjai 
Narain,  and  William  Giarla,  reported  work  on  an  experimental  environment  for  dis¬ 
tributed  air  traffic  control  from  1980  until  1985  [120,118,89,90,11,113].  The  questions 
that  interested  them  were  similar  to  the  ones  asked  by  CorkiU  and  Lesser.  They  sought 
experimentally  to  find  functional  relationships  between  architecture  structures  and  sys¬ 
tem  performance  measures  [120].  In  particular,  they  also  assumed  a  single  goal  for  the 
system  and  therefore  sought  globally  coherent  behavior  arising  from  local  computation. 

The  task  for  the  system  was  slightly  different  from  the  one  for  DVMT.  Multi¬ 
ple  problem-solving  nodes  guided  airplanes  through  a  simulated  three-dimensional 
airspace.  The  problem  was  to  develop  flight  plans  for  each  of  the  vehicles  to  ensure  a 
separation  of  at  least  three  miles  horizontally  and  1000  feet  vertically  between  aircraft, 
while  conserving  fuel  and  allowing  the  airplanes  to  reach  their  destinations  if  possible. 
The  researchers  attempted  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  cooperation  strategies  hold¬ 
ing  constant  the  degree  of  expertise  available  at  each  node.  As  was  mentioned  in  the 
section  on  DVMT,  the  reverse  approach  may  be  fruitful  for  future  testbeds.  In  this 
testbed,  each  agent  knew  its  own  airplane’s  flight  plan,  and  had  beliefs  about  the  flight 
plans  of  the  airplanes  around  it.  When  agents  perceived  a  potential  conflict  (violation 
of  the  separation  rules),  they  had  to  find  some  way,  with  or  without  communication, 
to  change  their  plans  [120,118,89,90].  Agents  in  the  testbed  had  a  constant  bandwidth 
for  communication  (no  more  than  five  messages  every  15  seconds),  but  the  distribution 
of  planning  tasks  was  variable.  Performance  indices  measured  included  the  communi¬ 
cation  load,  processing  time,  and  “task  effectiveness”  (separation  rule  violations  and, 
less  importantly,  fuel  use)  [11]. 

The  parameters  that  were  varied  in  the  simulation  changed  over  the  course  of  the 
research.  Originally,  there  were  plans  to  experiment  with  various  ways  of  assigning 
processors  to  airplanes,  including  space- centered  (covering  a  regon),  function-centered 
(according  to  mission  function),  object-centered  (one  agent  per  aircraft),  2md  plan- 


20 


centered  (specialization  by  subgoal)  [120].  In  the  reported  research  up  through  1985, 
however,  only  the  object-centered  approach  was  ever  used — aircraft  were  essentially 
identified  with  a  processor.  Initially,  two  general  coordination  regimes  were  tested — 
autonomous  planning  without  cooperation  (like  cars  on  a  freeway),  and  a  cooperative 
strategy.  The  density  of  aircraft  was  varied  for  each  of  these  strategies.  The  results 
were  that,  with  low  traffic,  autonomous  control  produced  conflict-free  plans  as  often  as 
cooperative  control  did,  but  in  the  liigh-density  case  the  cooperative  regime  performed 
significantly  better  [118]. 

The  experimenters  then  tested  various  ways  to  distribute  the  planning  burden  in 
the  cooperative  case.  In  one  approach,  the  task  was  shared  by  the  agents  involved  in 
a  potential  conflict.  In  three  other  approaclies,  a  single  agent  was  selected  to  plan  the 
paths  for  both  agents.  Selection  criteria  for  the  designated  agent  varied  and  included 
selection  of  the  least  spatially  constrained  agent  and  of  the  most  knowledgeable,  least- 
committed  agent.  Results  indicated  that  the  latter  selection  criterion  performed  best 
among  the  task-centralized  approaches.  The  authors  made  some  effort  to  point  out 
results  that  surprised  them  [11].  This  seemed  to  make  a  stronger  case  for  the  utility  of 
the  testbed  than  is  found  in  the  writings  of  CorkiU  and  Lesser,  especially  since  there  was 
more  of  an  attempt  to  integrate  the  results  into  an  understandable  theory  in  the  case 
of  the  Rand  researchers.  Unfortunately,  they  did  not  report  anywhere  near  the  volume 
of  results  that  the  DVMT  researchers  reported,  so  the  robustness  of  the  phenomena 
they  discovered  is  not  easy  to  assess.  By  1984,  the  researchers  reported  working  more 
on  strategies  involving  individual  decisionmaking  [113],  with  the  strategies  written  in 
ROSS,  an  object-oriented  language  for  simulation  originally  developed  by  Phil  Klahr 
and  William  Faught  [67]  and  used  later  in  the  construction  of  the  SWIRL  system  for 
simulating  military  air  battles  [68]. 

2.1.3  DREA’s  CNET 

CNET  WM  a  system  built  by  Reid  Smith  at  the  Defence  Research  Establishment  At¬ 
lantic  (DREA)  in  Dartmouth,  Nova  Scotia.  It  was  conceived  of  as  a  “medium  for 
writing  programs  for  distributed  problem  solvers,”  but  had  many  of  the  features  of  a 
testbed.  Its  domain  was  sensor  data  integration.  Its  name  derived  from  the  protocol 
for  communication  cimong  the  nodes  of  the  system — the  contract  net.  The  questions  to 
which  it  was  addressed  were  similar  in  form  to  those  of  the  DVMT  and  Rand  projects, 
in  particular  “what  task  specific  information  to  communicate,  how  to  combine  con¬ 
flicting  results  from  different  nodes  and  coordinate  node  activities  to  maintain  global 
coherence,  and  how  to  manage  the  tradeoff  between  communication  and  computation” 
[107].  One  of  the  comparisons  to  which  it  was  geared  was  that  between  task-sharing 
and  result-sharing,  a  distinction  introduced  by  Smith  and  Randy  Davis  [109]  to  capture 
the  fact  that  cooperation  may  involve  a  distribution  either  of  tasks  or  of  results.  Al¬ 
though  the  project  was  apparently  abandoned  due  to  Smith’s  departure  from  DREA, 


21 


CNET  was  interesting  in  that  it  had  a  more  powerful  language  for  knowledge  repre¬ 
sentation,  based  on  the  Unit  Package  [115,108],  than  most  experimental  DAI  systems 
have  had  [110]. 

2.1.4  WPI’s  Distributed  Sensor  Networks  Testbed 

Peter  Green  of  the  Worcester  Polytechnic  Institute  in  Worcester,  Massachusetts,  re¬ 
ported  in  1982  on  a  testbed  for  systems  to  acoustically  track  low-flying  aircraft  [53]. 
This  grew  out  of  the  HEARSAY-II  and  Distributed  Sensor  Nets  projects  at  CMU 
[81,37].  The  DSN  testbed  was  “a  distributed  AI  system  of  six  geographically  dis¬ 
tributed  nodes  with  each  node  containing  three  processors  that  were  used  for  data 
interpretation  and  message  communications”  [54].  The  architecture  was  distributed 
HEARSAY-II,  with  separate  blackboards  at  each  node.  The  main  conclusions  were 
that  the  distributed  HEARSAY  architecture  lacked  the  desired  features  of  modularity 
of  the  nodes  and  focused  ordering  of  KS  invokation.  What  is  meant  by  “modularity” 
is  that  the  modules  should  be  able  to  be  developed  by  separate  teams,  “should  be  sep¬ 
arately  testable  and  obey  good  software  en^neering  practices  in  terms  of  data  hiding 
and  freedom  from  interactions.”  The  ordering  problem  arose  because  “KSs  are  trig¬ 
gered  by  the  order  in  which  the  blackboard  is  searched  rather  than  the  KS  execution 
being  ordered  by  a  consideration  of  the  current  problem  state  and  goals.”  An  attempt 
to  solve  these  problems  was  the  development  tool  AF,  described  in  the  next  subsection 
[54]. 


2.1.5  GTE’s  Experimental  Testbed 

W.  Frawley,  Ralph  Worrest,  and  Henrik  Sandell  of  GTE  Laboratories  have  been  de¬ 
veloping  an  experimental  environment  for  exploring  “real-time  cooperative  planning 
and  action”  in  multiagent  domains  [39].  Only  a  few  results  have  been  reported.  One 
early  conclusion  has  been  that  cooperation  and  communication  need  to  be  designed 
into  the  system  from  the  start  to  allow  better  use  of  it,  that  is,  the  agents  should  not  be 
constructed  flrst  as  isolated  processors  and  then  given  the  capability  to  interact.  The 
comment  by  the  authors  that  “creating  a  useful  experimental  environment  for  DAI 
research  is  a  major  undertaking”  [122]  is  one  worth  noting,  and  goes  very  well  with  the 
Rand  researchers’  remark  that  “Distributed  problem  solving  is  an  enigma”  [11].  The 
thought  is  that  in-principle  arguments  for  the  usefulness  of  cooperation  and  multiple 
agents  are  hard  to  make  real;  the  practical  issues  are  very  complex.  A  promising  idea 
of  the  GTE  researchers  is  to  construct  taxonomies  to  characterize  different  dimensions 
and  styles  of  behavior,  and  to  try  to  reason  out  how  they  relate  in  addition  to  testing 
human  intuitions  on  a  system  [122]. 


22 


2.1.6  Stanford’s  Formal  Framework  for  Rational  Interaction 

Some  very  interesting  “theoretical  testbedding”  has  been  done  in  the  Knowledge  Sys¬ 
tems  Laboratory  at  Stanford  by  Mike  Genesereth,  Matt  Ginsberg,  and  Jeff  Rosen- 
schein.  Their  point  of  departure  from  prior  distributed  problem-solving  research  is 
what  they  call  the  “benevolent  agent  assumption,”  viz:  “All  agents  are  assumed  to 
have  identical  or  nonconflicting  goals  and  to  freely  help  each  other  (with  limited  ex¬ 
ceptions)”  [44].  They  reject  this  assumption  and  concentrate  on  how  cooperation  and 
compromise  can  be  achieved  by  agents  with  potentially  conflicting  goals.  As  they  point 
out,  this  “conflicting  agent”  metaphor  is  more  realistic  for  many  situations  in  which 
DAI  might  be  applied.  It  also  seems  more  general,  since  techniques  derived  under  the 
assumption  of  benevolence  appear  less  likely  to  scale  when  the  assumption  is  removed 
than  do  techniques  developed  assuming  potential  conflict  when  that  assumption  is  re¬ 
moved.  Genesereth  and  his  colleagues  developed  a  formal  framework  for  modeling  and 
investigating  what  agents  ought  to  do  to  resolve  conflicts. 

The  following  chronology  of  this  work  is  taken  from  the  group’s  summary  for  the 
1984  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop  [44]: 

Agents  with  identical  goals,  communication  strategies.  Early  work  fo¬ 
cused  on  the  case  of  communicating  agents  that  have  identical  goals,  but 
potentially  distinct  (and  conflicting)  information  about  the  world  [[100]]. 

We  have  isolated  strategies  of  information  transfer  that  will  cause  agents 
to  converge  to  identical  plans,  and  identified  strategies  that  wUl  not  cause 
convergence.  We  have  also  examined  what  role  “lying”  (i.e.,  the  transfer 
of  locally  inconsistent  information)  might  play  in  such  interactions,  and  its 
limited  utility. 

Agents  with  distinct  goals,  no  communication  allowed.  Later  work  [[42, 

43]]  focused  on  the  case  where  agents  with  potentially  conflicting  goals 
had  to  interact,  and  no  communication  was  possible  (i.e.,  after  initial  joint 
recognition  of  the  interaction).  A  hierarchy  of  rationality  assumptions  was 
developed,  and  various  types  of  behavior  were  shown  to  provably  follow 
from  each  level  of  rationality.  The  notion  of  “common  rationality”  (where 
agents  use  identical  decision  procedures  in  choosing  their  actions)  was  in¬ 
troduced,  and  certain  types  of  positive  behavior  were  shown  to  result  from 
this  assumption. 

Agents  with  distinct  goals,  promises  allowed.  Our  latest  work  [[101]] 
has  introduced  into  the  “conflicting  agents”  model  the  notion  of  binding 
promises  and  deal  making.  Agents  with  distinct  goals  are  assumed  to  be 
capable  of  promising  particulaj  actions,  contingent  on  certain  conditions  be¬ 
ing  met.  Our  research  has  answered  the  question  of  what  kinds  of  promises 
are  rational,  given  assumptions  (once  again)  about  the  rationality  of  other 


23 


agents.  It  has  also  shown  the  power  of  communication:  using  a  deal-making 
mechanism,  agents  are  able  to  coordinate  and  cooperate  more  easily  than 
in  the  communication-free  model.  In  fact,  there  are  certain  types  of  in¬ 
teractions  where  communication  allows  mutually  beneficial  activity  that  is 
otherwise  impossible  to  coordinate. 

This  work  is  a  good  example  of  the  mileage  that  can  be  gotten  from  pad-and-pencil 
testbedding,  which  might  be  a  beneficial  first  stage  in  the  design  of  any  DAI  system. 
Because  of  its  normative  character,  much  of  this  work,  at  least  in  these  early  stages, 
failed  to  address  the  issue  of  resource  limitations  on  how  rational  an  agent  can  be.  This 
has  been  a  later  topic  of  investigation  in  studying  models  of  rational  interaction  and 
rational  behavior,  and  is  obviously  crucial  to  Investigate  for  practical  uses  of  rational 
principles. 

2.1.7  IntelUcorp’s  Distributed  Expert  System  Simulation  Testbed 

Robert  Filman  of  Intellicorp  has  announced  a  plan  to  build  a  testbed  to  be  populated 
with  “collections  of  expert  subsystems  obeying  different  heuristic  architectures.”  He 
is  apparently  interested  in  performance  when  expert  systems  of  varying  architectures 
attempt  to  cooperate  and  compete  with  one  another.  Examples  of  the  architectures  he 
has  in  mind  include  contract  nets,  distributed  blackboards  systems,  the  scientific  com¬ 
munity  metaphor,  “systems  based  on  market  economics,  centralized  control,  classical 
operating  system  priority  mechanisms,  neural  mechanisms,  and  hybrids  of  the  above” 

[35]. 


2.1.8  Clarkson  University’s  Testbed  for  Monitoring  and  Controlling  Large 
Communications  Systems 

Susan  Conry  of  Clarkson  University  recently  reported  a  project  that  has  been  under¬ 
taken  there  to  build  a  testbed  for  investigating  cooperative  problem  solving  in  commu¬ 
nications  networks.  The  task  is  distributed  over  geographically  separate  agents,  who 
must  cooperate  to  assess  the  impact  of  various  disturbances  on  the  communication 
system,  diagnose  the  sources  of  outages,  and  plan  the  reconfiguration  of  the  network 
in  the  event  of  an  outage  [14]. 


2.1.9  Boeing’s  Experiments  on  Optimal  Cooperation  of  Knowledge  Sources 

Miroslav  Benda,  V.  Jagannathan,  and  Rajendra  Dodhiawala  of  the  Boeing  Advanced 
Technology  Center  have  done  experiments  to  measure  how  the  organization  of  knowl¬ 
edge  sources  in  a  blackboard  framework  influences  system  performance.  The  task  for 
the  community  of  agents  was  to  corner  an  adversary.  This  ensured  that  the  agents  had 


24 


to  cooperate  to  solve  the  problem.  They  experimented  with  nine  organizations  and 
found  performance  differences  among  them  [4,64,5]. 


2.2  Survey  of  Development  Tools 

All  of  the  systems  described  above  as  “testbeds”  embody  a  specific  environment  and 
family  of  problems  for  a  proposed  architecture  to  solve,  and  the  role  of  the  system  is  to 
generate  experimental  results  to  show  what  properties  of  an  architecture  are  best  suited 
to  the  particular  version  of  the  problem  being  run.  In  this  subsection,  environments 
of  a  more  exploratory  and  genereil  nature  are  considered.  These  development  tools  for 
DAI,  which  are  sometimes  also  referred  to  as  “testbeds”  by  the  people  who  build  them, 
generally  allow  a  rather  complete  defirution  of  the  agents  and  their  communication 
paths,  as  well  as  the  problem  to  be  solved  and  the  environmental  inputs  to  the  system. 
Seven  such  systems  are  reviewed  below. 

2.2.1  AGORA  (CMU) 

AGORA  is  an  environment  in  use  at  Carnegie  Mellon  “that  has  been  designed  specif¬ 
ically  to  build  efficient  problem  solving  architectures  on  a  number  of  different  multi¬ 
processor  computer  systems”  [7].  The  driving  problem  for  building  this  environment 
is  the  desire  to  speed  the  design  of  speech  recognition  systems,  as  part  of  a  CMU 
effort  to  develop  real-time,  continuous-speech  recognition  without  previous  knowledge 
of  the  identity  of  the  speaker.  AGORA  hides  from  the  user  all  the  details  of  the  im¬ 
plementation  in  a  multiprocessor  or  single-processor  system,  as  well  as  shielding  the 
user  “from  the  complexity  of  interfacing  programs  written  in  different  languages  (C 
and  Common  Lisp  are  currently  supported,  and  eventually  Ada  will  also  be  supported) 
and  executed  in  different  operating  systems  (Berkeley  Unix  and  Spice/Accent  are  cur¬ 
rently  supported)”  [7].  The  system  provides  facilities  for  defining  knowledge  sources, 
sets  of  hypotheses,  and  “knowledge  clusters,”  or  collections  of  knowledge  sources  that 
interact,  communicate,  or  share  some  property  in  a  way  specified  by  the  user.  The 
system  also  provides  blackboards  for  the  knowledge  sources  to  access,  and  schedulers 
for  each  cluster  that  coordinate  the  execution  of  its  knowledge  sources  [7].  Roberto 
Bisiani  claims  that  “AGORA  has  reduced  the  time  to  assemble  a  complex  parcJlel 
system  and  run  it  on  a  multiprocessor  from  more  than  six  man-months  to  about  one 
man-month.  The  main  reason  for  this  lies,”  according  to  Bisiani,  “in  the  fact  that  the 
details  of  communication  and  control  have  been  taken  ctire  of  by  AGORA.”  He  notes 
that  even  shorter  times  would  be  necessary  for  efficient  development,  e.g.  running  and 
completing  a  system  in  a  single  day  [8]. 


25 


2.2.2  MACE  (USC) 

A  summary  of  MACE  recently  appeared  in  Digital  Design  |6]: 

One  tool  implemented  on  the  iPSC  system^  with  CCLisp  is  MACE  from 
the  University  of  Southern  California.  Developed  on  the  IBM  PC/AT, 
it  was  ported  to  other  Common-Lisp  standard  environments-first  to  the 
Texas  Instruments  Explorer  workstations  and  then  to  the  iPSC.  Because 
it  is  a  flexible  test-bed  for  building  distributed  AI  systems,  MACE  may 
show  how  future  AI  systems  will  work.  MACE  programs  are  built  from 
units  called  agents,  which  are  objects  encapsulating  both  data  and  pro¬ 
gram  code.  Rule-agents  may  represent  a  single  rule  or  a  rule-based  system. 
Rule-based  systems,  a  class  of  expert  systems,  capture  knowledge  as  rules 
specified  by  a  knowledge  engineer.  MACE  allows  testing  and  exploration  of 
the  parallelism  of  multiple-agent  systems.  It  provides  a  complete  program 
environment  in  which  to  define  and  use  agents.  It  provides  automatic  load 
balancing  by  distributing  agents  across  the  nodes  of  a  large-scale  concur¬ 
rent  computer.  Another  MACE  feature  is  instrumentation — meters  and 
measuring  devices  that  teU  the  programmer  how  the  user  application  is 
distributed  across  the  hardware  system,  and  how  efficient  the  execution  is. 

This  information  is  valuable  not  only  to  the  researcher  gathering  data  on 
experiments  with  parallel  AI,  but  to  the  programmer  debugging  complex 
applications  on  many  nodes.  Most  current  work  with  MACE  focuses  on 
proving  it  is  a  description  language  for  a  variety  of  distributed  AI  systems. 

A  fuller  account  of  MACE  is  given  in  [10]. 

2.2.3  Concurrent  GESBT  (SAIC) 

The  Digital  Design  article  continues  [6]: 

Another  tool,  which  has  been  used  to  develop  an  end-user  application 
[on  the  iPSC],  is  Concurrent  GESBT.  Concurrent  GESBT  helps  to  dis¬ 
tribute  an  expert  system  across  an  array  of  iPSC  nodes.  Originally  written 
in  Common  Lisp  on  the  IBM  PC,  it  includes  additional  message  constructs. 
These  constructs  use  the  underlying  CCLisp  message  streams  to  allow  the 
expert  systems  on  each  node  to  communicate  with  expert  systems  on  each 
of  the  other  nodes.  The  resulting  collection  of  cooperating  expert  systems 
offers  a  simple  tool  for  distributed  expert  system  applications. 

‘The  iPSC  AI  computer  from  Intel  Scientific  Computers  is  enhanced  by  Gold  HiU  Computer’s 

Concurrent  Common  Lisp  (CCLisp).  Implementing  a  concurrent  configuration,  the  AI  version  of  the 

iPSC  supports  up  to  64  processing  nodes.  [Footnote  in  orginal.] 


26 


Concurrent  GESBT  is  simple  because  it  offers  the  programmer  no  help 
in  distributing  the  application.  The  programmer  determines  how  much 
knowledge  to  store  in  the  knowledge  base  on  each  node,  and  how  many 
nodes  to  use  for  the  application.  Most  significantly,  the  programmer  is 
responsible  for  tuning  the  application:  optimal  performance  depends  on 
a  balance  of  computation  per  node  (work  for  the  individual  expert)  and 
communication  of  data  between  experts  (the  cooperation  requirements  of 
the  problem).  This  is  a  difficult  problem  of  load  balancing,  which  is  at  the 
core  of  parallel  processing  research. 

The  first  application  for  Concurrent  GESBT  is  a  demonstration  battle 
management  simulation  developed  at  Science  Applications  International 
Corp.  (McLean,  VA),  creators  of  GESBT.  A  community  of  cooperating 
expert  systems  uses  captured  knowledge  to  conduct  air  defenses  for  an  air¬ 
craft  carrier  task  group.  Each  expert  system  contcuns  the  defensive  strategy 
for  part  of  the  total  area  about  the  aircraft  carrier.  The  area  around  the 
aircraft  carrier  is  divided  into  six  sectors,  each  representing  60  degrees  of 
the  horizon. 

Six  sector  commanders,  located  in  tin  airborne  radar  command  plane 
(E2C),  axe  each  assigned  an  expert  system  on  a  CCLisp  node.  A  seventh 
expert  system  is  assigned  to  the  aircraft  carrier  commander,  and  an  dghth 
expert  system  tracks  total  resources.  The  application  can  address  more 
than  250  hostile  airplanes  as  they  converge  on  the  carrier  group  from  all 
directions.  Eaeh  of  the  six  expert  systems  uses  its  knowledge  about  defen¬ 
sive  strategy  to  respond  to  the  incoming  airplanes.  Ail  six  cooperate  with 
neighboring  expert  systems  to  borrow  or  loan  resources,  to  warn  of  threats 
entering  new  sectors  and  to  report  success  or  failure. 

The  Concurrent  GESBT  application  uses  only  eight  nodes  of  a  16-node 
iPSC  system.  The  design  is  such,  however,  that  many  instances  of  the 
eight-node  system  can  execute  as  each  community  of  experts  uses  a  differ¬ 
ent  defensive  strategy  against  the  same  threats.  With  concurrent  execution 
of  many  scenarios,  another  expert  system  could  choose  among  all  of  the  sim¬ 
ulation  runs  for  the  best  defensive  strategy.  The  final  defensive  strategy 
could  then  be  presented  to  human  operators,  with  justification  and  reason¬ 
ing.  Such  a  system  would  execute  fax  faster  than  the  human  planning-staff 
equivalent,  and  of  course  the  simulations  could  be  run  again  and  again  as 
the  problem  data  changed. 

2.2.4  ABE  (Teknowledge) 

In  1985,  a  group  at  Teknowledge  led  by  former  HEARSAY  researcher  Lee  Erman  be¬ 
gan  work  on  ABE,  which  was  described  as  “a  multilevel  architecture  for  developing 


27 


intelligent  systems”  [30].  At  the  heart  of  the  ajchitecture  is  a  computing  model  re¬ 
ferred  to  as  “module-oriented  programming,”  which  is  presented  as  a  generalization 
of  object-oriented  programming  models  such  as  Smalltalk  and  Actors.  The  extensions 
are  that  messages  are  broadcast  to  other  modules  who  are  attuned  to  receive  that 
type  of  message,  and  the  module  definitions  must  encapsulate  how  they  manage  a 
set  of  processor  resources  (processors,  memory,  cycles)  to  accomplish  pending  module 
actions.  The  modules  are  constructed  hierarchically.  The  goals  of  this  project  are  to 
allow  reuse  of  previously  contstructed  modules,  integration  of  modules  constructed  in 
different  languages,  and  large-scale  development  of  application  systems  [30]. 

2.2.5  AF  (WPI) 

Peter  Green  of  Worcester  Polytechnic  Institute  has  reported  work  on  a  “framework  for 
real-time  distributed  cooperative  problem  solving”  called  AF  (for  “Activation  Frame¬ 
work”).  This  architecture  attempts  to  remedy  some  of  the  problems  he  encountered  in 
the  Distributed  Sensor  Networks  Testbed  (see  previous  subsection),  namely  the  lack 
of  modularity  and  control  focus  in  the  distributed  HEARSAY  architecture.  The  basic 
approach  is  to  make  what  were  HEARSAY  nodes  into  what  are  here  called  “activation 
framework  objects  (AFOs),”  which  generate  hypotheses  at  varying  levels  of  activation 
(translated  into  immediacy  for  processsing  by  other  nodes)  and  with  varying  “weighted 
evidence  levels”  to  indicate  strength  of  support  for  other  hypotheses.  In  other  words, 
it  is  a  connectionist  system,  except  that  the  machinery  at  each  node  is  more  compli¬ 
cated  than  that  of  model  neurons  because  there  are  expert  knowledge  and  procedures 
for  hypothesis  generation  in  each  AFO.  The  architecture  has  been  used  to  develop  a 
navigator  for  an  autonomous  vehicle  and  a  system  for  a  “smart  conveyer  belt  robot” 
[54]. 


2.2.6  Advanced  Architectures  Project  (Stanford) 

The  Advanced  Architectures  Project  of  Stanford’s  Knowledge  Systems  Laboratory 
encompasses  four  subprojects,  each  of  which  is  to  contribute  to  the  goal  of  achieving 
“2-3  orders  of  magnitude  in  overall  speedup  for  expert  sytems  applicatons  through 
the  exploitation  of  parallelism”  [98].  The  subprojects  are  (1)  The  CARE  Simulator, 
a  program  to  simulate  machines  with  “up  to  256  processors”  that  Is  reported  to  run 
very  slowly  (“2-3  orders  of  magnitude  slower  than  an  equivalent  program  running 
serially”);  (2)  Lamina,  “an  object  oriented  programming  extension  to  Lisp  which  is 
designed  to  operate  in  a  distributed  memory  multiprocessor  environment”;  (3)  CAGE, 
or  Concurrent  AGE,  a  version  of  the  program  AGE  “extended  with  constructs  for  the 
exploitation  of  concurrency  which  is  targeted  at  shared  memory  and  hardware”;  and 


28 


(4)  Poligon,  “a  high  level  language  and  system  for  the  implementation  of  blackboard- 
like  AI  applications  on  distributed  memory  machines”  [98].  This  project  is  funded  by 
DARPA. 

2.2.7  Connectionist  Simulator  (Rochestor) 

The  following  is  a  description  of  the  Rochester  Connectionist  Simulator  for  neural  net 
simulation,  which  appeared  with  the  announcement  of  its  general  release  in  February 
of  1987: 


The  Rochester  simulator  allows  construction  and  simulation  of  arbi¬ 
trary  networks  with  arbitrary  unit  functions.  It  is  designed  to  be  easily 
extensible  both  in  unit  structures  and  user  interface,  and  includes  a  facility 
for  interactive  debugging  during  network  construction.  The  simulator  is 
written  in  C  and  currently  runs  here  on  Suns,  Vaxen,  and  the  BBN  But¬ 
terfly  multiprocessor  (and  should  run  on  any  UNIX  machine).  There  is  a 
graphics  interface  package  which  runs  on  a  Sun  under  Sun  tools,  and  is 
primarily  designed  for  interactive  display  of  the  flow  of  activation  during 
network  simulation  .  The  simulator  is  eeisy  to  use  for  novices,  and  highly 
flexible  for  those  with  expertise.  [51] 

2.3  Conclusions  About  Testbeds  and  Environments 

The  terms  ‘testbed’  and  ‘development  tool’  have  herein  been  distinguished  from  each 
other  primarily  along  the  dimension  of  purpose.  Testbeds,  in  addition  to  providing  a 
more  complete  specification  of  the  problem  than  do  environments,  have  as  their  pri¬ 
mary  purpose  the  carrying  out  of  experiments  to  determine  which  of  several  candidate 
architectures  is  the  best  for  a  particular  problem.  Development  tools  encompeiss  en¬ 
vironments  and  languages  for  building  distributed  AI  systems  to  solve  a  more  general 
class  of  problems.  An  interesting  possibility  is  that  the  two  notions  (testbed  and  tool) 
could  be  combined  to  form  a  tool  for  the  development  and  testing  of  actual  systems. 
The  benefits  of  such  a  merger  are  more  easily  seen  when  one  looks  at  the  limitations 
of  either  approach  in  isolation.  Development  tools  that  lack  a  strong  simulation  of  the 
environment  and  problem  to  be  worked  on  offer  little  in  the  way  of  testing  for  the  sys¬ 
tems  built  with  them,  so  while  the  definitional  facilities  may  make  things  very  nice  for 
the  programmer,  it  may  be  harder  to  test  the  system  gradually  during  development. 
Testbeds  put  the  emphasis  on  being  able  to  test  a  variety  of  architectures  quickly,  which 
limits  the  specification  of  each  architecture  to  fiUing-in  parameters;  the  language  for 
development  is  not  rich  enough,  nor  is  the  scope  of  possible  architectures  large  enough, 
to  support  software  development  in  a  full  sense.  There  are  certainly  places  in  the  ex¬ 
ample  systems  described  above  in  which  the  limits  have  been  stretched.  A  system  that 


29 


is  a  true  hybrid  of  testbed  and  tool  could  be  of  great  use  for  the  development  of  real 
systems,  by  eliminating  the  limitations  inherent  in  either  approach  individually. 

This  suggests  perhaps  a  different  motivation  for  testbeds  than  has  led  to  their  con¬ 
struction  in  the  pzist.  To  the  extent  that  testbeds  are  designed  merely  to  generate 
experimental  results,  it  seems  that  their  value,  though  nonnegligible  even  in  this  con¬ 
text,  is  somewhat  diminished  by  the  fact  that  much  of  what  one  learns  qualitatively 
from  performing  such  experiments  could  have  been  predicted  beforehand,  and  that 
in  other  crises  the  causal  factors  that  go  into  a  result  are  so  complicated  as  to  make 
generalization  impossible.  For  learning  general  principles  about  DAI,  careful  thou^t 
experiments  may  often  be  both  more  effective  and  less  expensive,  but  at  the  point 
where  these  ideas  are  to  be  applied,  it  seems  that  a  testbed  is  indispensable  in  the 
verification  of  well-thought-through,  but  potentially  bug-ridden,  designs.  One  might 
conclude,  then,  that  building  testbeds  is  a  good  idea,  but  in  a  different  style  and  for 
different  reasons  from  those  that  have  been  built  in  the  past.  Namely,  the  testbed 
should  provide  a  rich  development  environment  for  exploring  architectures  pertinent 
to  the  driving  problem,  rather  than  just  providing  some  parameters  to  be  varied,  and 
it  should  be  used  to  find  a  good  design  tailored  to  the  actual  problem  to  be  solved, 
rather  than  to  find  general  rules  for  how  to  tackle  a  class  of  problems  that  may  or  may 
not  be  of  equal  importance. 


30 


References 


[1]  Appelt,  D.  E.  Planning  Natural- Language  Utterances  to  Satisfy  Multiple  Goals. 
Ph.D.  thesis,  Stanford  University,  1982.  Issued  as  Technical  Note  259,  Artificial 
Intelligence  Center,  SRI  International,  Menlo  Park,  California,  1982. 

[2]  Avizienis,  A.  On  the  Achievement  of  a  Highly  Dependable  and  Fault-tolerant  Air 
Traffic  Control  System.  Computer,  (February):84-90,  1987. 

[3]  Ballcird,  D.  Summary  of  Rochester  Group  Effort.  SIGART  Newsletter,  (73):49, 
1980. 

[4]  Benda,  M.,  Jagannathan,  V.,  Dodhiaweda,  R.  On  Optimal  Cooperation  of  Knowl¬ 
edge  Sources.  Boeing  Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  Boeing  Computer  Services, 
1985. 

[5]  Benda,  M.,  Jagannathan,  V.,  Dodhiaweda,  R.  T.  On  Optimal  Cooperation  of 
Knowledge  Sources:  An  Experimental  Investigation.  In  Sridharan,  N.  S.,  editor, 
Report  on  the  1986  Workshop  on  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence.  AI  Magazine, 
8(3):75-87,  1987. 

[6]  Billstrom,  D.  and  Teeter,  J.  AI  Meets  Paxallel  Processing.  Digital  Design, 
(December):38-41,  1986. 

[7]  Bisiani,  R.  AGORA:  An  Environment  for  Building  Problem  Solvers  on  Dis¬ 
tributed  Computer  Systems.  In  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea 
Ranch,  California,  1985. 

[8]  Bisiani,  R.  Agora.  In  Sridharan,  N.  S.,  editor,  Report  on  the  1986  Workshop  on 
Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence.  AI  Magazine,  8(3):75-87,  1987. 

[9]  Bleistein,  S.,  Goettge,  R.,  Petroski,  F.,  and  Wiseman,  R.  Capacity  Management 
of  Air  Traffic  Control  Computer  Systems.  Computer,  (February ):73-82,  1987. 

[10]  Braganza,  C.  and  Gasser,  L.  MACE  Multi-agent  Computing  Environment,  Ver¬ 
sion  6.0,  Release  Note  1.0.  Technical  Report  CRJ  87-16,  Computer  Research 
Institute,  University  of  Southern  California,  Los  Angeles,  California,  1987. 

[11]  Cammarata,  S.,  McArthur,  D.,  and  Steeb,  R.  Strategies  of  Cooperation  in  Dis¬ 
tributed  Problem  Solving.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Eighth  International  Joint  Con¬ 
ference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Karlsruhe,  West  Germany,  1983. 

[12]  Cohen,  P.  R.  and  Levesque,  H.  J.  Speech  Acts  and  Rationality.  In  Distributed 
Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea  Ranch,  California,  1985. 


31 


[13]  Cohen,  R.  R.  and  Levesque,  H.  J.  Persistence,  Intention,  and  Commitment.  In 
Reasoning  About  Actions  and  Plans;  Proceedings  of  the  1986  Workshop,  Morgan 
Kaufmann,  Los  Altos,  California,  1987. 

[14]  Conry,  Susan  E.  DAI  at  Clarkson  University.  In  Sridharan,  N.  S.,  editor.  Report 
on  the  1986  Workshop  on  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence.  AI  Magazine,  8(3):75- 
87,  1987. 

[15]  Corkill,  D.  D.  and  Lesser,  V.  R.  The  Use  of  Meta-level  Control  for  Coordination 
in  a  Distributed  Problem  Solving  Network.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Eighth  Inter¬ 
national  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Karlsruhe,  West  Germany, 
1983. 

[16]  Davies,  T.  Analogy.  Undergraduate  Honors  Thesis,  Stanford  University,  1985. 
Issued  as  Informal  Note  IN-CSLI-85-4,  Center  for  the  Study  of  Language  and 
Information,  Stanford  University,  1985. 

[17]  Davies,  T.  R.  and  Russell,  S.  J.  A  Logical  Approach  to  Reasoning  by  Analogy.  In 
Proceedings  of  the  Tenth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence. 
Milan,  Italy,  1987. 

[18]  Davies,  T.  R.  Some  Notes  on  the  Probabilistic  Semantics  of  Logistic  Function 
Parameters  in  Neural  Networks.  To  Appear  In  Neural  Networks  (Special  Issue): 
Proceedings  of  the  First  Annual  Meeting  of  the  International  Neural  Network  So¬ 
ciety,  Boston,  Massachusetts,  1988. 

[19]  Davis,  R.  Report  on  the  Workshop  on  Distributed  AI.  SIGART  Newsletter, 
(73):42-52,  1980. 

[20]  Davis,  R.  A  Model  for  Planning  in  a  Multi-agent  Environment:  Steps  Toward 
Principles  of  Teamwork.  Working  Paper  217,  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  1981. 

[21]  Davis,  R.  Report  on  the  Second  Workshop  on  Distributed  AI.  SIGART  Newslet¬ 
ter,  (80):13-23,  1982. 

[22]  Davis,  R.  and  Smith,  R.  G.  Negotiation  as  a  Metaphor  for  Distributed  Problem 
Solving.  Artificial  Intelligence,  20:63-109,  1983. 

[23]  Drummond,  M.  E.  Refining  and  Extending  the  Procedural  Net.  In  Proceedings  of 
the  Ninth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Los  Angeles, 
California,  1985. 

[24]  Durfee,  E.  H.,  Lesser,  V.  R.,  and  Corkill,  D.  D.  Coherent  Cooperation  Among 
Communicating  Problem  Solvers.  In  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop, 
Sea  Ranch,  California,  1985. 


32 


[25]  Durfee,  E.  H.  and  Lesser,  V.  R.  Incremental  Planning  to  Control  a  Blackboard- 
based  Problem  Solver.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Fifth  National  Conference  on  Artifi¬ 
cial  Intelligence,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  1986. 

[26]  Erman,  L.  D.,  Fennell,  R.  D.,  Lesser,  V.  R.,  and  Reddy,  D.  R.  System  Organi¬ 
zations  for  Speech  Understanding:  Implications  of  Network  and  Multiprocessor 
Computer  Architectures  for  AI.  Third  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial 
Intelligence:  Advance  Papers  of  the  Conference,  Stanford,  California,  1973. 

[27]  Erman,  L.  D.  and  Lesser,  V.  R.  A  Multi-level  Organization  for  Problem  Solving 
Using  Many,  Diverse,  Cooperating  Sources  of  Knowledge.  In  Advance  Papers 
of  the  Fourth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Tbilisi, 
Georgia,  USSR,  1975. 

[28]  Erman,  L.  D.,  Hayes-Roth,  F.,  Lesser,  V.  R.,  and  Reddy,  D.  R.  The  Hearsay- 
II  Speech-understanding  System:  Integrating  Knowledge  to  Resolve  Uncertainty. 
Computing  Surveys,  12:213-253,  1980 

[29]  Erman,  L.  D.,  London,  P.  E.,  and  Fickas,  S.  F.  The  Design  and  an  Exaonple  Use 
of  Hearsay-Ill.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Seventh  International  Joint  Conference  on 
Artificial  Intelligence,  Vancouver,  B.  C.,  1981 

[30]  Erman,  L.,  Fehling,  M.,  Forrest,  S.,  and  Lark,  J.  S.  ABE:  Architectural  Overview. 
In  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea  Ranch,  California,  1985. 

[31]  Fagin,  R.  and  Halpern,  J.  Y.  Belief,  Awareness,  and  Limited  Reasoning:  A  Pre¬ 
liminary  Report.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Ninth  International  Joint  Conference  on 
Artificial  Intelligence,  Los  Angeles,  California,  1985. 

[32]  Fagin,  R.,  Halpern,  J.  Y.,  and  Vardi,  M.  Y.  What  Can  Machines  Know?  On  the 
Epistemic  Properties  of  Machines.  In  Proceedings  of  the  National  Conference  on 
Artificial  Intelligence,  Philadelphia,  Pennsylvania,  1986. 

[33]  Fehling,  M.  and  Erman,  L.  Report  on  the  Third  Annual  Workshop  on  Distributed 
Artifical  Intelligence.  SIGART  Newsletter,  (84);3-12,  1983. 

[34]  Fikes,  R.  Automating  the  Problem  Solving  in  Procedural  Office  Work.  In  Pro¬ 
ceedings  of  the  AFIPS  Office  Automation  Conference,  Houston,  Texas,  1981. 

[35]  Filman,  R.  E.  Architectures  for  Distributed  Problem  Solving  Systems.  In  Dis¬ 
tributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea  Ranch,  California,  1985. 

[36]  Fischler,  M.  A.  and  Firschein,  0.  Parallel  Guessing:  A  Strategy  for  High-Speed 
Computation.  Technical  Note  No.  338,  Artihcial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI  Interna¬ 
tional,  Menlo  Park,  California,  1984. 


33 


[37]  Fox,  M.  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  at  Carnegie  Mellon  University:  Dis¬ 
tributed  Sensor  Nets.  SIGART  Newsletter,  (73):44,  1980. 

[38]  Fox,  M.  S.  The  Intelligent  Management  System:  An  Overview.  In  Sol,  H.  G., 
editor,  Processes  and  Tools  for  Decision  Support,  North-HoUand  Publishing  Com¬ 
pany,  1983.  Also  Issued  as  Technical  Report  CMU-RI-TR-81-4,  Robotics  Insti¬ 
tute,  Carnegie  Mellon  University,  1981. 

[39]  Frawley,  W.  and  Worrest,  R.  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  at  GTE  Labora¬ 
tories.  AI  Magazine,  6:237,  1985. 

[40]  Garot,  J.  M.,  Weathers,  D.,  and  Hawker,  T.  Evaluating  Proposed  Architectures 
for  the  FAA’s  Advanced  Automation  System.  Computer,  (February):33-45,  1987. 

[41]  Gasser,  L.  The  1985  Workshop  on  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence.  AI  Maga¬ 
zine,  8(2):91-97,  1987.  Issued  as  Technical  Report  No.  USC-86-222,  University  of 
Southern  California,  1986. 

[42]  Genesereth,  M.  R.,  Ginsberg,  M.  L.,  cind  Rosenschein,  J.  S.  Cooperation  With¬ 
out  Communication.  Report  No.  HPP-84-36,  Heuristic  Programming  Project, 
Stanford  University,  1984. 

[43]  Genesereth,  M.  R.,  Ginsberg,  M.  L.,  and  Rosenschein,  J.  S.  Solving  the  Prisoner’s 
Dilemma.  Report  No.  HPP-84-31,  Heuristic  Programming  Project,  Stanford  Uni¬ 
versity,  1984. 

[44]  Genesereth,  M.  R.,  Ginsberg,  M.  L.,  and  Rosenschein,  J.  S.  A  Formal  Framework 
for  Rational  Interaction.  AI  Magazine,  6:237-238,  1985. 

[45]  Georgeff,  M.  P.  Communication  and  Interaction  in  Multi- Agent  Planning.  In 
Proceedings  of  the  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Washington, 
D.C.,  1983. 

[46]  Georgeff,  M.  P.  A  Theory  of  Multiagent  Planning.  In  Proceedings  of  the  National 
Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Austin,  Texas,  1984. 

[47]  Georgeff,  M.  P.  and  Konolige,  K.  ONR  Research  on  Distributed  Reasoning  and 
Planning.  Research  Summary,  Project  8342,  Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI 
International,  Menlo  Park,  California,  1986. 

[48]  Georgeff,  M.  P.  The  Representation  of  Events  in  Multiagent  Domains.  In  Pro¬ 
ceedings  of  the  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Philadelphia,  Penn¬ 
sylvania,  1986. 


34 


[49]  Georgeff,  M.  P.  and  Konolige,  K.  G.  Distributed  Reeisoning  and  Planning:  Part 
One  -  Technical  Proposal.  Prepared  by  the  Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI 
International,  for  the  Office  of  Naval  Research,  1986. 

[50]  Georgeff,  M.  P.  Many  Agents  Are  Better  than  One.  Technical  Note  417,  Artificial 
Intelligence  Center,  SRI  International,  Menlo  Park,  California,  1987. 

[51]  Goddard,  N.  Rochester  Connectionist  Simulator  Release  in  April.  Electronic 
Message  Posted  to  Neuron  Digest,  17-FEB-1987  16:40. 

[52]  Goldman,  A.  L  Epistemology  and  Cognition.,  Harvard  University  Press,  Cam¬ 
bridge,  Massachusetts,  1986. 

[53]  Green,  P.  E.  DSN  Test-bed  Tour  and  Demonstration.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Dis¬ 
tributed  Sensor  Networks  Workshop,  MIT  Lincoln  Laboratory,  Lexington,  Mas¬ 
sachusetts,  1982. 

[54]  Green,  P.  E.  AF:  A  Framework  for  Real-time  Distributed  Cooperative  Problem 
Solving.  In  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea  Ranch,  C<ilifornia, 
1985. 

[55]  Halpem,  J.  Y.  and  Moses,  Y.  Towards  a  Theory  of  Knowledge  and  Ignorance: 
Preliminary  Report.  Research  Report  RJ  4448  (48136),  IBM  Research  Division, 
San  Jose,  California,  1984. 

[56]  Halpem,  J.  Y.  and  Moses,  Y.  Knowledge  and  Common  Knowledge  in  a  Dis¬ 
tributed  Environment.  1987.  Unpublished  manuscript. 

[57]  Hayes-Roth,  B.  A  Blackboard  Model  of  Control.  Report  No.  HPP-83-30,  Heuristic 
Programming  Project,  Stanford  University,  1984, 

[58]  Hecht-Nielsen,  R.  Performance  Limits  of  Optical,  Electro-optical,  and  Electronic 
Neurocomputers.  Unpublished  manuscript. 

[59]  Hewitt,  C.,  Bishop,  P.,  and  Steiger,  R.  A  Universal  Modular  ACTOR  Formalism 
for  Artificial  Intelligence.  In  Third  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial 
Intelligence:  Advance  Papers  of  the  Conference,  Stanford,  California,  1973. 

[60]  Hewitt,  C.  and  de  Jong,  P.  Analyzing  the  Roles  of  Descriptions  and  Actions  in 
Open  Systems.  In  Proceedings  of  the  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelli¬ 
gence,  Washington,  D.  C.,  1983. 

[61]  Hewitt,  C.  The  Challenge  of  Open  Systems.  Byte,  (April):223-242,  1985, 

[62]  Hopfield,  J.  J.  Neural  Networks  and  Physical  Systems  with  Emergent  Collective 
Computational  Abilities.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  USA, 
79:2554-2559,  1982. 


35 


[63]  Hunt,  V.  R.  and  Zellweger,  A.  Strategies  for  Future  Air  Traffic  Control  Systems. 
Computer,  (February):19-32,  1987. 

[64]  Jagannathan,  V.  and  Dodhiawala,  R.  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence:  An  An- 
notated  Bibliography.  In  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea  Ranch, 
California,  1985. 

[65]  Kaelbling,  L.  P.  An  Architecture  for  Intelligent  Reactive  Systems.  In  Reasoning 
About  Actions  and  Plans:  Proceedings  of  the  1986  Workshop,  Morgan  Kaufmann, 
Los  Altos,  California,  1987. 

[66]  Kirkpatrick,  S.,  Gelatt,  C.  D.  Jr.,  and  Vecchi,  M.  P.  Optimization  by  Simulated 
Annealing.  Science,  220:671-680,  1983. 

[67]  Klahr,  P.  and  Faught,  W.  S.  Knowledge-based  Simulation.  In  Proceedings  of  the 
First  Annual  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Stanford,  California, 
1980. 

[68]  Klahr,  P.,  McArthur,  D.,  and  Narain,  S.  SWIRL;  An  Object-oriented  Air  Battle 
Simulator.  In  Proceedings  of  the  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence, 
Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  1982. 

[69]  Kleinrock,  L.  Distributed  Systems.  Computer,  (November):90-103,  1985. 

[70]  Konolige,  K.  and  Nilsson,  N.  J.  Multiple- Agent  Planning  Systems.  Proceedings 
of  the  First  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Stanford,  California, 
1980. 

[71]  Konolige,  K.  A  Computational  Theory  of  Belief  Introspection.  In  Proceedings  of 
the  Ninth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Los  Angeles, 
California,  1985. 

[72]  Konolige,  K.  Experimental  Robot  Psychology.  Technical  Note  363,  Artificial  In¬ 
telligence  Center,  SRI  International,  Menlo  Park,  California,  1985. 

[73]  Kornfield,  W.  A.  and  Hewitt,  C.  E.  The  Scientific  Community  Metaphor.  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics,  SMC-ll:24-33,  1981. 

[74]  Lamport,  L.  and  Fischer,  M.  J.  Byzantine  Generals  and  Transaction  Commit  Pro¬ 
tocols.  Technical  Report  Op. 62,  Computer  Science  Laboratory,  SRI  International, 
Menlo  Park,  California,  1982. 

[75]  Lansky,  A.  L.  Behavioral  Specification  and  Planning  for  Multiagent  Domains. 
Technical  Note  360,  Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI  International,  Menlo  Park, 
California,  1985. 


36 


[76]  Lansky,  A.  L.  Specification  and  Analysis  of  Concurrency.  In  Distributed  Artificial 
Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea  Ranch,  California,  1985. 

[77]  Lansky,  A.  L.  A  Representation  of  Parallel  Activity  Based  on  Events,  Structure, 
and  Causality.  In  Reasoning  About  Actions  and  Plans:  Proceedings  of  the  1986 
Workshop,  Morgan  Kaufmann,  Los  Altos,  California,  1987. 

[78]  Lansky,  A.  L.  Localized  Event-based  Reasoning  for  Muiticigent  Domains.  Techni¬ 
cal  Note  423,  Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI  International,  Menlo  Park,  Cali¬ 
fornia,  1988. 

[79]  Lenat,  D.  B.  Beings:  Knowledge  as  Interacting  Experts.  In  Advance  Papers  of  the 
Fourth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Tbilisi,  Georgia, 
USSR,  1975. 

[80]  Lenat,  D.  B.  AM:  An  Artificial  Intelligence  Approach  to  Discovery  in  Mathematics 
as  Heuristic  Search.  In  Davis,  R.  and  Lenat,  D.  B.,  editors,  Knowledge-based 
Systems  in  Artificial  Intelligence,  McGraw-Hill,  New  York,  1982. 

[81]  Lesser,  V.  R.  and  Erman,  L.  D.  Distributed  Interpretation:  A  Model  and  an 
Experiment.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Computers,  C-29:1144-1162,  1980. 

[82]  Lesser,  V.  and  Corkill,  D.  Cooperative  Distributed  Problem-solving  and  Organi¬ 
zational  Self-design.  SIGART  Newsletter,  (73):47,  1980. 

[83]  Lesser,  V.  R.  and  Corkill,  D.  D.  Distributed  Interpretation  Testbed.  SIGART 
Newsletter,  (80):16-17,  1982. 

[84]  Lesser,  V.,  Corkill,  D.,  Pavlin,  J.,  Lefkowitz,  L.,  Hudlicka,  E.,  Brooks,  R.,  and 
Reed,  S.  A  High-level  Simulation  Testbed  for  Cooperative  Distributed  Prob¬ 
lem  Solving.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Third  International  Conference  on  Distributed 
Computer  Systems,  1982. 

[85]  Lesser,  V.  and  Corkill,  D.  Coordination  in  Distributed  Problem  Solving.  SIGART 
Newsletter,  (84):8-9,  1983. 

[86]  Lesser,  V.  R.  and  Corkill,  D.  D.  Coherence  in  Distributed  Problem  Solving.  AI 
Magazine,  6:235-236,  1985. 

[87]  Lesser,  V.  R.,  Durfee,  E.  H.,  and  Corkill,  D.  D.  Current  DAI  Research  at  the 
University  of  Massachusetts.  In  Sridharan,  N.  S.,  editor.  Report  on  the  1986 
Workshop  on  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence.  AI  Magazine,  8(3):75-87, 1987. 

[88]  MacQueen,  D.  B.  Models  for  Distributed  Computing.  Report  No.  351,  Lab- 
oratoire  de  Recherche  en  Informatique  et  Automatique,  Domaine  de  Voluceau 
Rocquencourt,  Le  Chesnay,  France,  1979. 


37 


[89]  McArthur,  D.,  Steeb,  R.,  and  Cammarata,  S.  A  Framework  for  Distributed  Prob¬ 
lem  Solving.  In  Proceedings  of  the  National  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence, 
Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania,  1982. 

[90]  McArthur,  D.,  Steeb,  R.,  and  Cammarata,  S.  Distributed  Intelligence  for  Air 
Fleet  Control.  SIGART  Newsletter,  (84):5-6, 1983. 

[91]  Minsky,  M.  L.  and  Papert,  S.  A,  Perceptrons:  An  Introduction  to  Computational 
Geometry  (Expanded  Edition).  Cambridge,  MA:  The  MIT  Press,  1988. 

[92]  Monteiro,  L.  F.  and  Pereira,  F.  C.  N.  Outline  of  a  Sheaf-Theoretic  Approach  to 
Concurrency.  In  First  Annual  Symposium  on  Logic  in  Computer  Science,  Cam¬ 
bridge,  Massachusetts,  1986. 

[93]  Moses,  Y.  and  Tuttle,  M.  R.  Programming  Simultaneous  Actions  Using  Common 
Knowledge.  In  Proceedings  of  the  27th  Annual  IEEE  Symposium  on  Foundations 
of  Computer  Science,  Toronto,  Ontario,  1986. 

[94]  Parunak,  H.  V.  D.  and  Kindrick,  J.  A  Connectionist  Model  for  Material  Handling. 
In  Sridharan,  N.  S.,  editor.  Report  on  the  1986  Workshop  on  Distributed  Artificial 
Intelligence.  AI  Magazine,  8(3):75-87,  1987. 

[95]  PoUack,  M.  E.  Inferring  Domain  Plans  in  Question  Answering.  Ph.D.  thesis.  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Pennsylvania,  1986.  Issued  as  Technical  Note  403,  Artificial  Intelligence 
Center,  SRI  International,  Menlo  Park,  California,  1986. 

[96]  Pollack,  M.  E.  A  Model  of  Plan  Inference  that  Distinguishes  between  the  Beliefs 
of  Actors  and  Observers.  In  Reasoning  About  Actions  and  Plans:  Proceedings  of 
the  1986  Workshop,  Morgan  Kaufmann,  Los  Altos,  California,  1987. 

[97]  Reddy,  D.  R.,  Erman,  L.  D.,  Fennell,  R.  D.,  and  Neely,  R.  B.  The  Hearsay 
Speech  Understanding  System:  An  Example  of  the  Recognition  Process.  In  Third 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence:  Advance  Papers  of  the 
Conference,  Stanford,  California,  1973. 

[98]  Rice,  J.  P,  Advanced  Architectures  Project.  In  Sridharan,  N.  S.,  editor,  Report  on 
the  1986  Workshop  on  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence.  AI  Magazine,  8(3):75- 
87,  1987. 

[99]  Rich,  E.  Artificial  Intelligence,  McGraw-Hill,  Inc.,  New  York,  1983. 

[100]  Rosenschein,  J.  S.  and  Genesereth,  M.  R.  Communication  and  Cooperation. 
Report  No.  HPP-84-5,  Heuristic  Programming  Project,  Stanford  University,  1984. 

[101]  Rosenschein,  J.  S.  and  Genesereth,  M.  R.  Deals  Among  Rational  Agents.  Report 
No.  HPP-84-45,  Heuristic  Programming  Project,  Stanford  University,  1984. 


38 


[102]  Rosenschein,  J.  S.  Rational  Interaction:  Cooperation  Among  Intelligent  Agents. 
Ph.D.  thesis,  Stanford  University,  1985. 

[103]  Rosenschein,  S.  J.  Formal  Theories  of  Knowledge  in  AI  and  Robotics.  New 
Generation  Computing,  3:345-357,  1985. 

[104]  Rosenschein,  S.  J.  and  Kaelbling,  L.P.  The  Synthesis  of  Digital  Machines  with 
Provable  Epistemic  Properties.  In  Theoretical  Aspects  of  Reasoning  About  Knowl¬ 
edge:  Proceedings  of  1986  Conference,  Morgan  Kaufmann,  Los  Altos,  California, 
1986. 

[105]  Rumelhart,  D.  E.,  McClelland,  J.  L.,  and  the  PDP  Research  Group.  Parallel 
Distributed  Processing:  Explorations  in  the  Microstructures  of  Cognition,  Volume 
I:  Foundations,  MIT  Press,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  1986. 

[106]  Shastri,  L.  Knowledge  Representation  and  Inference  in  a  Parallel  Evidential 
Framework.  AI  Magazine,  6:238,  1985. 

[107]  Smith,  R.  G.  A  Framework  for  Problem  Solving  in  a  Distributed  Problem  Solving 
Environment.  Ph.D.  thesis,  Stanford  University,  1978.  Issued  as  Technical  Report 
No.  STAN-CS-78-700  (HPP-78-28),  Department  of  Computer  Science,  Stanford 
University,  1978. 

[108]  Smith,  R.  G.  and  Friedland,  P.  E.  Unit  Package  User’s  Guide.  Report  No.  DREA 
TM  80/L,  Defence  Research  Establishment  Atlantic,  Dartmouth,  Nova  Scotia, 

1980.  Also  Issued  as  Report  No.  HPP-80-28,  Heuristic  Programming  Project, 
Stanford  University,  1980. 

[109]  Smith,  R.  G.  and  Davis  R.  Frameworks  for  Cooperation  in  Distributed  Problem 
Solving.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics,  SMC-1 1:61-70, 

1981. 

[110]  Smith,  R.  G.  CNET:  Simulation  of  Distributed  Problem  Solving.  SIGART 
Newsletter,  (80):16,  1982. 

[111]  Smith,  R.  G.  Report  on  the  1984  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop. 
AI  Magazine,  5:234-243,  1985. 

[112]  Sridharan,  N.  S.  Report  on  the  1986  Workshop  on  Distributed  Artificial  Intelli¬ 
gence.  AI  Magazine,  8(3):75-87,  1987. 

[113]  Steeb,  R.,  Narain,  S.,  Cammarata,  S.,  and  Giarla,  W.  Cooperative  Intelligent 
Systems.  AI  Magazine,  6:225,  1985. 


39 


[114]  Stefanuk,  V.  L.  Collective  Behaviour  of  Automata  and  the  Problems  of  Stable 
Local  Control  of  a  Large-scale  System.  In  Second  International  Joint  Conference 
on  Artificial  Intelligence:  Advance  Papers  of  the  Conference,  London,  England, 
1971. 

[115]  Stefik,  M.  J.  Planning  with  Constraints.  Technical  Report  No.  STAN-CS-80-784 
(HPP-80-2),  Department  of  Computer  Science,  Stanford  University,  1980. 

[116]  Stuart,  C.  J.  A  New  View  of  Parallel  Activity  for  Conflict  Resolution.  In  Rea¬ 
soning  About  Actions  and  Plans:  Proceedings  of  the  1986  Workshop,  Morgan 
Kaufmann,  Los  Altos,  California,  1987. 

[117]  Sutton,  R.  S.  Learning  Distributed,  Searchable,  Internal  Models.  In  Distributed 
Artificial  Intelligence  Workshop,  Sea  Ranch,  California,  1985. 

[118]  Thorndyke,  P.,  McArthur,  D.,  Cammarata,  S.,  cind  Steeb,  R.  Distributed  Prob¬ 
lem  Solving  in  Air  Traffic  Control.  SIGART  Newsletter,  (80):17-18,  1982. 

[119]  Turner,  D.  B.,  Burns,  R.  D.,  and  Hecht,  H.  Designing  Micro- based  Systems  for 
Fail-safe  Travel.  IEEE  Spectrum,  (February):58-63,  1987. 

[120]  Wesson,  R.,  Steeb,  R.,  and  Hayes-Roth,  F.  Distributed  Intelligence  for  Air  Fleet 
Control.  SIGART  Newsletter,  (73):47-48,  1980. 

[121]  Wesson,  R.,  Hayes-Roth,  F.,  Burge,  J.  W.,  Stasz,  C.,  and  Sunshine,  C.  A.  Net¬ 
work  Structures  for  Distributed  Situation  Assessment.  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics,  SMC-1 1:5-23,  1981. 

[122]  Worrest,  R.  W.  and  SandeH,  H.  S.  K.  DAI  Research  at  GTE  Labs:  Cooper¬ 
ative,  Time-constrained  Problem  Solving.  In  Distributed  Artificial  Intelligence 
Workshop,  Sea  Ranch,  California,  1985. 


40 


