AD-A019  641 

PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  A REPRESENTATION  FOR  A KNOWLEDGE- 
BASED  CONSULTATION  PROGRAM 

Randall  Davis,  et  al 

Stanford  University 


Prepared  for: 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
October  1975 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


w 


ADA019641 


Stanford  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
Memo  AIM-266 


October  1975 


Computer  Science  Department 
Report  No.  STAN-CS-75-519 


Production  Rules  as  a Representation  for  a 
Knowledge-Based  Consultation  Program 

by 

Randall  Davis 
Bruce  Buchanan 
Edward  Shortliffe 


Research  sponsored  by 

National  Institutes  of  Health 
Grant  HS01544 


Biotechnology  Resources 
Grant  RR-00785 

Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 
ARPA  Order  No.  2494 


COMPUTER  SCIENCE  DEPARTMENT 
Stanford  University 


Reproduced  by 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 


U$  Department  of  Commerce 
Springfield,  VA.  22151 


*>/ 


[ "piSTR^y.'  • 

• Apr-' 

T, 


i um tec 


UNCLASSIFIED 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
•BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

1 REPORT  NUMBER  2.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 

stan-cs-75-519 

S.  RECIPIENT'S  CAT ALOG  NUMBER 

4.  TITLE  ond  Submit) 

Production  Rules  as  a Representation  for  a 
Knowledge-Based  Consultation  Program. 

S.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  S PERIOD  COVERED 

Technical  October  1975 

s.  performing  org.  report  number 

AIM266 

7 author^; 

R.  Davis,  B.  Buchanan  and  E.  Short liffe 

• contract  or  grant  number^; 

dahc15-73-c-o>+35 

t.  performing  organization  name  ano  aooress 

Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
Stanford  University 
Stanford,  California  9*005 

10.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT.  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  • WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

ARPA  Order  21*9** 

II  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  ANO  AOORESS 

Col.  Dave  Russell,  Dep.  Dir.,  ARPA,  IPT, 

AREA  Headquarters,  lLOO  Wilson  Blvd.  Arlington, 
Virginia  22209 

12.  REPORT  DATE 

October  1975 

11.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

3T  V-  A 

14  MONITORING  AGENCY  name  A AODRESSflf  dllloront  fro*  Controlling  Olttco) 

0NR  Representative,  Philip  Surra 
Durand  Aeronautics  Building  Room  165 
Stanford  University 
Stanford,  California  9** 305 

IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (ot  thlo  roport) 

15 

IS*.  DECLASSI  FI  cation/ down  grading 
SCHEDULE 

IS.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ot  thli  Roport) 

Releasable  without  limitations  on  dissemination. 

17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (o(  tho  obotrocl  onforoif  fn  Block  20,  it  dtlloronl  Iron  Roport) 

is.  supplementary  notes 

20.  ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  rovoroo  oldo  If  noeoooory  and  Identity  by  block  numbor) 

The  MYCIN  system  has  begun  to  exhibit a high  level  of  performance  as  a 
consultant  on  the  difficult  task  of  selecting  antibiotic  therapy  for 
bacteremia.  This  report  discusses  issues  of  representation  and  design  for 
the  system.  We  describe  the  basic  task  and  document  the  constraints 
involved  in  the  use  of  a program  as  a consultant.  The  control  structure 
and  knowledge  representation  of  the  system  are  examined  in  this  light,  and 
special  attention  is  given  to  the  impact  of  production  rules  as  a repre- 
sentation. The  extent  of  the  domain  independence  ot  the  methodology  ia.  alafl. 

DO  1473  COITION  OF  I NOV  SS  IS  OBSOLETE 

S/N  0 10  2*  0 14*  660  1 


form  . .... ■ examined . 


UN  CLASSIFIED 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  RACE  Doto  Mntorod) 


Stanford  Artificial  Intelligence  Laboratory 
Memo  AIM-266 


October  1975 


Computer  Science  Department 
Report  No.  STAN-CS-75-519 


Production  Rules  as  a Representation  for  a 
Knowledge-Based  Consultation  Program 

by 

Randall  Davis 
Bruce  Buchanan 
Edward  Shortliffe 


ABSTRACT 


The  MYCIN  system  has  begun  to  exhibit  a high  level  of  performance  as  a consultant  on  the 
difficult  task  of  selecting  antibiotic  therapy  for  bacteremia.  This  report  discusses  issues  of 
representation  and  design  for  the  system.  Wo  describe  the  basic  task  and  document  the 
constraints  involved  in  the  use  of  a progran  as  a consultant.  The  control  structure  and 
knowledge  representation  of  the  system  are  examined  in  this  light,  and  special  attention  is  given 
to  the  impact  of  production  rules  as  a representation.  The  extent  of  the  domain  independence  of 
the  methodology  is  also  examined.  This  is  a pre-print  of  a paper  submitted  to  Artificial 
Intelligence.  


Randall  Davis  and  Bruce  Buchanan  are  in  the  Computer  Science  Department,  Edward  Shortliffe  is  in 
the  Department  of  Medicine.  The  work  reported  here  was  funded  in  part  by  grants  from  the  National 
Institutes  of  Health:  NIH  Grant  HS01S44  and  NIH  Grant  CM  29662,  in  part  by  the  Advanced 
Research  Projects  Agency,  under  ARPA  Contract  DAHC15-7S-C-04S5,  and  by  the  Medical  Scientist 
Training  Program  under  NIH  Grant  CM  10922.  Computing  support  was  furnished  by  the 
SUM  EX- AIM  computer  resource  at  Stanford  University,  funded  by  the  Biotechnology  Resouces  Branch 
of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  under  Grant  RR-00785. 

The  views  and  conclusions  contained  in  this  document  are  those  of  the  author(s)  and  should  not  be 
interpreted  as  necessarily  representing  the  official  policies,  either  expressed  or  implied,  of  Stanford 
University  ARPA,  National  Institutes  of  Health,  or  the  U.  S.  Government. 

Reproduced  in  the  U.S.A.  Available  from  the  National  Technical  Information  Service,  Springfield 
Virginia  221  SI.  . ' 


INTRODUCTION 


1 


[1]  INTRODUCTION 

Two  recent  trends  in  artificial  intelligence  research  have  been  applications  of  A I to 
‘real-world’  problems,  and  the  incorporation  in  programs  of  large  amounts  of  task-specific 
knowledge.  The  former  is  motivated  in  part  by  the  belief  that  artificial  problems  may  prove  in  the 
long  run  to  be  more  a diversion  than  a base  to  build  on,  and  in  part  by  the  belief  that  the  field  has 
developed  sufficiently  to  provide  techniques  capable  of  tackling  real  problems. 

The  move  toward  what  have  been  called  'knowledge-based'  systems  represents  a change  from 
previous  attempts  at  generalized  problem  solvers  (as,  for  example,  CPS).  Earlier  work  on  such 
systems  demonstrated  that  while  there  was  a large  body  of  useful  general  purpose  techniques  (e.g, 
problem  decomposition  into  subgoals,  heuristic  search  in  its  many  forms),  these  did  not  by 
themselves  offer  sufficient  power  for  high  performance.  Rather  than  non-specific  problem  solving 
power,  knowledge-based  systems  have  emphasized  both  the  accumulation  of  large  amounts  of 
knowledge  in  a single  domain,  and  the  development  of  domain-specific  techniques,  in  order  to 
develop  a high  level  of  expertise. 

There  are  numerous  examples  of  systems  embodying  both  trends,  including  efforts  at  symbolic 
manipulation  of  algebraic  expressions  [MACSYMA 1974),  speech  understanding  [Lesserl974], 
chemical  inference  [Buchanan  1971],  applications  of  advanced  automation  techniques  to  industrial 
assembly  [Finkell974,  Rosen  1975,  Nilsson  1 975],  some  work  on  natural  language  [Woods  1972],  and 
the  creation  of  computer  consultants  as  interactive  advisors  for  various  tasks  [Hart  1975, 
Shortliffe  1975a]. 

In  this  paper  we  discuss  issues  of  representation  and  design  for  one  such  knowledge-based 
application  program  - the  MYCIN  system  developed  over  the  past  three  years  as  an 
interdisciplinary  project  at  Stanford  University.1  We  examine  in  particular  how  the  implementation 
of  various  system  capabilities  is  facilitated  or  inhibited  by  the  use  of  production  rules  as  a knowledge 
representation.  In  addition,  the  limits  of  applicability  of  this  methodology  are  investigated. 

We  begin  with  a review  of  features  which  were  seen  to  be  essential  to  any  knowledge-based 
consultation  system,  and  suggest  how  these  imply  specific  program  design  criteria.  We  note  also  the 
additional  challenges  offered  by  the  use  of  such  a system  in  a medical  domain.  This  is  followed  by 
an  explanation  of  the  system  structure,  and  its  fundamental  assumptions.  The  bulk  of  the  paper  is 
then  devoted  to  a report  of  our  experience  with  the  benefits  and  drawbacks  of  production  rules  as  a 
knowledge  representation  for  a high  performance  A I program. 


2 


SYS TEH  COALS 


' 


j 


[2] 


SYSTEM  GOALS 


The  MYCIN  system  was  developed  originally  to  provide  consultative  advice  on  diagnosis  of 
and  therapy  for  infectious  diseases  - in  particular,  bacterial  infections  in  the  blood  2 From  the  start, 
the  project  has  been  shaded  by  several  important  constraints.  The  decision  to  construct  a high 
performance  A I program  in  the  consultant  model  brought  with  it  several  demands.  First,  the 
program  had  to  be  useful  if  we  expected  to  attract  the  interest  and  assistance  of  experts  in  the  field 
The  task  area  was  thus  chosen  partly  because  of  a demonstrated  need  for  example,  in  a recent  year 
one  of  every  four  people  in  the  U.S.  was  given  penicillin,  and  almost  90S  of  those  prescriptions  were 
unnecessary  [Kagan  1973],  Problems  such  as  these  indicate  the  need  for  more  (or  more  accessible) 
consultants  to  physicians  selecting  antimicrobial  drugs.  Usefulness  also  implies  competence, 
consistently  high  performance,  and  ease  of  use.  If  advice  is  not  reliable,  or  is  difficult  to  obtain,  the 
utility  of  the  program  is  severely  impaired. 

A second  constraint  was  the  need  to  design  the  program  to  accommodate  a large  and  changing 
body  of  technical  knowledge.  It  has  become  clear  that  large  amounts  of  task-specific  knowledge  are 
required  for  high  performance,  and  that  this  knowledge  base  is  subject  to  significant  changes  over 
time  [Buchananl971,  Finkell974,  Greenl974],  Our  choice  of  a production  rule  representation  was 
significantly  influenced  by  such  features  of  the  knowledge  base. 

A third  demand  was  for  a system  capable  of  handling  an  interactive  dialog,  and  one  which 
was  not  a "black  box."  This  meant  that  it  had  to  be  capable  of  supplying  coherent  explanations  of 
its  results,  rather  than  simply  printing  a collection  of  orders  to  the  user.  This  was  perhaps  the  major 
motivation  for  the  selection  of  a symbolic  reasoning  paradigm,  rather  than  one  which,  for  example, 
relied  totally  on  statistics.  It  meant  also  that  the  "flow”  of  dialog  - the  order  of  qut  :.ons  - should 
exhibit  the  sense  of  purposefulness  of  the  domain,  anu  not  be  determine^,  uy  programming- 
considerations.  Interactive  dialog  reguired,  in  addition,  extensive  human  engineering  features 
designed  to  make  interaction  simple  for  someone  unaccustomed  to  computers. 

The  choice  of  a medical  domain  brought  with  it  additional  demands  [Shortliffel 97*tb].  Speed, 
access,  and  ease  of  use  gained  additional  emph?  >is,  since  a physician’s  time  is  typically  limited.  The 
program  also  had  to  fill  a need  well-recognized  by  the  clinicians  who  would  actually  use  th  system, 
since  the  lure  of  pure  technology  is  usually  insufficient.  Finally,  the  program  had  to  be  designed 
with  an  emphasis  on  its  supportive  role  as  a tool  for  the  physician,  rather  than  as  a replacement  for 
his  own  reasoning  process. 

Any  implementation  selected  had  to  meet  all  these  demands.  Predictably,  some  have  been  met 
more  successfully  than  others,  but  all  have  been  important  factors  in  influencing  the  system’s  final 
design 


SYSTEfl  OVERVIEW 


3 


[3]  SYSTEM  OVERVIEW 

The  system  is  written  in  interlisp,  runs  on  a DEC  KI-10  with  approximately  130K  of 
nonshared  code,  and  is  fast  enough  to  permit  convenient  real-time  interaction.  The  consultation 
system  (with  the  required  data  structures)  requires  approximately  50K,  the  explanation  system  I OK, 
the  question  answering  system  15K.  the  rule  acquisition  system  20K,  and  the  rules  themselves 
approximately  8K  (the  remainder  includes  a dictionary,  information  on  drug  properties,  and  various 

system  utility  features). 

[3.1]  THE  TASK 

The  fundamental  task  is  the  selection  of  therapy  for  a patient  with  a bacterial  infection. 
Consultative  advice  is  often  required  in  the  hospital  because  the  attending  physician  may  not  be  an 
expert  in  infectious  diseases,  as  for  example,  when  a cardiology  patient  develops  an  infection  after 
heart  surgery.  Time  considerations  compound  the  problem.  A specimen  (of  blood,  urine,  etc.)  drawn 
from  a patient  may  show  some  evidence  of  bacterial  growth  within  12  hours,  but  24  to  48  hours  (or 
more)  are  required  for  positive  identification.  The  physician  must  therefore  often  decide,  in  absence 
of  complete  information,  whether  or  not  to  start  treatment  and  what  drugs  to  use  if  treatment  is 

required.  Both  of  these  may  be  difficult  questions. 

The  task  will  become  clearer  by  reviewing  initial  and  final  parts  of  a sample  dialog  with 
the  MYCIN  system,  shown  in  Figures  1 and  2 (italicized  comments  at  the  right  are  for  explanatory 
purposes,  and  are  not  part  of  the  actual  dialog).  A great  deal  of  attention  has  been  paid  to  making 
the  interaction  easy  and  natural.  Questions  have  been  carefully  worded,  for  example,  so  as  to  set  up 
expectations  of  responses  without  making  them  as  uninteresting  as  multiple  choice  questions. 
Currently  the  dialog  is  airected  primarily  by  the  system  - patient  information  can  be  entered  only 
by  answering  each  question  in  turn 

There  are  several  options  available  to  make  the  interaction  more  informative  The  usei  can, 
for  instance,  ask  for  a rephrasing  of  the  question  or  a display  of  some  (or  all)  of  the  acceptable 
responses.  If  a requested  item  of  information  is  unavailable,  he  can  respond  with  UNKNOWN  (U.  or 
UNK  for  short).  The  user  can  also  modify  any  answer  which  he  is  unsure  of  by  attaching  a number 

1 indicating  his  degree  of  certainty  (as.  for  example,  in  questions  13  and  15). 

The  main  purpose  of  the  system  is  to  provide  advice,  and  it  does  so  via  the  consultation 
system  (Figure  3).  In  addition  to  this  performance  program,  there  are  three  adjunct  programs  that 
increase  system  utility  and  flexibility:  (a)  a question  answering  system  which  handles  simple  natural 
language  inquiries  about  either  the  specific  consultation,  or  about  the  general  knowledge  base  of  the 
program;  (b)  an  explanation  program  for  giving  reasons  why  the  performance  program  has 
requested  an  item  of  information  or  has  drawn  a particular  conclusion;  and  (c)  a knowledge 
acquisition  system  for  extending  the  knowledge  base  through  a dialog  with  an  expert. 

As  described  below,  each  of  these  four  interrelated  programs  meets  one  or  more  of  the  goals 

outlined  above. 


f 


4 


SYSTEIl  OVERVIEW 


rv 


PATIENT-1 

1)  Patient’s  nans:  (first-last) 

**FRED  SMITH  { background  data} 

2)  Sex: 

«*MALE 

3)  Age: 

**55 

4)  Have  gou  been  able  to  obtain  positive  cultures  from  a site  at  uhich  Fred 
Smith  has  an  infection? 

**YES 

-INFECTION-1 

5)  Uhat  is  the  infection? 

**PRIMARY-BACTEREMIA 

6)  Please  give  the  date  and  approximate  time  uhen  signs  or  symptoms  of  the 
primary-bacteremia  (INFECTION-1)  first  appeared,  (mo/da/yr) 

**  MAY  5,  1 975 

The  most  recent  positive  culture  associated  uith  the  primary-bacteremia 
(INFECTION-1)  Mill  be  referred  to  as: 

CULTURE-1 

7)  From  uhat  site  uas  the  specimen  for  CULTURE-1  taken? 

**BL00D 

8)  Please  give  the  date  and  time  uhsn  this  blood  culture  (CULTURE-1) 
uas  obtained,  (mo/da/yr) 

**  MAY  9,  1975 

The  first  significar*.  organism  from  this  blood  culture  (CULTURE-1) 
ui I I be  referred  to  as: 

ORGAN ISM-1 

9)  Enter  the  identity  of  ORGANISM-1: 

•♦UNKNOWN 

{typically  the  identity  is  not  known  and  must  be  inferred } 

10)  Is  ORGANISM-1  a rod  or  coccus  (etc.): 

**R0D 

11)  The  gram  stain  of  ORGANISM-1: 

**GRAMNEG 

12)  Have  there  been  POSITIVE  cultures  from  sites  uhich  are  NOT 
associated  uith  infections  about  uhich  you  are  seeking  advice? 

**N0 

13)  Did  ORGANISM-1  grou  aerobically? 

**YES  (8) 

14)  Did  ORGANISM-1  grou  anaerobically? 

**YES 


IS)  Uhat  is  the  suspected  portal  of  entry  of  ORGANISM-1 
into  this  sterile  site? 

**GI  (6) 

• • • 

{ more  questions  follow,  to  gather  sufficient  information  to  infer  possible  identities  of 
the  infecting  organisms} 


FIGURE  I 


SYSTEO  OVERVIEW 


5 


fly  therrpy  recommendation  will  be  based  on  the  following  probable  infection(e) 
and  potential  causative  organism(s): 


I NFCCT  i ON-1  is  PR  I MAR  Y-BACTEREfl  I A 


{possiblt  identities} 


< I tern  1 > The  identity  cf  ORGANISM-1  may  be  PSEUDOMONAS- AERUGINOSA 

<Item  2>  The  identity  of  ORGANISM-1  may  be  KLEBS 1 ELLA-PNEUMONI AE 

<Item  3>  The  identi4u  of  ORGANISM-1  may  be  E.COLI 

<Item  4>  The  identity  of  ORGANISM-1  may  be  9ACTER0IDES-FRAGILIS 

<item  S>  The  identity  of  ORGANISM-1  may  be  ENTEROBACTER 

<Item  6>  The  identity  of  ORGANISM-1  may  be  PROTEUS-NON-MIRAHLIS 

4G)  On  a scale  of  0 to  4,  where  higher  numbers  indicate  increasing  severity 
how  would  you  rate  Fred  Smith’s  degree  of  sickness? 

47)  Does  Fred  Smith  have  a clinically  significant  allergic  reaction  to  any 
antimicrobial  agent? 

48)  Fred  Smith’s  weight  in  kilograms  (or  <number>  POUNOS): 

7 0 

{note  that  2 drugs  cover  for  6 potential  organisms] 
[Rec  II  My  preferred  therapy  recommendation  is  as  follows: 

In  order  to  cover  for  I terns  <1  2 3 5 6>: 

Give:  GENTAMICIN 

Oose:  119  mg  (1.7  mg/kg)  q8h  IV  lor  IM)  for  10  days 
Comments:  Modify  dose  in  renal  failure 
In  order  to  cover  fcr  I tern  <4>: 

Give:  CLINDAMYCIN 

Dose:  595  mg  (8.5  mg/kg)  qGh  IV  [or  IM]  for  14  days 
Comments:  If  diarrhea  or  other  GI  symptoms  develop,  patient 

should  be  evaluated  for  possible  pseudomembranous  colitis. 

Do  you  wish  to  see  the  next  choice  therapy?  {alternative  choices  ar' available] 

**  Y . 

Uhich,  if  any,  of  the  above  drugs  do  you  wish  eliminated  from  consideration? 

**CIINDAMYCIN 

[Rec  21  Next  best  therapy  recommendation: 

In  order  to  cover  for  I terns  <2  3 4 5 6>: 

Give:  CHLORAMPHENICOL 

Oose:  1 gm  (15  mg/kg)  qGh  IV  for  14  days 
Comments:  Monitor  patient’s  white  count 
In  order  to  cover  for  Item  <1>: 

Give:  GENTAMICIN 

Dose:  119  mg  (1.7  mg/kg)  q8h  IV  [or  IM]  for  10  days 
Comments:  Modify  dose  in  renal  failure 


FIGURE  2 


6 


SYSTCfl  OVERVIEW 


FIGURE  3 


SVSTEO  OVERVIEW 


7 


[3.2]  THE  RULES 

The  primary  source  of  domain  specific  knowledge  is  a set  of  some  200  production  rules, 
each  with  a premise  and  an  action  (Figure  4) 


PREMISE 


ACTION 


(SAND (SAME  CNTXT  INFECT  PR  I MARY -BACTEREMIA) 
(MEMBF  CNTXT  SITE  STERILESI TES) 

(SAME  CNTXT  PORTAL  Gl) 

(CONCLUDE  CNTXT  IDENT  BACTEROIDES  TALLY  .7) 


if  1)  the  infection  Is  primary-bacteremia,  and 

2)  the  9ite  of  the  culture  is  one  of  the  ster i I es i tee,  and 

3)  the  suspected  portal  of  entry  of  the  organism  is  the  gastro- 

Then  there  ! V suggesl  i dence  (.7)  that  the  identity  of  the  organism 

bacteroides. 


i s 


Figure  4 

The  PREMISE  is  a 3oolean  combination  of  predicate  functions  on  associative  triples.  Thus  each 

clause  of  a premise  has  the  following  four  components: 

predicate  function>  <object>  <attribute>  <value> 

There  is  a standardized  set  of  24  predicate  functions  (t  SAME.  KNOWN,  DEFINITE),  some  SO 
attributes  (e  g IDENTITY.  SITE.  SENSITIVITY),  and  11  objects  (eg  ORGANISM.  CULTURE. 
DRUG)  curently  available  for  us-  as  primitives  in  constructing  rules.  The  premise  is  a conjunction 
at  the  top  level  (top  level  d.siunct.ons  are  put  into  separate  rules),  but  may  contain  arbitrarily 
complex  conjunctions  or  disjunctions  at  lower  levels.  (We  have  not  found  it  necessary  in  practice  to 
use  more  than  two  levels.)  The  ACTION  part  indicates  one  or  more  conclusions  which  can  be 
drawn  if  the  premises  are  satisfied,  hence  the  rules  are  (currently)  purely  inferential  in  character. 

It  is  intended  that  each  rule  embody  a single,  modular  chunk  of  knowledge,  and  state 
explicitly  m the  premise  all  necessary  context.  Since  the  rule  uses  a vocabulary  of  concepts  common 
to  the  domain,  it  forms,  by  itself,  a comprehensible  statement  of  some  piece  of  domain  knowledge.  As 

will  become  clear,  this  characteristic  is  useful  in  many  ways. 

Each  rule  ,s.  as  is  evident,  highly  stylized,  with  the  IF/THEN  format  and  the  specified  set  of 
available  primitives  While  the  lisp  form  of  each  is  executable  code  (and.  in  fact,  the  premise  is 
simply  EVALuated  by  lisp  to  test  its  truth,  and  the  action  EVALuated  to  make  its  conclusions),  this 
tightly  structured  form  makes  possible  the  examination  of  the  rules  by  other  parts  of  the  system. 
This  in  turn  leads  to  some  important  capabilities,  to  be  described  below.  For  example,  the  internal 
form  can  be  automatically  translated  into  readable  English  as  shown  in  Figure  4. 

Despite  this  strong  stylization,  w-  have  not  found  the  format  restrictive,  as  evidenced  by  the 
fact  that  of  nearly  200  rules  on  a variety  of  topics,  only  8 employ  any  significant  variations  of 
methodology  The  limitations  we  have  encountered  arise  primarily  out  of  the  fact  that  the  use  of  a 
simple  predicate  in  the  premise  forces  a pure  problem  reduction  approach  (see  section  [6  1.2]).  We 


L 


8 


SYSTEfl  OVERVIEW 


have  thus  found  it  necessary,  for  instance,  to  use  a slightly  different  technique  to  implement  the  few 
rules  which  say  things  like  "For  each  organism  such  that  ...  conclude  that  but  this  has  been  done 
in  a way  which  is  closely  related  to  the  standard  formal. 

[3.3]  JUDGMENTAL  KNOWLEDGE 

Since  we  want  to  deal  with  re*i-world  domains  in  which  reasoning  is  often  judgmental  and 
inexact,  we  require  some  mechanism  for  being  able  to  say  that  "A  suggests  B“,  or  "C  and  D tend  to 
mle  out  E ” The  numbers  used  to  indicate  the  strength  of  a rule  (e  g the  7 in  Figure  4)  have  been 
termed  Certainty  Factors  (CFs).  The  methods  for  combining  CFs  are  embodied  in  a model  of 
approximate  implication.  Note  that  while  these  are  derived  from  and  are  related  to  probabilities, 
they  are  distinctly  different  (for  a detailed  review  of  the  concept,  see  [Shot tliffe  1 975b]).  For  the  rule 
in  Figure  4.  then,  the  evidence  is  strongly  indicative  (.7  out  of  '),  but  not  absolutely  certain. 
Evidence  confirming  an  hypothesis  is  collected  separately  from  that  which  disconfirms  it,  and  the 
truth  of  the  hypothesis  at  any  time  is  the  algebraic  sum  of  the  current  evidence  for  and  against  it. 
This  is  an  important  aspect  of  the  truth  model,  since  it  makes  plausible  the  simultaneous  existence 
of  evidence  in  favor  and  against  the  same  hypothesis  We  believe  this  is  an  important  characteristic 
of  any  model  of  inexact  reasoning. 

Facts  about  the  world  are  represented  as  4-tuples,  with  an  associative  triple  and  its  current  CF 
(Figure  5)  Positive  CFs  ind-cate  a predominance  of  evidence  confirming  an  hypothesis,  negative 
CFs  indicate  predominance  of  disaffirming  evidence 

(SITE  CULTURE-1  BLOOu  i.0) 

(IDENT  ORGANISH-2  KLEBSIELLA  .25) 

(iOENT  0RGANISI1-2  E.COLI  .73) 

(SENSITIVS  ORGAN I SH-1  PENICILLIN  -1.0) 

Figure  5 

Note  that  the  truth  model  permits  the  coexistence  of  several  plausible  values  for  a single 
clinical  parameter,  if  they  are  suggested  by  the  evidence.  Thus,  for  example,  after  attempting  to 
deduce  the  identity  of  an  organism,  the  system  may  have  concluded  (correctly)  that  there  is  evidence 
that  the  identity  is  Ecoli  and  evidence  that  it  is  Klebsiella,  despite  the  fact  that  they  are  mutually 
exclusive  possibilities. 

As  a result  of  the  program’s  medical  origins,  we  also  refer  to  the  attribute  part  of  the  triple  as 
a 'clinical  parameter’,  and  use  the  two  terms  interchangeably  here  The  object  part  (e.g., 
CULTURE-1,  ORGANISM-2)  is  referred  to  as  a context.  This  term  was  chosen  to  emphasize  their 
dual  role  as  both  part  of  the  associative  triple  and  as  a mechanism  for  establishing  scope  of  variable 
bindings  As  explained  below,  the  contexts  are  organized  during  a consultation  into  a tree  structure 
whose  function  is  similar  to  those  found  in  ‘alternate  world’  mechanisms  of  languages  like  or*. 


SYSTEM  OVERVIEW 


9 


[3.4]  CONTROL  STRUCTURE 

The  rules  are  invoked  in  a backward  unwinding  scheme  that  produces  a depth-first  search 
of  an  AND/OR  goal  tree  (and  hence  is  similar  in  some  respects  to  planner's  consequent  theorems): 
given  a goal  to  establish,  we  retrieve  the  (pre-computed)  list  of  all  rules  whose  conclusions  oear  on 
the  goal.  The  premise  of  each  is  evaluated,  with  each  predicate  function  leturnmg  a number 
between  -1  and  1 HAND  (the  multivalued  analogue  of  the  Boolean  AND)  performs  a minimization 
operation  and  UOR  (similar)  dees  a maximization.4  For  rules  whose  premise  evaluates  successfully 
(le  greater  than  2,  an  empirical  threshold),  the  action  part  is  evaluated,  and  the  conclusion  made 
with  a certainty  which  is 

<premi se-value>  * <certainty  factor> 

Those  which  evaluate  unsuccessfully  are  bypassed,  while  a clause  whose  truth  cannot  be  determined 
from  current  information  causes  a new  subgoal  to  be  set  up,  and  the  piocess  recurses.  Note  that 
'evaluating'  here  means  simply  invoking  the  lisp  EVAL  function  - there  is  no  additional  rule 
interpreter  necessary,  since  SAND,  SOR,  and  the  predicate  functions  are  all  implemented  as  us? 
functions. 

Unlike  planner,  however,  the  subgoal  which  is  set  up  is  a generalized  form  of  the  original  goal. 
If,  for  example,  the  unknown  clause  is  'the  identity  of  the  organism  is  E coli',  the  subgoal  which  is 
set  up  is  'determine  the  identity  of  the  organism  ’ The  new  subgoal  is  therefore  always  of  the  form 
•determine  the  value  of  the  <attribute>’  rather  than  'determine  whether  the  <attribute>  is  equal  to 
<value>’.  Gy  setting  up  the  generalized  goal  of  collecting  all  evidence  about  a clinical  parameter,  the 
piog]  am  effectively  exhausts  each  subject  as  it  is  encountered,  and  thus  tends  to  group  together  all 
questions  about  a given  topic  This  results  in  a system  which  displays  a much  more  focussed, 
methodical  approach  to  the  task,  which  is  a distinct  advantage  where  human  engineering 
considerations  aie  important.  The  cost  is  the  effort  of  deducing  or  collecting  information  which  is 
not  strictly  necessaiy  However,  since  this  occurs  rarely  — only  when  the  <attiibute>  can  be  deduced 
with  certainty  to  be  the  <v\lue>  named  in  the  original  goal  - we  have  not  found  this  to  be  a 
problem  in  practice 

A second  deviation  from  the  standard  rule  unwinding  approach  is  thaf  every  rule  relevant  to 
a goal  is  used  The  premise  of  each  rule  is  evaluated,  and  if  successful,  its  conclusion  is  invoked. 
This  continues  until  all  lelevant  rules  have  all  been  used,  or  one  of  them  has  given  the  result  with 
certainty  Tms  use  of  all  rules  is  in  part  an  aspect  of  the  model  of  judgmental  reasoning  and  the 
approximate  implication  character  of  rules  - unless  a result  is  obtained  with  certainty,  we  should  be 
careful  to  collect  all  positive  and  negative  evidence  It  is  also  appropriate  to  the  system’s  current 
domain  of  application,  clinical  medicine,  where  a conservative  strategy  of  considering  all  possibilities 
and  weighing  all  the  evidence  is  preferred. 

If,  after  trying  all  relevant  rules  (referred  to  as  ‘tracing’  the  subgoal),  the  total  weight  of  the 
evidence  about  a hypothesis  falls  between  -.2  and  .2  (again,  empirically  determined),  the  answer  is 
regarded  as  still  unknown  This  may  happen  if  no  rule  were  applicable,  the  applicable  rules  were  too 
weax,  the  effects  of  several  rules  offset  each  other,  or  if  there  were  no  rules  for  this  subgoal  at  all  In 


* 


m 


m 


IPUU  UIFI'llim.l  PI  UWfWMJMIU  inii,u»*PV  yi  j|  III  UUUJ  IJWU  ? 1 ' '"'.".i'll  .,114.^1  ,(  !)■  >■■■•  HI  P.P*' J UH  I, 


- 10  - SYSTEM  CVERVIEU 

ins  ul  tin  se  cases,  when  the  system  is  unable  to  deduce  the  answer,  it  asks  the  user  for  the  value 
(using  a phrase  which  is  stored  along  with  the  attribute  itself).  Since  the  legal  values  for  each 
attnbute  are  also  stored  with  it,  the  validity  (or  spelling)  of  the  user’s  i espouse  is  easily  checked 
(This  also  makes  possible  a display  of  aaeptabk  answers  in  response  to  a ?’  answer  f'lom  the  usei) 

The  strategy  of  always  attempting  to  deduce  the  value  of  a subgoal,  and  asking  only  when 
that  tails,  would  insuie  the  minimum  number  of  questions  It  would  also  mean,  however,  that  woih 
mi  lit  he  expended  seal  thing  for  a subgoal,  arming  peihaps  at  a less  than  definite  answer,  when 
the  usei  dieady  knew  the  answer  with  certainty  in  lespunse  to  this,  some  of  the  attributes  have 
been  labelled  as  LABDATA,  indicating  that  they  lepresent  quantities  which  aie  often  available  as 
quantitative  results  of  laboratory  tests  in  this  case  the  deduce-then-ask  procedine  is  reversed,  and 
the  system  will  attempt  to  deduce  the  answer  only  if  the  user  cannot  supply  it.  Given  a desire  to 
minimize  both  tiee  seaich  and  the  number  of  questions  asked,  there  is  no  guaranteed  optimal 
solution  to  the  pioblem  of  deciding  when  to  ask  lor  information,  and  when  10  tiy  to  deduce  it.  But 
the  LABDATA  - clinical  data  distinction  used  here  has  performed  quite  will,  and  seems  to  embody 
a veiy  ippiopnate  ciitenon 

Tluee  other  recent  additions  to  the  tree  search  procedure  have  helped  impiove  performance. 
Fus’.  bet  cue  the  entue  list  of  mles  for  a subgoal  is  retrieved,  the  system  attempts  to  find  a sequence 
ot  mles  which  would  establish  the  goal  with  certainty,  based  only  on  what  is  cmmitiy  known.  Since 
this  is  a search  for  a sequence  o:  rules  with  CF  = I , we  have  teimed  the  n sult  a j.uity  path.  Besides 
r: ; i lemy  considei ations,  this  process  otteis  the  advantage  of  allowing  the  system  to  make  common 
sense*  deductions  with  ? minimum  of  effort  (rules  with  CF-I  are  laigely  definitional).  Since  it  also 
helps  minimize  the  number  of  questions,  this  check  is  peifoimed  even  betoie  asking  about 

I ANUATA  t>pe  attributes  as  well.  Because  theie  aie  few  such  rules  in  the  sysviii,  the  seairh  is 
typirallv  wiy  brief 

Second,  a straightforward  bookkeeping  mechanism  notes  the  ml.  s that  have  failed 
pi.  viousiy,  anci  avoids  ever  trynit,  to  leevaiuate  any  of  them  (Recall  that  a tide  may  have  more 

than  one  conclusion,  may  conclude  about  more  than  a single  attribute,  and  hence  may  get 

i . ti  i>  v e , mole  than  once) 

Finally,  we  have  implemented  a partial  evaluation  of  rule  premises  Since  ma.  y attributes 
mind  in  several  rules,  the  value  of  one  clause  (perhaps  the  last)  in  a picnusc  may  already 
h.tv>  been  established,  even  while  ‘he  rest  are  still  unknown  if  this  clause  alone  would  make  the 
l>n  i ii-e  ; the,  theie  is  dearly  no  reason  to  do  all  the  search  necessary  to  tiy  to  establish  the  ot  he  i s . 
i t h pitmise  is  thus  pieviewed’  by  evaluating  it  on  the  basis  of  currently  available  information. 
I in'-  p: ndni.es  a Boolean  combination  of  TRUEs,  FALSEs,  and  UNKNOWNS,  and 

. ii  .lidni  w.ucl  simplification  (e  g F a U h F)  indicates  whether  the  rule  is  guaranteed  to  fail. 

Tnr-  last  technique  is  implemented  in  a way  which  suggests  the  utility  of  stylized  coding  in  the 
ul'  •-  It  al  o foirns  .<n  example  of  vhat  was  alluded  to  earlier,  where  it  was  noted  that  the  mles  may 
I . . x tMii"  d by  vanous  elements  of  the  system,  as  well  as  executed  We  requue  a way  to  tell  u any 
, <11  i in  he  piemise  is  known  o be  false.  We  cannot  simply  EVAL  each  individually,  since  a 


SYSTEfl  OVERVIEW 


11 


■iubgoal  which  had  never  been  traced  before  would  send  the  system  off  on  its  recursive  search 
Inhibiting  search  by  means  of  some  global  switch  will  not  work,  since  a null  result  could  mean  either 
that  the  subgoal  had  never  been  traced,  or  that  it  had  been  but  the  system  was  unable  to  deduce  an 
answer  Even  maintaining  lists  of  previously  successful  or  unsuccessful  clauses  would  be  aa 
incomplete  solution,  since  the  current  clause  might  differ  only  in  its  predicate  function 

However,  if  we  can  establish  which  attribute  is  referenced  by  the  clause,  it  is  possible  to 
determine  (by  reference  to  internal  flags)  whether  it  has  been  traced  previously.  If  so,  the  clause  can 
be  EVALed  to  obtain  the  value.  This  is  made  possible  by  the  TEMPLATE  which  each  function 
name  has  on  its  property  list  (Figure  6). 

Function  Template  Samp  I e f unc t i on  ca I I 

SAME  (SAME  CNTXT  PARM  VALUE)  (SAME  CNTXT  SITE  BLOOD) 

Figure  6. 

The  template  indicates  the  generic  type  and  order  of  arguments  to  the  predicate  function,  much  like 
a simplified  procedure  declaration.  By  using  it  as  a guide,  the  previewing  mechanism  can  extract  the 
attribute  from  the  clause,  and  determine  whether  or  not  it  has  been  traced. 

There  are  two  points  of  interest  here  - first,  part  of  the  system  is  ‘reading’  the  code  (the  rules) 
being  executed  by  another  part;  and  second,  this  reading  is  guided  by  the  information  carried  in 
components  of  the  rules  themselves.  The  ability  to  'read'  the  code  could  have  been  accomplished  by 
requiring  all  predicate  functions  to  use  the  same  format,  but  this  is  obviously  awkward.  By  allowing 
each  function  to  describe  the  format  of  its  own  calls,  we  peimit  cede  which  is  stylized  without  being 
constrained  to  a single  form,  and  hence  is  flexible  and  much  easier  to  use  We  require  only  that  each 
form  be  expressable  in  a template  built  from  the  current  set  of  template  primitives  (e.g,  PARM, 
VALUE,  etc).  This  approach  also  insures  that  the  capability  will  persist  in  the  face  of  future 
additions  to  the  system  The  result  is  one  example  of  the  general  idea  of  giving  the  system  access  to, 
and  an  "understanding"  of  its  own  representations.  This  idea  has  been  used  and  discussed 
extensively  in  [Davis  1 975b] 

We  have  also  implemented  antecedent-style  rules.  These  are  rules  which  are  invoked  if  a 
conclusion  is  made  which  matches  their  premise  condition.  They  are  currently  limited  to 
common-sense  deductions  (i.e.  CF-1),  and  exist  primarily  to  improve  system  efficiency.  Thus,  for 
example,  if  the  user  responds  to  the  question  of  organism  identity  with  an  answer  he  is  certain  of, 
there  is  an  antecedent  rule  which  will  deduce  the  organism  gramstain  and  morphology  This  saves 
the  trouble  of  deducing  these  answers  later  via  the  subgoal  mechanism  described  above 


12 


3YSTEN  OVERVIEW 


[3.5]  META-RULES 

With  the  system's  current  collection  of  200  rules,  exhaustive  invocation  of  rules  would  be 
quite  feasible  since  the  maximum  number  of  rules  for  a single  subgoal  is  about  30.  We  are  aware, 
however,  of  the  problems  that  may  occur  if  and  when  the  collection  grows  substantially  larger  It 
was  partly  in  response  to  this  that  we  developed  an  alternative  to  exhaustive  invocation  by 
implementing  the  concept  of  meta-rules.  These  are  strategy  rules  which  suggest  the  best  approach  to 
a given  subgoal.  They  have  the  same  format  as  the  clinical  rules  (Figure  7),  but  can  indicate  that 
certain  clinical  rules  should  be  tried  first,  last,  before  others,  or  not  at  all. 


PREMISE:  (SAND  (MEMBF  SITE  CNTXT  NONSTER I LEG I TES ) 

(THEREARE  OURULES (MENTIONS  CNTXT  PREMISE  SAMEBUG) ) 

ACTION:  (CONCLIST  CNTXT  UTILITY  YES  TALLY  -1.0) 

If  1)  the  site  of  the  culture  is  one  of  the  nonster i I es i tes,  and 

2)  there  are  rules  which  mention  in  their  premise  a previous 
organism  which  may  be  the  same  as  the  current  organism 

Then  it  is  definite  (1.0)  that  ea;.h  of  them  is  not  going  to  be  useful. 

Figure  7 

Thus  before  processing  the  entire  list  of  rules  applicable  to  any  subgoal,  the  meta-rules  for  that 
subgoal  are  evaluated.  They  may  rearrange  or  shorten  the  list,  effectively  ordering  the  search  or 
pruning  the  tree.  By  making  them  specific  to  a given  subgoal,  we  can  specify  precise  heuristics 
without  imposing  any  extra  overhead  in  the  tracing  of  other  subgoals. 

Note,  however,  that  there  is  no  reason  to  stop  at  one  level  of  rr, eta-rules.  We  can  generalize 
this  process  so  that,  before  invoking  any  list  of  rules,  we  check  for  the  existence  of  rules  of  the  next 
higher  order  to  use  in  pruning  or  rearranging  the  first  list.  Thus,  while  meta-rules  are  strategies  for 
selecting  clinical  rules,  second  order  meta-rules  would  contain  information  about  which  strategy  to 
try,  third  -der  rules  would  suggest  criteria  for  deciding  how  to  choose  a strategy,  etc.  These  higher 
order  rules  represent  a search  by  the  system  through  "strategy  space",  and  appear  to  be  powerful 
constraints  on  the  search  process  at  lower  levels.  (We  have  not  yet  encountered  higher  order 
meta-rules  in  practice,  but  neither  have  we  actively  sought  them). 

Note  also  that  since  the  system's  rule  unwinding  may  be  viewed  as  tree  search,  we  have  the 
appearance  of  a search  through  a tree  with  the  interesting  property  that  each  brunch  point  contains 
information  on  the  best  path  to  take  next.  Since  the  meta-rules  can  be  judgmental,  there  exists  the 
capability  of  writing  numerous,  perhaps  conflicting  heuristics,  and  having  their  combined  judgment 
suggest  the  best  path.  Finally,  since  meta-rules  refer  to  the  clinical  rules  by  their  content  rather  than 
by  name,  the  method  automatically  adjusts  to  the  addition  or  deletion  of  clinical  rules,  as  well  as 
modifications  ,o  any  of  them. 

The  capability  of  meta-rules  to  order  or  prune  the  search  tree  has  proved  to  be  useful  in 


SYSTEM  0VCRV1EU 


- 13 


w„„  another  .»„«»  u.  Urn**  » «>'  *"  “k»  n!  h'"™"  «»»*• 

„ „v,k.s  rood  .rose  to  ask  the  user  first  about  the  pollin'  culture,  (those  show,,,;  bacternl  growth). 

betore  ask, o,  about  ncgatne  cut  ures  Formerly,  thts  tie- .go  chotce  «!  emhrrtdni  the  ordmng  o, 
a |,M  but  ted  to  the  sysleo.  code  Yet  can  be  stated  little  easily  and  eM,l,crl,  in  a metau  ule. 
yielding  the  significant  advantage,  of  mating  ,t  both  readily  explainable  and  modifiable  Metanules 
have  thus  proved  capable  of  expressing  a limited  subset  of  the  knowledge  formerly  embedded  ,n  the 

conf  ol  structure  code  of  the  system 

Metarules  may  also  be  used  Id  control  antecedent  rule  invocal, on  Thus  we  can  write 
„ ,.nm  which  control  the  dep.h  and  breadth  of  condustons  drawn  b,  the  systetn  ,n  response  to  a 

iv  w piece  of  information 

A detailed  overview  of  all  o!  these  mechanisms  is  included  in  the  Appendix,  and  indicates  the 

way  they  function  together  to  insure  an  efficient  search  for  each  subgoal 

The  final  aspect  of  the  control  structure  is  the  tree  of  contexts  (recall  the  dual  meaning  o.  the 
lerm  Wlull  :\U).  constructed  dynamically  from  a fixed  hierarchy  as  the  consultation  proceeds 
(Picro  S)  Tin-  ser  es  several  purposes  First,  binding  of  free  variables  m a rule  are  established  by 

in  which  -he  rule  is  invoked,  with  .he  standard  access  to  contexts  winch  are  its  ancestors. 

Second  s,„ce  this  ree  is  intended  to  reflect  the  .elationsh.ps  of  objects  in  the  domain,  it  helps 
sti  n( tui >■  the  consultation  m ways  familiar  to  the  user  In  the  current  domain,  a patient  has  one  or 
m01„  infections,  each  o.  which  may  have  one  or  more  associated  cultures,  each  of  which  in  turn  may 
havr  n|,e  o,  more  organisms  growing  in  it.  and  so  on.  Finally,  we  have  found  useful  to  select  one 
o,  . rcu e of  the  attributes  of  eich  context  type  and  establish  these  as  its  MAINPROPS.  or  primary 
Each  time  a new  cortex’  of  that  type  is  sprouted,  these  MAINPROPS  are  automatically 
traced  5 Since  many  of  them  are  LA  C.DATA-type  attributes,  the  effect  is  to  begin  each  new  context 
with  a set  of  standard  questions  appropriate  to  that  context,  which  serve  to  'set  the  stage  for 
subsequent  questions.  This  has  proved  to  be  a very  useful  human  engineering  feature  in  a domain 
which  has  evolved  a heavily  stylized  format  for  the  presentation  of  information 


SYSTEfl  OVERVIEW 


PATIENT-1 


CULTURE-1 


ORGANISM-1 


CULTURE-2  CULTURE-3 

/ (\ 

ORGAN  ISM-2  ORGANISM-3  ORGANISM-4 


FIGURE  8 


relation  to  other  uorl 


15 


I 


[* 

\ 

t 

i 


t 


,*■ 


1 

' 

I- 


[4]  RELATION  T0  OTHER  WORK 

We  outline  briefly  in  this  section  a few  programs  that  relate  to  vauous  aspects  of  our  work 
Some  of  these  have  provided  the  intellectual  basis  from  which  the  present  system  evolved,  others 
have  employed  techniques  which  are  similar,  while  still  others  have  attempted  to  solve  closely  related 
problems.  Space  limitations  preclude  detailed  comparisons,  but  we  indicate  some  of  the  moie 
irrpoitant  distinctions  and  similarities 

There  have  been  a large  number  of  attempts  to  aid  medical  decision  making  (see 
[Shortliffe  1 974a]  for  an  extensive  review).  The  basis  for  some  programs  has  been  simple  algorithmic 
processes,  often  implemented  as  decision  trees  ((Meyer  1973],  [Warnerl972]).  or  more  complex  control 
structures  in  systems  tailored  to  specific  d .orders  [Bleichl971]  Many  have  based  their  diagnostic 
capabilities  on  variations  of  Bayes'  theorem  [Corry  195S.  Warnerl964].  or  on  techniques  derived 
from  utility  theory  of  operations  research  [Gorry  1979a]  Models  of  the  patient  or  disease  process 
hav.  been  used  successfully  in  [Silverman  1974],  [PaukeM975],  and  [Kulikowski  1974]  A few  recent 
efforts  have  been  based  on  some  form  of  symbolic  reasoning.  In  particular,  the  glaucoma  diagnosis 
system  described  in  [Kul.kowsk.1974]  and  the  diagnosis  system  . f [Poplel972]  car.  also  be  viewed  as 

rule-based 

Carbonell’s  work  [Carbonelll970]  represents  an  early  attempt  to  make  uncertain  inferences  in 
a domain  of  concepts  that  are  strongly  linked,  much  a,  MYCIN’s  are  Although  the  purpose  of 
Cai bonell’s  system  was  computer-aided  instruction  rather  than  consultation,  much  of  oui  initial 

design  was  influenced  by  his  semantic  net  model. 

The  basic  production  rule  methodology  has  been  applied  in  many  diffeient  contexts,  in 
attempts  to  solve  a wide  range  of  problems  (see,  for  example.  [Dav.sl975a]  for  an  overview)  The 
most  directly  relevant  of  these  is  the  DENDRAL  system  [Buchanan  1971],  which  has  achieved  a 
high  level  of  performance  on  the  task  of  mass  spectrum  analysis.  Much  of  the  initial  design  of 
MYCIN  was  influenced  by  the  experience  gained  in  building  and  using  the  DENDRAL  system. 
Earlier  attempts  to  build  general  and  powerful  production  rule  based  systems  have  included 
[Waterman  1970]  and  [Moorel979] 

There  have  b*.*en  numerous  attempts  to  create  models  of  inexact  reaso Among  the  more 

recent  is  [LeFavirel974],  which  reports  on  the  implementation  of  a language  to  facilitate  fuzzy 
reason. ng  It  deals  with  mar  y of  the  same  issues  of  reasoning  under  uncertainty  that  are  detailed  in 

[Shortliffe  1975b] 

The  approach  to  natural  language  used  in  our  system  has  been  thus  far  quite  elementary, 
pnmaiily  neyword-based  Some  of  the  work  reported  in  [Colby  1974]  suggested  to  us  initially  that 
this  might  be  a sufficiently  powerful  approach  for  our  purposes  This  has  proven  generally  true 
because  the  technical  language  of  this  domain  contains  relatively  few  ambiguous  words 

The  chess  playing  program  of  [Zobrist  1 973]  employs  a knowledge  repiesentation  which  is 


i 


V 

i 


i 


4 


1 


16 


RELATION  TO  OTHER  UORU 


functionally  quite  close  to  ours.  The  knowledge  base  of  that  system  consists  of  small  sequences  of 
code  which  recognize  patterns  of  pieces,  and  then  conclude  (with  a variable  weighting  factor)  the 
value  ot  obtaining  that  configuration  They  repot t quite  favorably  on  the  ease  of  augmenting  a 
knowledge  base  organized  along  these  lines. 

The  natural  language  understanding  system  of  [Winogradl972]  had  some  basic  explanation 
capabilities  similar  to  those  described  here,  and  could  discuss  its  actions  and  plans. 

As  we  have  noted  above,  and  will  explore  further  below,  part  of  our  work  has  been  involved 
in  making  it  possible  for  the  system  to  understand  its  own  operation.  Ma;.y  of  the  explanation 
capabilities  were  designed  and  implemented  with  this  in  mind,  and  it  has  significantly  influenced 
design  ot  the  knowledge  acquisition  system  as  well.  These  efforts  are  related  in  a gereral  way  to  the 
long  sequence  of  attempts  to  build  program-understanding  systems.  Such  efforts  have  been 
motivated  by.  among  other  things,  the  desire  to  prove  correctness  of  programs  (as  in 
[Walclmgei  1974]  or  [Mannal969]),  and  as  a basis  for  automatic  programming  (as  in  [Green  1974]). 
Most  of  these  systems  attempt  to  assign  meaning  to  the  code  of  some  standard  programming 
language  like  lisp,  or  Algol.  Our  attempts  have  been  oriented  toward  supplying  a semantics  for  what 
amounts  to  a high  level  language  - the  production  rules  and  their  associated  components.  The  task 
is  of  com  re  made  easier  by  approaching  it  at  this  higher  conceptual  level  - we  attempt  only  to 
assign  semantics  to  conceptual  primitives  of  the  domain  like  the  function  SAME,  rather  than  the 
lisp  code  in  which  they  are  implemented.  We  cannot  therefore  prove  that  the  implementation  is 
cortect,  but  can  use  the  representation  of  mearing  in  other  powerful  ways.  It  forms,  for  example,  the 
basis  for  much  of  the  knowledge  acquisition  system  (see  section  [6.3]),  and  permits  the  explanation 
system  to  be  quite  precise  in  explaining  the  program’s  actions  (see  [Davisl975b]  for  details).  A 
similar  sort  of  high  level  approach  has  been  explored  by  Hewitt  in  his  proposed  INTENDER 
system  [Hewittl97|], 

Finally,  similar  efforts  at  computer-based  consultants  have  recently  been  developed  in  diffeient 
domains.  The  work  detailed  in  (Nilsson  1975]  and  [Hartl675]  has  explored  the  use  of  a consultation 
system  similar  to  the  one  described  here,  as  part  of  an  integrated  vision,  manipulation,  and  problem 
solving  system.  Recent  work  or.  an  intelligent  terminal  system  [RAND  1975]  has  been  based  in  part 
on  a formalism  which  grew  out  of  early  experience  with  the  MYCIN  system. 


FUNDAMENTAL  ASSUMPTIONS 


17 


[5]  FUNDAMENTAL  ASSUMPTIONS  OF  THE  METHODOLOGY 

We  attempt  here  to  examine  some  of  the  explicit  and  implicit  assumptions  which  are  part  of 
the  methodology  described  above  We  believe  this  will  help  to  suggest  the  range  of  application  for 
these  techniques,  and  indicate  some  of  their  strengths  and  limitations.  Because  such  a listing  is 
potentially  open-ended,  we  include  here  the  assumptions  essential  to  the  methodology  used  in 
MYCIN,  but  not  necessarily  applicable  to  every  interactive  program. 

There  are  several  assumptions  implicit  in  both  the  character  of  the  rules  and  the  ways  in 
which  they  are  used.  First,  it  must  be  possible  to  write  such  judgmental  rules.  Not  every  domain  will 
support  this.  It  appears  to  require  a field  which  has  attained  a certain  level  of  formalization,  which 
includes  perhaps  a generally  recognized  set  of  primitives  and  a minimal  understanding  of  basic 
processes.  It  does  not  seem  to  extend  to  one  which  has  achieved  a thorough,  highly  formalized  level, 
however.  Assigning  certainty  factors  to  a rule  should  thus  be  a reasonable  task  whose  results  would 
be  repeatable,  but  not  a trivial  one  in  which  all  answers  were  1. 

Second,  we  require  a domain  in  which  there  is  a limited  sort  of  interaction  between  conceptual 
primitives.  Our  experience  has  suggested  that  a rule  with  more  than  about  six  clauses  in  the  premise 
becomes  conceptually  unwieldy.  The  number  of  factors  interacting  in  a premise  to  trigger  an  act. on 
therefore  has  a practical  (but  no  theoretical)  upper  limit.  Also,  the  AND/OR  goal  tree  mechanism 
lequiies  that  the  clauses  of  a rule  premise  can  be  set  up  as  non-conflicting  subgoals  for  the  purposes 
of  establishing  each  of  them  (just  as  in  robot  problem  solving;  see  [Fahlman  1974]  and  the  comment 
on  side  effects  in  [Siklossy  1973])  Failure  of  this  criterion  causes  results  which  depend  on  the  order  in 
which  evidence  is  collected  We  are  thus  making  fundamental  assumptions  concerning  two  forms  of 
interaction  - we  assume  (a)  that  only  a small  number  of  factors  (about  6)  must  be  considered 
simultaneously  to  trigger  an  action;  and  (b)  that  the  presence  or  absence  of  each  of  those  factors  can 
be  established  without  adverse  effect  on  the  others 

Also,  certain  characteristics  of  the  domain  will  influence  the  continued  utility  of  this  approach 
as  the  knowledge  base  of  rules  grows.  Where  there  are  a limited  number  ot  attributes  for  a given 
object,  the  growth  in  the  number  of  rules  in  the  knowledge  base  will  not  produce  an  exponential 
growth  in  search  time  for  the  consultation  system.  Thus  as  newly  acquired  rules  begin  to  reference 
only  established  attributes,  use  of  these  rules  in  a consultation  will  not  produce  further  branching, 
since  the  attributes  mentioned  in  their  premises  will  have  already  been  traced. 

There  are  essential  assumptions  as  well  in  the  use  of  this  methodology  as  the  basis  for  an 
interactive  system  First,  our  explanation  capabilities  (reviewed  below)  rest  on  the  assumption  that 
display  of  either  a rule  or  some  segment  of  the  control  flow  is  a reasonable  explanation  of  system 
behavior  Second,  much  of  the  approach  to  rule  acquisition  is  predicated  on  the  assumption  that 
experts  can  be  "debriefed",  that  is,  they  can  recognize  and  then  formalize  chunks  of  their  own 
knowledge  and  experience,  and  express  them  as  rules.  Third,  the  IF/THEN  format  of  rules  must  be 


.■  .. 


i 


- 18  - 


FUNDAMENTAL  BSSUMPTIONS 


- ,-*■  zz~‘ 

crsr;- ....  - - - - — »>  — 

that  all  these  are  plausible  assumptioi  s. 

There  ,s  an  important  assumption,  .00.  in  the  development  of  a system  fo,  use  by  two  class  s 
of  user.  Since  the  domain  experts  who  educate  the  system  so  strong  influence  us  conceptua. 
p„m, ti.es.  vocabulary,  and  knowledge  base,  we  must  be  sure  that  the  naive  users  w 

idV'";r^K^r^e  does  not,  therefore,  seen,  wel,  suited  ,0  domains  re, a great 

deal  of  complex  interaction  between  goats,  or  those  for  which  it  ,s  difficult  .0  compose  sound 
. , iu,es  As  a general  mdicat.on  of  potentially  useful  apphcat.ons,  we  have  found  that 

cognitive  tasks  are  good  candidates  In  one  such  domain,  antibiotic  therapy  fleet, on.  we  have  me, 
with  encouraging  success. 


PRODUCTION  RULES  OS  fl  KNOULEOGE  REPRESENTfiTION 


19 


[6]  PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  A KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 

In  the  introduction  to  this  report  we  outlined  three  design  goals  for  the  system  we  are 
developing  us  -fulness  (including  competence),  maintenance  of  an  evolutionary  knowledge  base,  and 
support  of  an  interactive  consultation.  Our  experience  has  suggested  that  production  rules  offer  a 
knowledge  representation  that  greatly  facilitates  the  accomplishment  of  these  goals.  Such  rules  are 
straightforward  enough  to  make  feasible  many  interesting  features  beyond  performance,  yet  powerful 
enough  to  supply  significant  problem  solving  capabilities  Among  the  features  discussed  below  are 
the  ability  for  explanation  of  system  performance,  and  acquisition  of  new  rules,  as  well  as  the 
general  ‘understanding’  by  the  system  of  its  own  knowledge  base. 

[6.1]  COMPETENCE 
[6.1.1  j Advantages  of  production  rules 

Recent  p.oblem  solving  efforts  in  A I have  made  it  clear  that  high  performance  of  a system  is 
often  strongly  correlated  with  the  depth  and  breadth  of  the  knowledge  base  Hence,  the  task  of 
accumulation  and  management  of  a large  and  evolving  knowledge  base  soon  poses  problems  which 
dominate  those  encountered  in  the  initial  phases  of  knowledge  base  construction.  Our  experience 
suggests  that  giving  the  system  itself  the  ability  to  examine  and  manipulate  its  knowledge  base 
provides  some  capabilities  for  confronting  these  problems.  These  are  discussed  in  subsequent 

sections  belcw 

The  selection  of  production  rules  as  a knowledge  representation  is  in  part  a response  to  this 
fact  One  view  of  a production  rule  is  as  a modular  segment  of  code  [Winograd  1975],  which  is 
heavily  stylized  [Waterman 1 970,  Buchanan  1971}  Each  of  MYCIN’s  rules  is.  as  noted,  a simple 
conditional  statement:  the  premise  is  constrained  to  be  a Boolean  expression,  the  action  contains  one 
or  more  conclusions,  and  each  is  completely  modular  and  independent  of  the  others.  Such  modu'ar, 
stylized  coding  is  an  important  factor  in  building  a system  that  is  to  achieve  a high  level  of 

competence. 

For  example,  any  stylized  code  is  easier  to  examine.  This  is  used  in  several  ways  in  the  system. 
Initial  integration  of  new  rules  into  the  knowledge  base  can  be  automated,  since  their  premise  and 
action  parts  can  be  systematically  scanned,  and  the  rules  can  then  be  added  to  the  appropnate 
internal  lists.  In  the  question  answering  sys’em,  inquiries  of  the  form  Do  you  recommend 
clindamycin  for  bacte.oides?’  can  be  answered  by  retrieving  rules  whose  premise  and  action  contain 
the  relevant  items.  Similarly,  the  detection  of  straightforward  cases  of  contradiction  and  subsumption 
is  made  possible  by  the  ability  to  examine  rule  contents.  Stylized  code  also  makes  feasible  the  direct 
manipulation  of  individual  rules,  facilitating  automatic  correction  of  such  undesirable  interactions 
The  discussion  below  of  the  use  of  TEMPLATES  demonstrates  yet  another  use.  in  which  this 


■ 


20 


PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  A iNOwlECGE  REPRESENTATION 


capability  is  used  to  help  provide  explanations  of  system  behavior 

The  benefits  of  modularized  code  are  well  understood.  Especially  significant  in  this  case  are 
the  e.rso  of  adding  new  rules  and  the  relatively  uncomplicated  control  structuie  which  the  modular 
rules  peinut  Since  rules  are  retrieved  because  they  are  relevant  to  a specific  goal  (i  e„  they  mention 
that  goal  in  their  action  part),  the  addition  of  a new  rule  requires  only  that  it  be  added  to  the 
appropriate  internal  list  according  to  the  clinical  parameters  found  in  its  action  A straightforward 
depth  first  search  (the  result  of  the  backward  chaining  of  rules)  is  made  possible  by  the  lack  of 
interactions  among  rules 

These  benefits  are  common  to  stylized  code  of  any  form  Stylization  in  the  form  of 
production  rules  in  particular  has  proved  to  be  a useful  formalism  for  seveial  reasons  In  the 
domain  of  deductive  piobtems,  especially,  it  has  proven  to  be  a natuial  way  of  expressing 
knowledge  It  also  supplies  a clear  and  convenient  way  of  expressing  modular  chunks  of 
knowledge,  since  all  necessary  context  is  stated  explicitly  in  the  premise  This  m turn  makes  it 
e..siei  to  insure  proper  r^rieval  and  use  of  each  rule.  Finally,  in  common  with  similar  formalisms, 
one  rule  never  directly  calls  anothe,.  This  is  a significant  advantage  m integrating  a new  rule  into 
the  system  - it  can  simply  be  ‘added  to  the  pot'  and  no  other  rule  need  he  changed  to  insure  that 
it  is  called  (compate  this  with  the  addition  of  a new  procedure  to  a typical  mooL  type  program). 

[6.1.2]  Shoitcomtngs  of  production  rules 

Stylization  and  modularity  also  result  in  cert  am  shortcomings,  however  It  is,  of  course, 
somewhat  harder  to  express  a given  piece  of  knowledge  if  it  must  be  put  into  a predetermined 
foimat  The  intent  of  a few  of  the  rules  in  our  .ystem  are  thus  less  than  obvious  to  the  naive  user 
even  when  translated  into  English  The  requirement  of  modularity  (along  with  the  uniformity  of  the 
knowledge  base),  means  all  necessary  contextual  Information  must  be  stated  explicitly  in  the  premise, 
and  this  at  times  leads  to  rules  which  have  awkwardly  long  and  complicated  premises. 

bhoitcomings  in  the  formalism  arise  also  in  part  from  the  backwaid  chaining  control 
structuie,  and  from  the  restriction  to  a pure  predicate  in  the  premise  it  is  not  always  easy  to  map  a 
sequence  of  desired  actions  or  tests  into  a set  of  production  rules  whose  goal  dnected  invocation  will 
provide  that  sequence  Thus,  while  the  system’s  performance  is  reassuringly  similar  to  some  human 
reasoning  behavior,  the  creation  of  appropriate  rules  which  result  in  such  behavior  is  at  times 
non-ti  ivial  This  may  in  fact  be  due  more  to  programming  experience  oriented  primarily  toward 
ALCOL-like  languages,  rather  than  any  essential  characteristic  of  production  rules  After  some 
experience  with  the  system  we  have  improved  our  skill  at  'thinking  backward’. 

A final  shoitcommg  arises  from  constraining  rule  premises  to  be  simple  predicates  This  forces 
a pure  problem  reduction  moce  in  the  use  of  rules,  each  clause  of  a premise  is  set  up  as  an 
independent  goal,  and  execution  u the  action  should  be  dependent  solely  on  the  success  or  failure  of 
premise  evaluation,  without  referencing  its  precise  value  It  is  at  times,  however,  extremely 
convenient  to  write  what  amounts  to  a 'for  each’  rule,  as  in  ’for  each  organism  such  that  conclude 
A few  rules  of  this  form  are  present  in  the  system  (including,  for  example,  the  meta-rule  in 


PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  fl  LNOULEDCE  REPRESENTOTION 


- 21  - 


Figure  7),  and  they  are  made  to  appear  formally  like  the  rest  by  allowing  the  premise  to  compute  a 
value  (the  set  of  items  that  satisfy  the  premise),  which  is  passed  to  the  action  clause  via  a global 
variable  While  this  has  been  relatively  successful,  the  violation  of  the  basic  formalism  results  in 
other  difficulties  - in  particular,  in  the  explanation  system,  which  produces  somewhat  murk' 
explanations  of  such  rules.  We  are  working  toward  a cleaner  solution  of  this  problem. 


I 


I 


mHm 


22 


PRODUCTION  RULES  RS  fl  KNOUIEOGE  REPRESENTATION 


i 


: 


[6  2] 


EXPLANATION 


Augmentation  or  modification  of  any  knowledge  base  is  fac  litaied  by  the  ability  to 
discover  what  knowledge  is  currently  in  the  system  and  how  it  is  u^ec  The  system’s  ac  ptance 
(especially  to  a medical  audience)  will  be  strongly  dependent  upon  the  extent  to  which  its 
peifoimance  is  natural  (ie.,  human-like)  and  transparent.  Lack  of  acceptance  of  some  applications 
programs  can  be  traced  to  their  obscure  reasoning  mechanisms  which  leave  the  user  foiced  to 
accept  or  leject  advice  without  a chance  to  discover  basis.  One  of  our  original  design  criteua, 
then,  was  'o  give  the  system  the  abih'y  to  provide  explanations  of  its  behavior  and  knowledge  It 
soon  became  evident  that  an  approach  relying  on  some  form  of  symbolic  reasoning  (rather  than, 
for  example,  statistics)  would  make  this  feasible  This  was  one  of  the  primaiy  reasons  behind  the 
choae  u!  the  production  rule  representation,  and  has  continued  to  influence  the  program’s 


development 

Our  initial  efforts  at  explanation  and  question  answering  were  based  on  tluee  capabilities: 
(i)  display  on  demand  during  the  consultation  the  rule  currently  being  invoked,  (u)  record  rules 
which  were  involved,  and  after  the  consultation,  be  able  to  associate  specific  rules  with  specific 
events  (questions  and  conclusions)  to  explain  why  each  of  them  happened,  and  (m)  search  the 
knowledge  base  for  a specific  type  of  lule  in  answer  to  inquiries  of  the  user  The  first  of  these 
could  be  easily  implemented  via  the  single- word  command  format  described  below 

The  latter  two  were  intended  ioi  use  after  the  consultation,  and  hence  weie  provided  with 
a simple  natmal  language  front  end  Examples  aie  shown  in  Figure  9 (additional  examples  can  be 
tound  in  [Slioi  tliffe  1975a])  Note  that  the  capability  tor  answering  questions  of  type  (u)  has  been 
extended  to  include  inquiries  about  actions  the  progiam  failed  to  take  (example  [d],  Figuie  9)  This 
is  based  on  the  ability  of  the  explanation  system  to  simulate  the  conti ol  structure  of  the  consultation 
system,  and  can  be  extremely  useful  in  deciphering  the  program’s  behavior.  Foi  questions  of  type 
mu,  r[e]  in  Figure  9)  the  seaich  through  the  knowledge  base  is  directed  by  a simple  parsing  of  the 
question  into  a request  for  a set  of  rules,  wuf  constraints  on  premise  and/or  action  contents.  The 
retrieval  of  relevant  rules  is  guided  primarily  by  pie  established  (but  automatically  generated)  lists 
which  indicate  premise  and  action  contents. 

< insert  figure  9 about  here> 

Some  generalization  of  and  excisions  to  the  methodology  of  (i)  and  (i<)  have  been  motivated 
by  two  shortcomings  Displaying  the  current  rule  is  not  pa  icularlv  in.ormauve  if  the  rule  is 
essentially  definitional  and  hence  conceptually  trivial  The  problem  here  is  the  lack  of  a good  gauge 
lor  the  amount  of  mfoimation  in  a tule 

Recording  individual  rule  invocations,  questions,  and  conclusions  is  usetul,  but,  as  a record  of 
individual  events,  it  fails  to  capture  the  context  and  ongoing  sequence  It  is  mfticult  therefcie  to 
explain  any  event  with  reference  to  anything  but  ’he  specific  information  lecoidcd  with  that  event 

Two  related  techniques  wer°  developed  to  solve  these  problems  First,  to  provide  a metric  for 
the  amount  of  intormation  in  a rule,  we  use  (in  a very  rough  analogy  with  information  theory) 
-(log  CF)  Rules  which  are  definitional  (CF  • I)  have  by  this  measure  no  information,  while  those 


* •ITT' 

r”^'w 


PRODUCTION  RULES  PS  A fNOULEOCE  REPRESENTATION 

(,:)  **  HOW  DID  YOU  DECIDE  THAT  ORGANISM- 1 MIGHT  BE  AN  E.COLI? 

1 uccd  RULE021  to  conclude  that  the  identity  of  ORGANISM-1  is  e.coli. 

T ^ he  n 7 1 se  d TuLE084  to  conclude  that  the  identity  of  ORGANISM-1  is 

C‘F°nJiljrT1?‘.,d  ROE003  w,c'onCcF|°d.'tha.,‘th.  identity  of  0RGAN1SH-1 
is  e.coli*.  This  gave  a cumulative  CF  of  (.74). 

(b)  **  DID  YOU  USE  RULE  163  TO  FIND  OUT  ANYTHING  ABOUT  ORGANISM- 1? 

RULE163  was  tried  in  the  context  of  ORGAN! SM-l.  but  it  failed  because 
it  is  not  true  that  the  patient  has  had  ? geni  to-ur  in.iry  tract  manipulative 

procedure  (clause  3). 

(C)  **  DID  RULE  116  TELL  YOU  ANYTHING  ABOUT  INFECTION- 1? 

No.  RULE11G  would  be  relevant  to  the  primary-bacteremia  when  applied 

to  ORGA  1 ^ ("the  gram  stain  of  the  organism  is  not  known")  was 

already  known  to  be  false  for  ORGAN ISfl-l.  so  the  rule  was  never  tried. 

(i{)  **  WHY  DIDN'T  YOU  CONSIDER  STREPTOCOCCUS  AS  A POSSIBILITY  FOR  ORGANISM- 1? 

The  following  rule  could  have  been  used  to  determine  that  the  identity 

of  ORGANISH-1  was  streptococcus:  RULE033 

But  clause  2 ("the  morphology  of  the  organism  is  coccus  ) was 
already  known  to  be  false  for  ORGANISM-1,  so  the  rule  was  never  tried. 

(()  **  DO  YOU  RECOMMEND  CLINDAMYCIN  FOR  BACTEROIDES7 

Yes. 

RULE0S0 

If  the  identity  of  the  organism  is  bacteroides 

Tk„_  i rernmmpnd  theraDU  be  chosen  from  among  the  following: 

CHLORAMPHENICOL,  CLINDAMYCIN,  RIFAMPIN,  ERYTHROMYCIN,  CARBENICILLIN 
TETRACYCLINE,  LINCOMYCIN 

(f)  **  IS  BLOOD  A STERILE  SITE? 

Yes,  blood  is  one  of  those  sites  that  are  normally  sterile. 

(g)  **  WHAT  ARE  THE  ORGANISMS  ASSOCIATED  WITH  THE  GASTRO-INTESTINAL  TRACT7 

Thp  likelu  Dathoaens  associated  w'th  the  gast ro- i n tes t i na  I tract  are: 
ENTEROCOCCUS.  CLOSTRlDIun-GAJIGRENE.  BACTEROIDES.  KLEBISELLA,  PSEUOOTtONAS . 

e.coli,  enterobacter,  proteus. 


Figure  9 


24 


PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  fi  KNOULEDGE  REPRESENTRT ION 


which  express  less  obvious  implications  have  progressively  more  information.  The  measure  is  clearly 
imperfect,  since  first.  CFs  are  not  probabilities,  and  there  is  thus  nu  formal  justification  that  -(log 
CD  is  a meaningful  measure.  Second,  any  sophisticated  information  content  measure  should  factor 
in  the  state  of  the  observer's  knowledge,  since  the  best  explanations  are  those  which  are  based  on  an 
understanding  of  what  the  observer  fails  to  comprehend.  Despite  these  shortcomings,  however,  this 
heuristic  has  proven  to  be  quite  useful 

To  solve  the  second  problem  (explaining  events  in  context)  the  piucess  of  recording  individual 
rule  invocations  has  been  generalized'  all  the  basic  control  functions  of  the  system  have  been 
augmented  to  leave  behind  a history  of  each  of  their  executions.  This  internal  trace  is  then  read  by 
various  parts  of  the  explanation  system  to  provide  a complete,  m-context  explanation  of  any  part  of 
the  system’s  behavior. 

Because  the  consultation  process  is  essentially  one  of  search  through  an  AND/OR  goal  tree, 
inquiries  during  the  course  of  a consultation  fall  quite  naturally  into  two  types:  WHY  a question 
was  asked,  and  HOW  a conclusion  was  (or  will  be)  reached.  The  first  of  these  looks  "up"  the  tree,  in 
examining  higher  goals,  while  the  second  looks  "down"  in  examining  rules  which  may  help  achieve 
a goal  This  part  of  the  system’s  explanation  capability  can  thus  be  viewed  in  general  as  a process  of 
tree  traversal.  By  combining  this  concept  with  the  information  content  metiic,  we  make  possible 
explanations  in  varying  levels  of  detail:  the  tree  may  be  traversed  in  steps  whose  information  content 
size  is  specified  by  the  user,  rather  than  simply  stepping  from  goal  to  goal  At  the  start  of  the 
traversal  process,  "information  distance"  from  the  current  goal  to  the  top  of  the  tiee  is  normalized  to 
9 The  argument  to  the  WHY  command  (an  integer  between  one  and  ten,  assumed  to  be  one  if 
absent)  is  then  taken  to  indicate  some  part  of  that  distance  Thus,  WHY  3 indicates  an  explanation 
which  encompasses  approximately  one-third  of  the  total  “conceptual”  distance  Repeated  WHY 
questions  have  the  effect  of  stepping  up  the  goal  tree.  Examples  are  shown  below;  additional 
examples  are  found  in  [S hortliffe  1 975a]). 

In  this  series,  how  many  of  the  cultures  were  positive  for  the 

e.coli  (ORGANISM-1) ? {typical  system  prompt} 

**WHY 

{request  from  user  to  determine  motivation  for  question} 

ti.e.  UHY  is  is  important  to  determine  the  number  of  cultures  which  were 
positive  for  the  organism?) 

{system's  rephrasing  of  the  WHY  question,  and  answer} 

(1.8)  This  will  help  to  determine  whether  there  is  significant  disease 
associated  with  this  occurence  of  the  organism. 

It  has  already  been  established  that 

(1.11  the  culture  was  taken  from  a sterile  source 

(1.2)  the  number  of  cultures  in  the  series  is  greater  than  2 

There  fore,  i f 

(1.3)  the  number  of  cultures  which  were  positive  for  ORGAN  I Sfl-1 
i s greater  than  2 

Then  there  is  suggestive  evidence  (.5)  that  there  is  sign i f i can t d i sease 
associated  with  this  occurrence  of  the  e.coli  (ORGAN  1 SM-1 ) . 

(RULE049) 


PRODUCTION  PULES  PS  » • '■HuiEaCf  5£P»E3EN’ntI3M 


25 


WHY 

• refected  I'  //)  to  deter*  !«'!<•'.  true  of  previous  exphzn'ition', 

(i.o.  UHY  io  it  important  to  determine  if  there  ip  significant  disease 
assoc  i aim)  with  this  occurrence  of  the  organism?] 

(2.  ft]  This  will  help  to  determine  a diagnosis  for  which  the  infection  should 
be  treated. 

It  has  already  been  established  that 

12.11  the  infection  is  not  one  of:  primary-bacteremia,  meningitis 
[2.21  for  some  current  culturp  uf  the  patient  it  is  true  that  the 
site  of  the  culture  is  blood 
Ther  pforc,  if 

[2.31  there  is  significant  disease  associated  uith  this  occurrence 
of  the  organism 

Then 

it  is  definite  (l.fl)  that  the  diagnosis  for  which  the  infection  should 
he  treated  is  secorriary-hac terem i a 

[RULE  1031 


F it  in  c Id 


Ipimilmly,  HOW  commands  step  "down"  the  'tee  This  can  r»snli  cither  bandies 

which  have  already  been  traversed  ‘as  m the  e sample  below)  or  those  winch  have  yet  to  be  tried  (in 
which  case  the  question  becomes  'HOW  will  you  determine  ) 

**HOW  1.1 

{fee  1 1 rejers  to  the  mfomano  ■ in  the  line  hihell.d  / 1 1 ] in  Fig  in 

[i.e.  HOU  was  it  determined  that  the  culture  uas  taken  from  a sterile  source?] 

[3.11  RULE001  was  used  to  conclude  that  there  13  suggestive  evidence 
(.7)  that  the  culture  uas  taken  from  a sterile  eurre. 

[3.21  RULE022  uas  used  to  conclude  that  there  is  strongly  suggestive 
evidence  (.7)  that  the  culture  was  takpr.  from  a sterile  source. 

**HOW  3.1  { another  request  from  the  user) 

[i.e.  HOU  uas  RULE031  used?! 

It  ha9  already  been  established  that 

(4.11  the  site  of  the  culture  is  one  of:  those  sites  from  uhirh  the 

sterility  of  cultures  depends  upon  the  method  of  collect  ion 
[4.21  the  method  of  collection  of  the  culture  is  one  of:  the 

recognized  methods  01  collection  associated  with  the  site 
of  the  culture,  and 

(4.31  it  is  not  known  whether  care  uas  taken  in  roller  ting  the  culturi 
Therefore 

there  '19  strongly  suggestive  evidence  (.8)  that  the  culture  was  taken 

from  a ster i le  source 

(RULE0221 


Figure  1 1 


The  system's  fundamental  approach  to  explanation  is  thus  ro  display  some  recap  of  its  internal 


26 


PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  A LNOULEOOE  REPRESENTATION 


actions,  a trace  of  us  reasoning.  The  success  of  thts  technique  is  predicated  on  the  claim  that  the 
system’s  basic  approach  to  the  problem  is  sufficiently  intuitive  that  a summaiy  of  those  actions  is  at 
least  a icasonable  basis  from  which  to  start.  While  it  would  be  difficult  to  prove  the  claim  in  any 
foimal  sense,  there  are  several  factors  which  suggest  its  plausibility 

Fust,  we  are  dealing  with  a domain  in  which  deduction,  and  deduction  in  the  face  of 
uncertainty,  is  a primary  task  The  use  of  production  mles  in  an  IF/THEN  format  seems  therefore 
to  be  a natural  way  ot  expressing  things  about  the  domain,  and  the  display  of  such  rules  should  be 
comp.chensible  Second,  the  use  of  such  rules  in  a backward  chaining  mode  is,  we  claim,  a 
reasonably  intuitive  scheme.  Modus  pon/ns  ts  a well-understood  and  widely  (if  not  explicitly)  used 
mode  ot  inference  Thus,  the  general  form  of  the  representation  and  the  way  it  is  employed  should 
not  be  unfamiliar  to  the  average  user  More  specifically,  however,  cons.dei  the  source  of  the  rules. 
They  have  been  given  to  us  by  human  experts  who  were  attempting  to  foimalize  then  own 
knowledge  of  the  domain  As  such,  they  embody  accepted  patterns  of  human  leasonmg,  implying 
that  they  should  be  relatively  easy  to  understand,  especially  for  those  familial  with  the  domain.  As 
such,  they  will  also  attack  the  problem  at  what  has  been  judged  an  appreciate  level  of  detarl  That 
,s.  th.  y will  embody  the  light  size  ot  "chunks”  of  the  problem  to  be  comprehensible 

We  are  not.  therefore,  recapping  the  binary  bit  level  operations  of  the  machine  instructions 
fur  an  obscuie  piece  of  code  We  claim  instead  to  be  working  with  primitives  and  a methodology 
whose  (a)  substance,  (b)  level  of  detail,  and  (c)  mechanism  are  all  well  suited  to  the  domain,  and  to 
human  compi ehension,  precisely  because  they  were  provided  by  human  experts.  This  approach 
seems  to  provide  what  may  plausibly  be  an  understandable  explanation  of  system  behavior. 

This  use  o;  symbolic  reasoning  is  one  factor  which  makes  the  geneiation  of  explanations  an 
easier  task  For  example,  it  makes  the  display  of  a backtrace  of  performance  comprehensible  (as,  for 
example,  in  Figure  9).  The  basic  control  structure  of  the  consultation  system  is  a second  factor.  The 
simple  depth-fi. st-search  of  the  AND/OR  goal  tree  makes  HOW,  WHY.  and  the  tree  traversal 
approach  natural  (as  in  Figures  10  and  II).  We  believe  several  concepts  in  the  current  system  are. 
howevei , fan ly  general  purpose,  and  would  be  useful  even  in  systems  which  did  not  share  these 
advani ages.  Whatever  control  structure  is  employed,  the  maintenance  of  an  internal  trace  will  clearly 
be  useful  in  subsequent  explanations  of  system  behavior  The  use  of  some  mtoimauon  metric  will 
h<l|>  to  msuie  that  those  explanations  aie  at  an  appropriate  level  of  detail  Finally,  the  explanation 
genei  atirig  routines  irqime  some  ability  to  decipher  the  actions  of  the  mam  system 

I ||.rc  diffeient  means  of  generating  explanations  are  present  in  oui  cunent  system,  (c) 
y t„st  tY1,e  is  used  ...  producing  answers  to  HOW  questions  which  expluie  branches  of  the  tree 
not  yet  traversed  by  the  consultation  system  (eg.  "HOW  will  you  dete.mme  the  identity  of  the 
organism  ")  These  are  produced  by  having  the  explanation  system  simulate  the  operation  of  the 
consultation  system  via  special  purpose  software,  This  is  thus  a hand  crafted  solution,  {b)  Mote 
genei  ,1  IS  the  use  of  the  goal-tree  concept  as  a basts  for  explanation  - since  the  notion  of  an 
AND/OR  goal  tree  models  a large  part  of  the  control  structure,  we  have  a single,  uncomplicated 
models  for  much  of  the  system's  behav.or  As  a result,  a relatively  simple  formalism  whch  equates 


PRODUCTION  RULES  PS  A I NOULEDGE  REPRESENTATION 


27 


WHY  and  HOW  with  tree  traversal  offers  a reasonably  powerful  and  comprehensive  explanatory 
capability  (c)  The  most  general  technique  has  been  mentioned  earlier  - one  pa:  t of  the  system 
"reads"  the  code  (the  rule)  that  is  being  executed  by  another  part  (The  same  basic  approach  is  used 
to  do  the  partial  evaluation  described  above  and  the  division  of  rule  piemises  into  known  and 
unknown  clauses  shown  in  the  examples  above),  in  this  case  the  explanations  are  constructed  by 
reference  to  the  contents  of  the  rules,  and  this  referral  is  guided  by  information  contained  in  the  rule 
components  themselves 

By  way  of  contrast,  we  might  try  to  imagine  how  a progiam  based  on  a statistical 
approach  might  attempt  to  explain  itself.  Such  systems  can,  for  instance,  display  a disease  which 
has  been  deduced  and  a list  of  relevant  symptoms,  with  prior  and  postenor  probabilities.  No  mote 
informative  detail  is  available,  however.  When  the  symptom  list  is  long,  it  may  not  be  clear  how 
each  of  them  (or  some  combination  of  them)  conttibuted  to  the  conclusion  It  is  more  difficult  to 
imagine  what  sort  of  explanation  could  be  provided  if  the  program  were  intemipted  with  interim 
queries  while  in  the  process  of  computing  probabilities.  The  problem,  of  ionise,  is  that  statistical 
methods  are  not  good  models  of  the  actual  reasoning  piocess  (as  shown  in  psychological 
experiments  of  [Edwardsl%8]  and  [Tvei  sky  1974]),  nor  were  they  designed  :o  be  While  they  arc 
operationally  effective  when  extensive  data  concerning  disease  incidence  are  avail'ble,  they  are 
also  for  the  most  part,  "shallow",  one  step  techniques  which  capture  little  of  the  ongoing  process 
actually  used  by  expert  problem  soivers  in  the  domain  6 

We  have  found  the  presence  of  even  the  current  basic  explanation  capabilities  to  be  extremely 
useful,  as  they  have  begun  to  pass  the  most  fundamental  test:  it  has  become  easier  to  ask  the  system 
what  it  did  than  to  trace  through  the  code  by  hand  The  continued  development  and  generalization 
of  these  capabilities  is  one  focus  of  our  present  research 


r , 


. 28  - PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  fl  KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTfiTION 

[6  3]  ACQUISITION 

Since  the  field  of  infectious  disease  therapy  is  both  large  and  constantly  changing,  it  was 
,1T.,,e„t  from  the  outset  that  the  program  would  have  to  deal  with  an  evolving  knowledge  base 
The  domain  size  made  writing  a complete  set  of  rules  an  impossible  task,  so  the  system  was 
designed  to  facilitate  an  incremental  approach  to  competence.  New  research  in  the  domain 
produces  new  results  and  modifications  of  old  principles,  so  that  a broad  scope  of  knowledge-base 
management  capabilities  was  clearly  necessary. 

As  suggested  above,  a fundamental  assumption  is  that  the  expert  teaching  the  system  can 
be  "debriefed",  thus  transferring  his  knowledge  to  the  program.  That  is,  presented  with  any 
conclusion  he  makes  during  a consultation,  the  expert  must  be  able  to  state  a rule  indicating  all 
relevant  premises  for  that  conclusion.  The  rule  must,  in  and  of  itself,  repiesents  a valid  chunk  of 
clinical  knowledge. 

There  are  two  leasons  why  this  seems  a plausible  approach  to  knowledge  acquisition  First, 
clinical  medicine  appears  to  be  at  the  correct  level  of  formalization  That  is,  while  relatively  little 
of  the  knowledge  an  be  specified  in  precise  algorithms  (at  a level  comparable  to.  say,  elementary 
physics)  the  judgmental  knowledge  that  exists  is  often  specifiable  in  reasonably  firm  heuristics. 
Second,  on  the  model  of  a medical  student’s  clinical  training,  we  have  emphasized  the  acquisition 
of  new  knowledge  in  the  context  of  debugging  (although  the  system  is  ptepaied  to  accept  a new 
rule  Horn  the  user  at  any  time).  We  expect  that  some  error  on  the  system's  part  will  become 
apparent  during  the  consultation,  perhaps  through  an  incorrect  organism  identification  or  therapy 
selection.  Tracking  down  this  error  by  tracing  back  through  the  program’s  actions  is  a reasonably 
straightforward  process  which  presents  the  expert  with  a methodical  and  complete  review  of  the 
svstrin’s  reasoning  He  is  obligated  to  either  approve  of  each  step  or  to  correct  it  This  means  that 
the  expert  is  faced  with  a sharply  focussed  task  of  adding  a chunk  of  knowledge  to  remedy  a 
specific  bug  This  makes  it  far  easier  for  him  to  formalize  his  knowledge  than  would  be  the  case 
if  tie  were  asked,  for  example,  "tell  me  about  bacteremia" 

This  methodology  has  the  interesting  advantage  that  the  context  of  the  error  (i e„  which 
conclusion  was  in  error,  what  rules  were  used,  what  the  facts  of  this  case  weie,  etc)  is  of  great 
help  -o  the  acquisition  system  in  interpreting  the  expert’s  subsequent  msti uctions  for  fixing  the 
Pug  The  error  type  and  context  supply  the  system  with  a set  of  expectations  about  the  form  and 
content  of  the  anticipated  correction,  and  this  greatly  facilitates  the  acquisition  process  (details  of 
this  and  much  of  the  operation  of  the  acquisition  system  are  found  in  [Davis  1975b]) 

The  problem  of  educating  the  system  can  be  usefully  broken  down  into  three  phases 
uncovering  the  bug,  transferring  to  the  system  the  knowledge  necessary  to  correct  the  bug,  and 
integrating  the  new  (or  revised)  knowledge  into  the  knowledge  base  As  suggested  above,  the 
explanation  system  is  designed  to  facilitate  the  first  task  by  making  it  easy  to  review  all  of  the 
program’s  actions.  Corrections  are  then  specified  by  adding  new  rules  (and  peihaps  new  values, 
attributes,  or  contexts),  or  by  modifying  old  ones.  This  process  is  earned  out  in  a mixed  initiative 
dialogue  using  a subset  of  standard  English  (an  early  example  is  found  in  [Shortliffe  1975a]). 


I 


PRODUCTION  RULES  RS  fl  I NDULEDCE  REPRESENTATION 


29 


The  system’s  understanding  of  the  dialog  is  based  on  what  may  be  viewed  as  a primitive 
form  of  ’model-directed'  automatic  programming  Civen  some  natural  language  text  describing  one 
clause  of  a new  rule's  premise,  the  system  scans  the  text  to  find  keywords  suggesting  which 
predicate  function(s)  are  the  most  appropriate  translations  of  the  predicate(s)  used  in  the  clause. 
The  appropriate  TEMPLATE  for  each  such  function  is  retrieved,  and  the  ‘parsing’  of  the 
remainder  of  the  text  is  guided  by  the  attempt  to  fill  this  in. 

If  one  of  the  functions  were  SAME,  the  TEMPLATE  would  be  as  shown  in  Figure  c. 
CNTXT  is  known  to  be  a literal  which  should  be  left  as  is,  PARM  signifies  a clinical  paramr  ;r 
(attribute),  and  VALUE  denotes  a corresponding  value.  Thus  the  phrase  "the  stain  of  the 
organism  is  negative"  would  be  analyzed  as  follows;  the  word  "stain”  in  the  system  dictionary  has 
as  part  of  its  semantic  indicators  the  information  that  it  may  be  used  in  talking  about  the 
attribute*  gramstain  of  an  organism.  The  word  “negative"  is  known  to  be  a valid  value  of  gramstain 
(although  it  has  other  associations  as  well)  Thus  one  possible  (and  in  fact  the  correct)  parse  is 
(SAME  CNTXT  CRAM  GRAMNEG),  or  "the  gramstain  of  the  organism  is  giamnegative.” 

Note  that  this  is  another  example  of  the  use  of  higher  level  primitives  to  do  a form  of 
program  understanding.  It  is  the  semantics  of  PARM  and  VALUE  which  guide  the  parse  after  the 
TEMPLATE  is  retrieved,  and  the  semantics  of  the  gramstain  concept  which  allow  us  to  insure  thu 
consistency  of  each  parse.  Thus  by  treating  such  concepts  as  conceptual  primitives,  and  providing 
semantics  at  this  level,  we  make  possible  the  capabilities  shown,  using  relatively  modest  amounts  of 
machinery 

Other,  incorrect  par  are  of  course  posable,  and  are  generated  too  There  are  three 
factors,  however,  which  keep  the  total  number  of  parses  within  reasonable  bounds.  First,  and 
perhaps  most  important,  we  are  dealing  with  a very  small  amount  of  text  The  user  is  prompted 
for  each  clause  of  the  premise  individually,  and  while  he  may  type  an  abritr ary  amount  at  each 
prompt,  the  typical  response  is  less  than  a dozen  words  Second,  there  is  a relatively  small  degree 
of  ambiguity  in  the  semi-formal  language  of  medicine.  Therefore  a keyword-based  approach 
produces  only  a small  number  of  possible  interpretations  for  each  word  Finally,  insuring  the 
consistency  of  any  given  parse  (eg  that  VALUE  is  indeed  a valid  value  for  PARM)  further 
restricts  the  total  number  generated.  Typically,  between  I and  15  candidate  parses  result. 

Ranking  of  possible  interpretations  of  a clause  depends  on  expectation  and  internal 
consistency  As  noted  above,  the  context  of  the  original  error  supplies  expectations  about  the  form 
of  the  new  rule,  and  this  is  used  to  help  sort  the  resulting  parses  to  choose  the  most  likely 

As  the  last  step  in  educating  the  system,  we  have  to  integrate  the  new  knowledge  into  the 
rest  of  the  knowledge  base  We  have  only  recently  begun  work  on  this  problem,  but  we  recognize 
two  important,  general  problems  First,  the  rule  set  should  be  free  of  internal  conti adictions, 
subsumptions,  or  redundancies  Ti  e issue  is  complicated  significantly  by  the  judgmental  nature  of 
the  rules  While  some  inconsistencies  are  immediately  obvious  (two  rules  identical  except  for 
differing  certainty  factors)  indirect  contradictions,  (resulting  from  chaining  rules,  for  example)  are 
more  difficult  to  detect  Inexactness  in  the  rules  means  that  we  can  specify  only  an  interval  of 


i 


30 


PRODUCTION  RULES  AS  A KNOWLEDGE  REPRESENTATION 


consistent  values  for  a certainty  factor 

The  second  problem  is  coping  with  the  secondary  effects  that  the  addition  of  new 
knowledge  typically  introduces.  This  arises  primarily  from  the  acquisition  of  a new  value,  clinical 
parameter  or  context  After  requesting  the  information  required  to  specify  the  new  structure,  it  is 
often  necessary  to  update  several  other  information  structures  in  the  system,  and  these  in  turn  may 
cause  yet  other  updating  to  occur.  For  example,  the  creation  of  a new  value  for  the  site  of  a 
culture  involves  a long  sequence  of  actions:  the  new  site  must  be  added  to  the  internal  list 
ALLSITES,  it  must  then  be  classified  as  either  sterile  or  non-sierile,  and  then  added  to  the 
appropriate  list,  if  non-sterile  rhe  user  has  to  supply  the  names  of  the  organisms  that  are  typically 
found  there,  and  so  forth.  While  some  of  this  updating  is  appaient  from  the  stiuctures  themselves, 
much  of  it  is  not  We  are  currently  investigating  methods  for  specifying  such  interactions,  and  a 
methodology  of  representation  design  that  minimizes  or  simplifies  the  interactions  to  begin  with. 

The  choice  of  a production  rule  representation  does  impose  some  limitations  in  the 
knowledge  transfer  task.  Since  rules  are  simple  conditional  statements,  they  can  at  times  provide 
power  insufficient  to  express  some  more  complex  concepts  In  addition,  while  expressing  a single 
fact  is  often  convenient,  expressing  a larger  corcept  via  several  rules  is  at  times  somewhat  more 
difficult.  As  suggested  above,  mapping  from  a sequence  of  actions  to  a set  of  rules  is  not  always 
easy  Goal-directed  chaining  is  apparently  not  currently  a common  human  approach  to  structuring 
larger  chunks  of  knowledge 

Despite  these  drawbacks,  we  have  found  the  production  rule  formalism  a powerful  one.  It 
has  helped  to  organize  and  build,  in  a relatively  short  period,  a knowledge  base  which  performs 
at  an  encouraging  level  of  competence.  The  rules  are.  as  noted,  a reasonably  intuitive  way  of 
expressing  simple  chunks  of  inferential  knowledge,  and  one  which  requires  no  acquaintance  with 
any  programming  language.  While  it  may  not  be  immediately  obvious  how  to  restate  domain 
knowledge  in  production  rule  format,  we  have  found  that  infectious  disease  experts  soon  acquired 
some  proficiency  in  doing  this  with  relatively  little  experience. 

The  rules  also  appear  capable  of  embodying  appropriate-sized  chunks  of  knowledge,  and 
of  expiessmg  concepts  that  are  significant  statements.  They  remain,  however,  straightforward 
enough  to  be  built  of  relatively  simple  compositions  of  conceptual  primitives  (the  attributes,  values, 
etc.)  While  any  heavily  stylized  form  of  coding  of  course  makes  it  easier  to  produce  code,  stylizing 
in  the  form  of  production  rules  in  particular  also  provides  a framework  which  is  structurally 
simple  enough  to  be  translatable  to  simple  English.  This  means  that  the  experts  can  easily 
comprehend  the  program’s  explanation  of  what  it  knows,  ar.d  equally  easily  specify  knowledge  to 
be  added 


CONCLUSIONS 


31 


[7]  CONCLUSIONS 

The  MYCIN  system  has  begun  to  approach  its  design  goals  of  competence  and  high 
performance,  7 flexibility  in  accomodating  a targe  and  changing  knowledge  base,  and  ability  to 
explain  its  own  reasoning.  Successful  applications  of  our  control  structure  with  rules  applicable  to 
other  problem  areas  have  been  (a)  fault  diagnosis  and  repair  reccommendations  for  bugs  in  an 
automobile  horn  system  [van  Mellel974],  (b)  a consultation  system  for  industrial  assembly  problems 
[Hartl975],  and  (c)  part  of  the  basis  for  an  intelligent  terminal  system  [RAND1975]. 

A large  factor  in  this  work  has  been  the  production  rule  methodology.  It  has  proved  to  be  a 
powerful,  yet  flexible  representation  for  encoding  knowledge,  and  has  contributed  significantly  to  the 
capabilities  of  the  system. 


BD.UA 


relevant  rwfavj 


TWEUt  \ 


P>S»\  USLR 


P*-  <ve  *.t 


/HCKt\ 


t^ttOTE 

Trte-w 


Capticns 

I:  [consultation,  initial  segment] 

Initial  segment  of  a session  with  the  consultation  system.  User  responses  are  in  boldface 
and  follow  the  double  asterisks.  Italicized  comments  at  the  right  are  not  part  of  the  actual 

dialog. 

2 [consultation,  final  segment] 

Final  segment  of  a consultation.  Alternative  choices  for  therapies  are  generated  if  requested, 
[five  boxes  - 4 systems  plus  rule  base] 

The  five  components  of  the  system:  four  programs  and  a single  knowledge  base.  Arrows 
indicate  the  diieuion  of  information  flow 

4 llUleJA  rule  from  the  knowledge  base.  SAND  and  SOR  are  the  multivalued  analogues  of  the 
standard  Boolean  AND  and  OR 

5.  [quadruples  fiom  data  base] 

Samples  of  information  in  the  data  base  during  a consulta'ion. 

6;  [template] 

PARM  is  shorthand  for  clinical  parameter  (attribute);  VALUE  is  tne  corresponding  value; 
CNTXT  is  a free  variable  which  references  the  context  in  which  the  rule  is  invoked. 

7:  [meta  rule] 

meta-rule  A previous  inteci.on  which  has  been  cured  (temporarily)  may  reoccur.  Thus 
one  of  the  ways  to  deduce  the  identity  of  the  current  organism  is  by  reference  to  previous 
infections.  However,  this  method  is  not  valid  if  the  current  infection  was  cultured  from  one 
of  the  non-sterile  culture  sites  Thus  this  metarule  says,  in  effect,  if  the  current  culture  is  from 
(I  non-sterile  site,  don't  bother  trying  to  deduce  the  current  organism  identity  from  identities  of 
previous  organisms. 

8;  [context  tree] 

A sample  of  the  contexts  which  may  be  sprouted  during  a consultation 
9:  [QA  natural  language  examples] 

Examples  of  natural  language  question  answering  capabilities.  Questions  la]-[d]  reference  a 
specific  consultation,  while  [e]-[g]  are  general  inquiries  answered  from  the  system  knowledge 
base 

10;  [Explanation  examples,  WHY] 

Examples  of  explanation  capabilities.  User  input  is  in  boldface  and  follows  the  double 
asterisk  EApansion  of  each  WHY  or  HOW  question  (enclosed  in  brackets)  is  produced  by 
the  system,  to  be  sure  the  user  is  aware  of  the  system’s  interpretation  of  them. 

1 1 [Explanation  examples.  HOW] 

{No  caption  necessary] 

Appendix  caption 

A detailed  overview  of  the  control  structure,  illustrating  the  combination  of  the  various 
mechanisms  used  to  establish  a subgoal. 


33 


NOTES 

The  MYCIN  system  has  been  developed  by  the  authors  in  collaboration  with. 

Drs.  Stanley  Cohen,  Stanton  Axline,  Frank  Rhame,  Robert  Ilia,  and  Rudolpho 
Chavez-Pardo,  all  of  whom  provided  medical  expertise; 

William  van  Melle,  who  made  extensive  revisions  to  the  system  code  for  efficiency 
and  to  introduce  new  features; 

Carlisle  Scott,  who  (with  William  Clancey)  designed  and  implemented  the  expanded 
natural  language  question  answering  capabilities. 

We  have  recently  begun  investigating  extending  the  system  The  next  medical  domain  will 
be  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  meningitis  infections.  This  area  is  sufficiently  different 
to  be  challenging,  and  yet  similar  enough  to  suggest  that  some  of  the  automated 
procedures  we  have  developed  may  be  quite  useful. 

The  paper  by  [van  M ehe  1 974]  reports  on  an  interesting  effort  at  inserting  an 
entirely  different  knowledge  base  into  the  body  of  the  current  system.  A small  part  of  an 
automobile  repair  manual  was  translated  into  production  rules,  and  the  appropriate 
attributes,  objects,  contexts,  and  vocabulary  were  provided  It  then  required  relatively  little 
effort  to  plug  this  new  knowledge  base  into  the  standard  system  code,  and  a small  but 
completely  functional  automobile  consultant  program  resulted 

We  are  presently  working  on  an  interface  which  will  allow  the  physician  to  describe  the 
important  facts  of  the  case  using  an  appropriate  subset  of  natural  language.  This  would 
allow  him  to  begin  by  describing  the  case  in  standard  medical  format,  and  allow  the 
system  to  prompt  with  more  general  questions  like  'Please  describe  the  second  blood 
culture.* 

Note  that,  unlike  standard  probability  theory,  SAND  does  not  involve  any  multiplication 
over  its  arguments  Since  CFs  are  not  probabilities,  there  is  no  a priori  reason  why  a 
product  should  be  a reasonable  number  There  is,  moreover,  a long-standing  convention  in 
work  with  multi-valued  logics  which  interprets  AND  as  min  and  OR  as  max  [Lukasciewicz]. 
It  is  based  primarily  on  intuitive  grounds:  if  a conclusion  requires  all  of  its  antecender.ts  to 
be  true,  then  it  is  a relatively  conservative  strategy  to  use  the  smallest  of  the  antecedent 
values  as  the  value  of  the  premise  Similarly,  if  any  one  of  the  antecendent  clauses  justifies 
the  conclusion,  we  are  safe  in  taking  the  maximum  value 

As  a result  of  this,  the  control  flow  is  actually  slightly  more  complicated  than  a pure 
AND/OR  goal  tree,  and  the  flowchart  in  the  appendix  is  correspondingly  more  complex 

However,  the  reasoning  process  of  human  experts  may  not  be  the  ideal  model  for  all 
knowledge-based  problem  solving  systems  In  the  presence  of  reliable  statistical  data, 
programs  using  a decision  theoretic  approach  are  capable  of  performance  surpassing  those  of 
their  human  counterparts. 

In  domains  like  infectious  disease  therapy  selection,  however,  which  are  characterized 
by  'judgmental  knowledge’,  statistical  approaches  may  not  be  viable.  This  appears  to  be  the 
case  for  many  medical  decision  making  areas.  See  [Corry  1 973b]  for  further  discussion  of  this 
point 

A preliminary  evaluation  of  the  system  [Shortliffe 1 974a]  demonstrates  agreement  with  a 
panel  of  experts  on  737.  of  a randomly  chosen  set  of  patients.  A more  formal  evaluation 
study  is  currently  being  performed. 


34 


References 


[ Bleich  1971] 

B letch  H L The  computer  as  a 
January  1971)  pp  141-147. 


consultant  The  New  England  Journal  of  Medicine,  284 


(21 


[Buchanan  1971] 

Buchanan  B G,  Lederberg  J,  The  heuristic 
data,  1F1P,  1971,  pp  179  - 188. 


DENDRAL  program 


for  explaining  empirical 


[Colby  1971] 

Colby  K M,  Parkinson  R C,  Faught 
natural  language  dialog  expressions, 
Department,  Stanford  University. 


B L.  Pattern  matching  rules  for  the  recognition  of 
A i Memo  »234,  June  1974,  Computer  Science 


[Ca  bo,c^oneU  J R,  Mixed  initiative  man-computer  instructional  dialogues,  BBN  Report  1971, 
(31  May  1970),  Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman,  Cambridge,  Mass. 


[Davisl975a] 

Davis  R.  King  J.  An 
Knowledge,  Proceedings 


overview  of  production  systems,  in  Machine  Representations  of 
of  the  NATO  Advanced  Study  Institute.  Santa  Cruz.  CA,  (in  press). 


[Da  v is  1 075b] 

Davis  R 


Forthcoming  PhD  thesis,  Stanford  University 


[Edwar<lsl968] 

Edward;  ?,  Conservatism  in  human  information  processing, 
Representation  of  Human  Judgment,  Wiley  (1968),  pp  17-52. 


in 


Kleinmuntz  (Ed.),  Formal 


[Fahlmanl974] 

FaHr>an  SEA  planning  system 
1974)  pp  1-50. 


for  robot  construction  tasks,  Arlifical  Intelligence  5 (Spring 


[FinkCl  Fmkel  R Taylor  R,  Bolles  R,  Paul  R,  Feldman  J.  AL,  A programming  system  for 
automation,  A1  Memo  243,  Nov  1974,  Stanford  University 


Gorry  196S] 


Gorry  G A,  Barnett  G O.  Experience  with  a model  of  sequential  diagnosis,  Computers  and 
Biomedical  Research,  l (1968)  pp  490-507. 


IGO"V'o«riv  G A.  Kassirer  j P.  Esa.g  A.  Sch.am  W B.  Daemon  analysis  as  the  basis  for 
computer-aided  management  of  acute  renal  failure.  American  Journal  of  Medicine,  55  (1973) 

pp  473-484 


[Goriyl^^]  ^ ^ computer-assisted  clinical  decision  making,  Meth.  Inform  Med,  12  (1973),  pp 
42-51 


35 


[Green  1974] 

Gippii  C.  C.  Waldmger  R J,  Barstow  D R,  Elschlagei  \ Lenat  D B,  McCune  B P,  Shaw 
D E.  Steinberg  L I Progress  repoit  on  program-undei  standing  systems.  A 1 Memo  *240. 
August  1 974,  Computer  Science  Department,  Stanford  University. 

[Hart  197*0 

Hart  P E Progress  on  a computer-based  consultant.  A1  Croup  Technical  Note  99, 
Januuary  1975,  Stanford  Research  Institute,  Menlo  Park,  CA 

[Hewitt  1971] 

Hewitt  C Procedure  semantics  - models  of  procedures  and  the  teaching  of  procedures, 
Natural  Language  Processing,  Courant  Computer  Science  Symposium,  Rustin  R.(Ed),  S 
(1971)  pp  331-350. 

[Kagan  1977] 

Kagan  B M,  Fannin  S L.  Bardie  F.  Spotlight  on  antimicrobial  agents  - 1973,  JAMA,  226. 
.3  (October  1973)  pp  306-310. 

[Kulikowski  1974] 

Kulikowski  C A A system  for  computer-based  medical  consultation.  Proceedings  of  National 
Computer  Conference,  1974. 

[LeFarvrel975] 

Le  Faivre  R A Fuzzy  problem  solving.  Tech  Rept  37  (September  1974),  University  of 
Wisconsin  - Madisr., 

[Lesser  1974] 

Lesser  V R.  Fennell  R D,  Erman  L D,  Reddy  D R Organ. ration  of  the  HEARSAYII  speech 
undei  standing  system,  IEEE  Transactions  on  Acoujtics,  Speech,  and  Signal  Processing, 
ASSP-23,  February  1975,  pp  11-23 

[Lukasiewiszl970] 

Lukasiewicz  J A numerical  interpretation  of  ihe  'heory  of  propositions,  in  Jan  Lukasiewicz 
Selected  Works  Borkowski  (ed  ),  1970. 

[MACSYMA  1974] 

The  MACSYMA  reference  manual,  September  1974,  The  MATHLAB  Croup,  Mass  Inst 
Tech 

[Manna  1969] 

Manna  Z Correctness  of  programs,  Journal  of  Computer  Systems  Sciences,  May  1969 
[Meyer  1973] 

Meyer  A V,  Weissman  W K Comp  iter  analysis  of  the  clinical  neurological  exam,  Computers 
anil  Biomedical  Research,  3(1973)  pp  111-117 

[Moorel973] 

Moore  J,  Newell  A How  can  MERLIN  understand,  Tech  Rept  (15  November  19/3), 
Carnegie  Mellon  University 


36 


[Nilsson  1975] 

Nilsson  N J (Ed.)  Artifical  Intelligence  - Research  and  Applications,  A 1 Croup  Progress 
Report,  May  1975,  Stanford  Research  Institute,  Menlo  Park,  CA. 

[Paukei  1975] 

Paukei  S C,  Gorry  C A,  Kassirer  J P,  Schwartz  W B.  Towards  the  simulation  of  clinical 
cognition,  taking  the  present  illness  by  comouter.  American  Journal  of  Medicine,  (in  press) 
1975. 

[Pople  1972] 

Pop’e  H,  Meyers  J,  Miller  R.  DIALOG,  a model  of  diagnostic  logic  for  internal  medicine 
Proceedings  of  the  Fourth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Tibhsi, 
USSR,  September  1975,  pp  848-855. 

[Rand  1975] 

RAND  intelligent  terminals  agent:  design  philosophy,  RAND  Report  1309,  October  1975, 
The  RAND  Corporation,  Santa  Monica,  CA. 

[Rosen  1975] 

Rosen  C A,  Nitzan  D.  Some  developments  in  programmable  automation,  A I Group 
Technical  Note  100,  January  1975,  Stanford  Research  Institute,  Menlo  Park,  CA. 

[Shortliffel974a] 

Shortliffe,  E H MYCIN-  A rule-based  computer  program  for  advising  physicians  regarding 
antimicrobial  therapy  selection,  A I Memo  »25 1 , October  1974,  Computer  Science 
Department,  Stanford  University.  Also  to  appear  as  MYCIN  Computer-Based  Medical 
Consultations,  American  Elsevier,  1976. 

[Shortliffe  1974b] 

Shortliffe  E H,  Axline  S G,  Buchanan  B G,  Cohen,  S N.  Design  conside-ations  for  a 
program  to  provide  consultations  in  clinical  therapeutics  Precented  at  San  Diego  Biomedical 
Symposium  1974  (February  6-8,  1974). 

[Shortliffe  1 975a] 

Shortliffe  E H,  Davis  R,  Buchanan  B G,  Axline  S G,  Green  C C,  Cohen  S N. 
Computer-based  consultations  in  clinical  therapeutics  - explanation  and  rule  acquisition 
capabilities  of  the  MYCIN  system,  Computers  and  Biomedical  Research,  8 (1975)  pp  303-320. 

[Shortliffe  1975b] 

Shortliffe  E H,  Buchanan  B G.  A model  of  inexact  reasoning  in  medicine,  Mathematical 
Biosciences  23  (1975)  pp  351-379. 

[Siklossy  1 973] 

Siklossy  L,  Roach  J.  Proving  the  impossible  is  impossible  is  possible,  Proc  Third  Int  Joint 
Ccnf  At,  1973,  Stanford  University,  pp  383-387. 

[Silverman  1974) 

Silverman  H A digitalis  therapy  advisor,  MAC  TR-143  (January  1975)  Project  MAC,  Mass 
Inst  Tech. 


37 


[T  versky  197*1] 

Tversky  A,  Kahneman  D Judgment  under  uncertainty:  heuristics  and  biases,  Science,  185 
( IS  September  1974)  pp  1129-1131 


[van  M die  1974] 

van  Melle  W Would  you  tike  advice  on  another  horn.  MYCIN  project  internal  working 
paper.  December  1974,  Stanford  University,  Stanford  California 

[Waldtngei  1974] 

Waldinger  R,  Levitt  K N.  Reasoning  about  programs,  Artificial  Intelligence,  5 (Fall  1974)  pp 
235-316 


[Warnei  1964] 

Warner  H P.  Toronto  A F,  Veasy  L C.  Experience  with  Bayes  theorem  for  computer 
diagnosis  of  congenital  heart  disease,  Annals  New  York  Academy  of  Science,  115  (1964)  pp 

558-567. 

[Warnei  1972] 

Warner  H R.  Olmstead  C M,  Rutherford  B D.  HELP  - a program  for  medical 
decision-making.  Computers  and  Biomedical  Research,  5 (1972)  pp  65-74. 

[Waterman  1970] 

Waterman  D A.  Generalization  learning  techniques  for  automating  the  learning  of  heuristics 
Artificial  Intelligence,  1 (1970)  pp  121-170. 

[Wmogiatll972] 

" Winograd  T.  Understanding  natural  language,  Cognitive  Psychology,  3 (1972). 

[ Winogi  ad  1975] 

" Winograd  T.  Frame  representations  and  the  procedural/declarative  controversy,  in 
Rc presentation  and  Understanding,  Bobro'v  and  Collins  (eds.),  Academic  Press,  1975 

[Woodsl972] 

Woods  W A,  Kaplan  R M,  Nash-Webber  B.  The  lunar  sciences  natural  language 
information  system:  final  report,  BBN  Report  2378,  June  1972,  Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman, 
Cainbndge,  Mass. 

[Zobrist  1973] 

Zobrist  A L,  Carlson  F R.  An  advice-taking  chess  computer,  Scientific  American,  228  (June 
1973)  pp  92-105. 


