A  Prolog-like  Inference  System 

for  Computing  Minimum-Cost  Abductive  Explanations 
in  Natural-Language  Interpretation 


Technical  Note  451 


September  1988 


By:  Mark  E.  Stickel 

Artificial  Intelligence  Center 

Computer  Science  and  Technology  Division 


This  paper  will  be  presented  at  the  International  Computer  Science  Con¬ 
ference  ’SS,  Hong  Kong,  December  1988. 


Tliis  research  is  supported  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency,  under  Contract  N00014-85-C-0013  with  the  Office  of  Naval  Re¬ 
search,  and  by  the  National  Science  Foundation,  under  Grant  CCR-8611116 
The  views  and  conclusions  contained  herein  are  those  of  the  author  and 
should  not  be  interpreted  as  necessarily  representing  the  official  policies, 
either  expressed  or  implied,  of  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects 
Agency,  the  National  Science  Foundation,  or  the  United  States  govern¬ 
ment.  APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RELEASE.  DISTRIBUTION  UNLIM¬ 
ITED. 


333  Ravenswood  Ave.  •  Menlo  Park,  CA  94025 
!415)  326-6200  •  TWX:  910-373-2046  •  Telex:  334-486 


Report  Documentation  Page 

Form  Approved 

0MB  No.  0704-0188 

Public  reporting  burden  for  the  collection  of  information  is  estimated  to  average  1  hour  per  response,  including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  data  sources,  gathering  and 
maintaining  the  data  needed,  and  completing  and  reviewing  the  collection  of  information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  aspect  of  this  collection  of  information, 
including  suggestions  for  reducing  this  burden,  to  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  Information  Operations  and  Reports,  1215  Jefferson  Davis  Highway,  Suite  1204,  Arlington 

VA  22202-4302.  Respondents  should  be  aware  that  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  no  person  shall  be  subject  to  a  penalty  for  failing  to  comply  with  a  collection  of  information  if  it 
does  not  display  a  currently  valid  0MB  control  number. 

1.  REPORT  DATE 

SEP  1988  2.  REPORT  TYPE 

3.  DATES  COVERED 

00-09-1988  to  00-09-1988 

4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

A  Prolog-like  Inference  System  for  Computing  Minimum-Cost  Abductive 
Explanations  in  Natural-Language  Interpretation 

5a.  CONTRACT  NUMBER 

5b.  GRANT  NUMBER 

5c.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT  NUMBER 

6.  AUTHOR(S) 

5d.  PROJECT  NUMBER 

5e.  TASK  NUMBER 

5f.  WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

SRI  International, 333  Ravenswood  Avenue, Menlo  Park, CA, 94025 

8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 

REPORT  NUMBER 

9.  SPONSORING/MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

10.  SPONSOR/MONITOR’S  ACRONYM(S) 

11.  SPONSOR/MONITOR’S  REPORT 
NUMBER(S) 

12.  DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 

13.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

14.  ABSTRACT 

15.  SUBJECT  TERMS 

16.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF:  17.  LIMITATION  OF 

18.  NUMBER  19a.  NAME  OF 

a.  REPORT  b.  ABSTRACT  c.  THIS  PAGE 

unclassified  unclassified  unclassified 

22 

standard  Form  298  (Rev.  8-98) 

Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std  Z39-18 


Abstract 


By  determining  what  added  assumptions  would  suffice  to  make  the  logical  form  of  a  sen¬ 
tence  in  natural  language  provable,  abductive  inference  can  be  used  in  the  interpretation 
of  sentences  to  determine  what  information  should  be  added  to  the  listener’s  knowledge, 
i.e.,  what  he  should  learn  from  the  sentence.  This  is  a  comparatively  new  application  of 
mechanized  abduction.  A  new  form  of  abduction — least  specific  abduction — is  proposed  as 
being  more  appropriate  to  the  task  of  interpreting  natural  language  than  the  forms  that 
have  been  used  in  the  traditional  diagnostic  and  design-synthesis  applications  of  abduction. 
The  assignment  of  numerical  costs  to  axioms  and  assumable  literals  permits  specification 
of  preferences  on  different  abductive  explanations.  A  new  Prolog-like  inference  system  that 
computes  abductive  explanations  and  their  costs  is  given.  To  facilitate  the  computation  of 
minimum-cost  explanations,  the  inference  system,  unlike  others  such  as  Prolog,  is  designed 
to  avoid  the  repeated  use  of  the  same  instance  of  an  axiom  or  assumption. 

1  Introduction 

We  introduce  a  Prolog-like  inference  system  for  computing  minimum-cost  abductive  ex¬ 
planations.  This  work  is  being  applied  to  the  task  of  natural-language  interpretation,  but 
other  applications  abound.  Abductive  inference  is  inference  to  the  best  explanation.  The 
process  of  interpreting  sentences  in  discourse  can  be  viewed  as  the  process  of  generating 
the  best  explanation  as  to  why  a  sentence  is  true,  given  what  is  already  known  [8] — that  is, 
determining  what  information  must  be  added  to  the  listener’s  knowledge  (what  assumptions 
must  be  made)  for  him  to  know  the  sentence  to  be  true.^ 

To  appreciate  the  value  of  an  abductive  inference  system  over  and  above  that  of  a  merely 
deductive  inference  system,  consider  a  Prolog  specification  of  graduation  requirements  (e.g., 
to  graduate  with  a  computer  science  degree,  one  must  fulfill  the  computer  science,  mathe- 
*  Alternative  abductive  approaches  to  natural-language  interpretation  have  been  proposed  by  Charniak  [3] 
and  Norvig  [10]. 


1 


inatics,  and  engineering  requirements;  the  computer  science  requirements  can  be  satisfied 
by  taking  certain  courses,  etc.)  as  an  example  of  a  deductive-database  application  [9]: 

csReq  <-  basicCS,  mathReq,  advancedCS,  engReq,  natSciReq. 

engReq  <-  digSys . 

natSciReq  <-  physicsl,  physicsll, 

natSciReq  <-  chemi ,  chemll. 

natSciReq  <-  biol,  bioll. 

After  adding  facts  about  which  courses  a,  student  has  taken,  such  a  database  can  be 
queried  to  ascertain  whether  the  student  meets  the  requirements  for  graduation.  Evaluating 
csReq  in  Prolog  will  result  in  a  yes  or  no  answer.  However,  standard  Prolog  deduction 
cannot  determine  what  more  must  be  done  to  meet  the  requirements  if  they  have  not 
already  been  fulfilled;  that  would  require  analysis  to  find  out  why  the  deduction  of  csReq 
failed. 

This  sort  of  task  can  be  accomplished  by  abductive  reasoning.  Given  what  is  known 
in  regard  to  which  courses  have  been  taken,  what  assumptions  could  be  made  to  render 
provable  the  statement  that  all  graduation  requirements  have  been  met? 

2  Three  Abduction  Schemes 

We  will  consider  here  the  abductive  explanation  of  conjunctions  of  positive  literals  from 
Horn  clause  knowledge  bases.  An  explanation  will  consist  of  a  substitution  for  variables  in 
the  conjunction  and  a  set  of  literals  to  be  assumed.  In  short,  we  are  developing  an  abductive 
extension  of  pure  Prolog. 

The  general  approach  can  be  characterized  as  follows;  when  trying  to  explain  why  Q{a) 
is  true,  hypothesize  P{a)  if  P{x)  D  Qix)  is  known. 

The  requirement  that  assumptions  be  literals  does  not  permit  us  to  explain  Q{a)  when 
P(a)  is  known  by  assuming  P{x)  D  Qix),  or  even  P{a)  D  Q(a).  We  do  not  regard  this  as 
a  limitation  in  tasks  like  diagnosis  and  natural-language  interpretation.  Some  other  tasks, 
such  as  scientific- theory  formation,  could  be  cast  in  terms  of  abductive  explanation  when 
the  assumptions  take  these  more  general  forms. 


2 


We  want  to  include  the  possibility  that  Q{a)  can  be  explained  by  assuming  C3(a).  As 
later  examples  will  show,  this  is  vital  in  the  natural-language  interpretation  task. 

Consider  agmn  the  example  of  the  deductive  database  for  graduation  requirements.  All 
the  possible  ways  of  fulfilling  the  requirements  can  be  obtained  by  backward  chaining  from 
csReq: 


<- 


<- 

<- 

<- 

<- 

<- 


<- 


<- 


<- 


csReq. 
basicCS, 
basicCS, 
basicCS, 
basicCS, 
basicCS , 
basicCS , 
basicCS , 
basicCS , 


mathReq, 
mathReq, 
mathReq , 
mathReq, 
mathReq, 
mathReq, 
mathReq , 
mathReq, 


advancedCS, 
advancedCS, 
advancedCS, 
advancedCS, 
advancedCS , 
advancedCS , 
advancedCS , 
advancedCS , 


engReq,  natSciReq. 
engReq,  physicsl,  physicsll. 
engReq,  chemi,  chemll. 
engReq,  biol ,  bioll. 
digSys,  natSciReq. 
digSys,  physicsl,  physicsll. 
digSys ,  chemi ,  chemll . 
digSys,  biol,  bioll . 


Eliminating  from  any  such  clause  those  requirements  that  have  been  met  results  in  a  list 
that,  if  met,  would  result  in  fulfilling  the  graduation  requirements.  Different  clauses  can  be 
more  or  less  specific  about  how  the  remaining  requirements  must  be  satisfied.  If  the  student 
lacks  only  Physics  II  to  graduate,  the  statements  that  he  can  fulfill  the  requirements  for 
graduation  by  satisfying  physicsll,  natSciReq,  or  (rather  uninformatively)  csReq  can  all 
be  derived  by  this  backward-chaining  scheme. 

The  above  clauses  are  all  possible  abductive  explanations  for  the  graduation  require¬ 
ments’  being  met. 

In  general,  if  the  formula  A  -  -  •  A  Qn  is  to  be  explained  or  abductively  proved,  the 
substitution  [of  values  for  variables]  6  and  the  assumptions  Pi,  ...,  Pm  would  constitute 
one  possible  explanation  if  (Pi  A  •  •  ■  A  P„, )  D  (QiB  A  •  •  •  A  Qn6)  is  a  consequence  of  the 
knowledge  base. 

If,  in  the  foregoing  example,  the  student  lacks  only  Physics  II  to  graduate,  assuming 
physicsll  then  makes  csReq  provable. 

If  the  explanation  contains  variables  (for  example,  if  P(a:)  is  an  assumption  used  to 
explain  Q{x)),  the  explanation  should  be  interpreted  as  neither  to  assume  P{x)  for  all  x 


3 


(i.e.,  assume  yxP{x))  nor  to  assume  P{x)  for  some  unspecified  x  (i.e.,  assume  3xP(a:)),  but 
rather  that,  for  any  variable-free  instance  t  of  i,  if  P{t)  is  cissumed,  then  Q{i)  follows. 

It  is  a  general  requirement  that  the  conjunction  of  all  the  assumptions  made  be  con¬ 
sistent  with  the  knowledge  base.  (In  the  natural-language  interpretation  task,  the  validity 
of  rejecting  assumptions  that  are  inconsistent  with  the  knowledge  base  presupposes  that 
the  knowledge  base  is  correct  and  that  the  speaker  of  the  sentence  is  neither  mistaken  nor 
lying.) 

Prolog-style  backward  chaining,  with  an  added  factoring  operation  and  without  the 
literal  ordering  restriction  (so  that  any,  not  just  the  leftmost,  literal  of  a  clause  can  be 
resolved  on),  is  capable  of  generating  all  possible  explanations  that  are  consistent  with  the 
knowledge  base.  That  is,  every  possible  explanation  consistent  with  the  knowledge  base  is 
subsumed  by  an  explanation  that  is  generable  by  backward  chaining  and  factoring. 

It  would  be  desirable  if  the  procedure  were  guaranteed  to  generate  no  explanations 
that  are  inconsistent  with  the  knowledge  base.  However,  this  is  impossible;  consistency 
of  explanations  with  the  knowledge  base  must  be  checked  outside  the  abductive-reasoning 
inference  system.  (Not  all  inconsistent  explanations  are  generated:  the  system  can  generate 
only  those  explanations  that  assume  literals  that  can  be  reached  from  the  initial  formula  by 
backward  chaining.)  Determining  consistency  is  undecidable  in  general,  though  decidable 
subccises  do  exist,  and  many  explanations  can  be  rejected  quickly  for  being  inconsistent  with 
the  knowledge  base.  For  example,  assumptions  can  be  readily  rejected  if  they  violate  sort  or 
ordering  restrictions,  e.g.,  assuming  woman[John)  can  be  disallowed  if  man[John)  is  known 
or  already  assumed,  and  assuming  b  <  a  can  be  disallowed  if  c  <  6  is  known  or  already 
assumed.  Sort  restrictions  are  particularly  effective  in  eliminating  inconsistent  explanations 
in  natural-language  interpretation.  We  shall  not  discuss  the  consistency  requirement  further; 
what  we  are  primarily  concerned  with  here  is  the  process  of  generating  possible  explanations, 
in  order  of  preference  according  to  our  cost  criteria,  not  with  the  extra  task  of  verifying 
their  consistency  with  the  knowledge  base. 

Obviously,  any  clause  derived  by  backward  chaining  and  factoring  can  be  used  as  the  list 


4 


of  assumptions  to  prove  the  correspondingly  instantiated  original  clause  abductively.  This 
can  result  in  an  overwhelming  number  of  possible  explanations.  Various  abductive  schemes 
have  been  developed  to  limit  the  number  of  acceptable  explanations. 

What  we  shall  call  most  specific  abduction  has  been  used  particularly  in  diagnostic 
tasks.  In  explaining  symptoms  in  a  diagnostic  task,  the  objective  is  to  identify  causes  that, 
if  assumed  to  e.xist,  would  result  in  the  symptoms.  The  most  specific  causes  are  usually 
sought,  since  identifying  less  specific  causes  may  not  be  as  useful. 

What  we  shall  call  predicate  specific  abduction  has  been  used  particularly  in  planning 
and  design-synthesis  tasks.  In  generating  a  plan  or  design  by  specifying  its  objectives  and 
ascertaining  what  assumptions  must  be  made  to  make  the  objectives  provable,  acceptable 
assumptions  are  often  e.xpressed  in  terms  of  a  prespecilied  set  of  predicates.  In  planning, 
for  example,  these  might  represent  the  set  of  executable  actions. 

We  consider  what  we  will  call  least  specific  abduction  to  be  especially  well  suited  to 
natural-language-interpretation  tasks.  Given  that  abductive  reasoning  has  been  used  mostly 
for  diagnosis  and  planning,  and  that  least  specific  abduction  tends  to  produce  what  would 
be  considered  frivolous  results  for  such  tasks,  least  specific  abduction  has  been  little  studied. 
Least  specific  abduction  is  used  in  natural-language  interpretation  to  seek  the  least  specific 
assumptions  that  explain  a  sentence.  More  specific  explanations  would  unnecessarily  and 
often  incorrectly  make  excessively  detailed  assumptions. 

2.1  Most  Specific  Abduction 

Resolution-based  systems  for  abductive  reasoning  applied  to  diagnostic  tasks  [11,4,5]  have 
favored  most  specific  explanations  by  stipulating  that  only  pure  literals  (those  that  can¬ 
not  be  resolved  with  any  clause  in  the  knowledge  base),  which  are  reached  by  backward¬ 
chaining  deduction  from  the  formula  to  be  explained,  be  adoptable  as  assumptions.  For 
causal-reasoning  tasks,  this  eliminates  frivolous  and  unhelpful  explanations  for  “the  watch 
is  broken”  such  as  simply  noting  that  the  watch  is  broken,  as  opposed  to,  perhaps,  the  main¬ 
spring’s  being  broken.  The  explanations  Ccin  be  too  specific.  In  diagnosing  the  failure  of  a 


5 


computer  system,  most  specific  abduction  could  never  merely  report  the  failure  of  a  board  if 
the  knowledge  base  has  enough  information  for  the  board’s  failure  to  be  explained — possibly 
in  many  alternative,  inconsistent  ways — by  the  failure  of  its  components. 

Besides  sometimes  providing  overly  specific  explanations  (discussed  further  in  Section  2.3), 
most  specific  abduction  is  incomplete — it  does  not  compute  all  the  reasonable  most  specific 
explanations. 

Consider  explaining  instances  of  the  formula  P{x)  A  Q{x)  with  a  knowledge  base  that 
consists  of  P(a)  and  Q(b).  Most  specific  abduction’s  backward  chaining  to  sets  of  pure 
literals  makes  P(c)  A  Q(c)  explainable  by  assuming  P(c)  and  Q(c)  (both  literals  are  pure), 
but  P(x)  A  <5(x)  is  explainable  only  by  assuming  P(b)  or  Q(a),  since  P(x)  and  Q(x)  are 
not  pure.  The  explanation  that  assumes  P(c)  and  Q(c),  or  any  value  of  x  other  than  a  or 
i),  to  explain  P(x)  A  Q(x)  will  not  be  found. 

Thus,  most  specific  abduction  does  not  “lift”  properly  from  the  case  of  ground  (variable- 
free)  formulas  to  the  general  case  (this  would  not  be  a  problem  if  we  restricted  ourselves  to 
propositional-calculus  formulas).  A  solution  would  be  to  require  that  all  generalizations  of 
any  pure  literal  also  be  pure.  This  too  is  often  impractical,  since  purity  of  P(c)  in  the  above 
example  would  require  purity  of  P(.'c),  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  presence  of  P(a)  in 
the  knowledge  base. 

A  special  case  of  the  requirement  that  generalizations  of  pure  literals  be  pure  would  be 
to  have  a  set  of  predicates  that  do  not  occur  positively  (i.e.,  they  appear  only  in  negated 
literals)  in  the  knowledge  base.  But  the  case  of  a  set  of  assumable  predicate  symbols  is 
handled  more  generally,  i.e.,  without  the  purity  requirement,  by  predicate  specific  abduction 
(see  Section  2.2).  This  is  consistent  with  much  of  the  practice  in  diagnostic  tasks,  where 
causal  explanations  in  terms  of  particular  predicates,  such  as  Ab,  are  often  sought. 

2.2  Predicate  Specific  Abduction 

Resolution-based  systems  for  abductive  reasoning  applied  to  design-synthesis  and  planning 
tasks  [6]  have  favored  explanations  that  are  expressed  in  terms  of  a  prespecified  subset  of 


6 


the  predicates,  namely,  the  assumable  predicates. 

In  explaining  P{x)aQ{x)  with  a  knowledge  base  that  consists  of  P{a)  and  Q{b),  predicate 
specific  abduction  would  offer  the  following  explanations:  (1)  Q{b),  if  P  is  assumable, 
(2)  P{a),  if  Q  is  assumable,  along  with  (3)  P{x)  A  Q{x),  if  both  are  assumable. 

2.3  Least  Specific  Abduction 

The  criterion  for  “best  explanation”  that  must  be  applied  in  natural-language  interpretation 
differs  greatly  from  most  specific  abduction  for  diagnostic  tasks.  To  interpret  the  sentence 
“the  watch  is  broken,”  the  conclusion  will  likely  be  that  we  should  add  to  our  knowledge 
the  information  that  the  watch  (i.e.,  the  one  currently  being  discussed)  is  broken.  The 
explanation  that  would  be  frivolous  and  unhelpful  in  a  diagnostic  task  is  just  right  for 
sentence  interpretation.  A  more  specific  causal  explanation,  such  as  the  mainspring’s  being 
broken,  would  be  gratuitous. 

Associating  the  assumability  of  a  literal  with  its  purity  as  most  specific  abduction  does 
yields  not  only  causally  specific  explanations,  but  also  taxonomically  specific  explanations. 
With  axioms  like  mercury(x)  D  liquid{x),  waier{x)  D  liquid{x),  explaining  liquid(a), 
when  liquid{a)  cannot  be  proved,  would  require  the  assumption  that  a  was  mercury,  or 
that  it  was  water,  and  so  on.  Not  only  are  these  explanations  more  specific  than  the  only 
fully  warranted  one  that  a  is  simply  a  liquid,  but  none  may  be  correct,  for  example,  if  a 
is  actually  milk,  but  milk  is  not  mentioned  as  a  possible  liquid.  Most  specific  abduction 
thus  assumes  completeness  of  the  knowledge  base  with  respect  to  causes,  subtypes,  and  so 
on.  The  purity  requirement  may  make  it  impossible  to  make  any  assumption  at  all.  Many 
reasonable  axiom  sets  contain  axioms  that  make  literals,  which  we  would  sometimes  like  to 
assume,  impure  and  unassumable.  For  example,  in  the  presence  of  pareni(x,  y)  D  ehild{y,  x) 
and  child[x,y)  D  pareni{y,x),  neither  child{a,b)  nor  pareni(b,a)  could  be  assumed,  since 
neither  literal  is  pure. 

We  note  that  assuming  any  literals  other  than  those  in  the  original  formula  generally 
results  in  more  specific  (and  thus  more  likely  to  be  wrong  and  riskier)  assumptions.  When 


7 


explaining  R  with  P  D  -R  (or  P  A  Q  D  i?)  in  the  hnowledge  base,  either  R  or  P  (or  P  and 
Q)  can  be  assumed  to  explain  R.  Assumption  of  R,  the  consequent  of  an  implication,  in 
preference  to  antecedent  P  (or  P  and  Q),  results  in  the  fewest  consequences.  Assuming  the 
antecedent  may  result  in  more  consequences,  e.g.,  if  other  rules  like  P  D  S  are  present. 

Predicate  specific  abduction  is  not  ideal  for  natural-language  interpretation  either,  since 
there  is  no  easy  division  of  predicates  into  assumable  and  nonassumable  ones  so  that  those 
assumptions  that  can  be  made  will  be  reasonably  restricted.  Most  predicates  must  be 
assumable  in  some  circumstances,  e.g.,  when  certain  sentences  are  being  interpreted,  but  in 
many  other  cases  should  not  be  assumed. 

Least  specific  abduction,  wherein  a  subset  of  the  literals  asked  to  be  proven  must  be 
assumed,  comes  closer  to  our  ideal  of  the  right  method  of  explanation  for  natural-language 
interpretation.  Under  this  model,  a  sentence  is  translated  into  a  logical  form  that  contains 
literals  whose  predicates  stand  for  properties  and  relationships  and  whose  variable  and 
constant  arguments  refer  to  entities  specified  or  implied  by  the  sentence.  The  logical  form 
is  then  proved  abductively,  with  some  or  all  of  the  variable  values  filled  in  from  the  knowledge 
base  and  unprovable  literals  of  the  logical  form  assumed. 

The  motivation  for  this  is  the  claim  that  what  we  should  learn  from  a  sentence  is  often 
near  the  surface  and  can  attained  by  assuming  literals  in  the  sentence’s  logical  form.  For 
example,  when  interpreting 

The  car  is  red. 

with  logical  form 

crir(2;)  A  red(a;),^ 

we  would  typically  want  to  ascertain  from  the  discourse  which  car  x  is  being  discussed  and 
learn  by  abductive  assumption  that  it  is  red  and  not  something  more  specific,  such  as  the 
^  A  logical  form  that  insisted  upon  proving  carfi)  and  assnining  red(a;)  might  have  been  used  instead.  We 
prefer  this  more  neutral  logical  form  to  allow  for  alternative  interpretations.  The  preferred  interpretation  is 
determined  by  the  assignment  of  costs  to  axioms  and  assumable  literals. 


8 


fact  that  it  is  carmine  or  belongs  to  a  fire  chief  (whose  cars,  according  to  the  knowledge 
base,  might  always  be  red). 

3  Assumption  Costs 

A  key  issue  in  abductive  reasoning  is  picking  the  best  explanation.  Which  one  is  indeed 
best  is  so  subjective  and  task-dependent  that  there  is  no  hope  of  devising  an  algorithm 
that  will  always  compute  [only]  the  best  explanation.  Nevertheless,  there  are  often  so  many 
abductive  explanations  that  it  is  necessary  to  have  some  means  of  eliminating  most  of 
them.  We  attach  numerical  assumption  costs  to  assumable  literals  and  compute  minimum- 
cost  abductive  explanations  in  an  effort  to  influence  the  abductive  reasoning  system  into 
favoring  the  intended  explanations. 

We  regard  the  assignment  of  numerical  costs  as  a  part  of  programming  the  explanation 
task.  The  values  used  may  be  determined  by  subjective  estimates  of  the  likelihood  of  various 
interpretations  or  perhaps  they  may  be  learned  through  exposure  to  a  large  set  of  examples. 

In  selecting  the  best  abductive  explanation,  we  often  prefer,  when  given  the  choice,  that 
certain  literals  be  assumed  rather  than  others.  For  example,  when  the  sentence 

The  car  is  red. 
with  the  logical  form 

car{x)  A  red{x) 

is  being  interpreted,  the  knowledge  base  will  likely  contain  both  cars  and  things  that  are  red. 
However,  the  form  of  the  sentence  suggests  that  red(x)  is  new  information  to  be  learned 
and  that  car(x)  should  be  proved  from  the  knowledge  base  because  it  is  derived  from  a 
definite  reference,  i.e.,  a  specific  car  is  presumably  being  discussed.  Thus,  an  explanation 
that  assumes  red(a)  where  car(a)  is  provable  should  be  preferred  to  an  explanation  that 
assumes  car(b)  where  red(b)  is  provable.  A  way  to  express  this  preference  is  through 
numerical  assumption  costs  associated  with  the  assumable  literals:  car(a:)  could  have  cost 
10,  and  red(x)  cost  1. 


9 


The  cost  of  an  abductive  explanation  could  then  just  be  the  sum  of  the  assumption 
costs  of  all  the  literals  that  had  to  be  assumed:  car(a)  A  red{a)  would  be  the  preferred 
explanation,  with  cost  1,  and  car(b)  A  red{b)  would  be  another  explanation,  with  higher 
cost  10. 

However,  if  only  the  cost  of  assuming  literals  is  counted  in  the  cost  of  an  explanation, 
there  is  in  general  no  effective  procedure  for  computing  a  minimum-cost  explanation.  For 
example,  if  we  are  to  e.xplain  P,  where  P  is  assumable  with  cost  10,  then  assuming  P 
produces  an  e.xplanation  with  cost  10,  but  proving  P  would  result  in  a  better  explanation 
with  cost  0.  Since  provability  of  iirst-order  formulas  is  undecidable  in  general,  it  may  be 
impossible  to  determine  whether  the  cost  10  explanation  is  best. 

The  solution  to  this  difficulty  is  that  the  cost  of  proving  literals,  as  well  as  the  cost 
of  assuming  them,  must  be  included  in  the  cost  of  an  explanation.  An  explanation  that 
assumes  P  with  cost  10  would  be  preferred  to  an  explanation  that  proves  P  with  cost  50 
(e.g.,  in  a  proof  of  50  steps)  but  would  be  rejected  in  favor  of  an  explanation  that  proves  P 
with  cost  less  than  10. 

Although  treating  explanation  costs  as  composed  only  of  assumption  costs  is  conceptu¬ 
ally  elegant  (why  should  we  distinguish  explanations  that  differ  in  the  size  of  their  proof, 
when  only  their  provability  should  matter?),  there  are  substantial  advantages  gained  by  tak¬ 
ing  into  account  proof  costs  as  well  as  assumption  costs,  in  addition  to  the  crucial  benefit 
of  making  the  search  for  a.  minimum-cost  explanation  theoretically  possible. 

If  costs  are  associated  with  the  axioms  in  the  knowledge  base  as  well  as  with  assumable 
literals,  these  costs  can  be  used  to  encode  information  on  the  likely  relevance  of  the  fact  or 
rule  to  the  situation  in  which  the  sentence  is  being  interpreted. 

Axiom  costs  can  be  adjusted  to  reflect  the  salience  of  certain  facts.  If  a  is  a  car  mentioned 
in  the  previous  sentence,  the  cost  of  the  axiom  car(a)  could  have  been  adjusted  downward 
so  that  the  explanation  of  car(x)  A  red{x)  that  assumes  red{a)  would  be  preferred  to  one 
that  assumes  red{c)  for  some  other  car  c  in  the  knowledge  base. 

Indeed,  the  explanation  that  assumes  red{a)  should  probably  be  preferred  to  any  expla- 


10 


nation  that  proves  both  car(c)  and  red(c)  (i.e.,  there  is  a  red  car  in  the  knowledge  ba^e — this 
would  be  a  “perfect”  zero-cost  explanation  if  only  assumption  costs  were  used),  since  the 
recent  mention  of  a  makes  it  likely  that  a  is  the  subject  of  the  sentence  and  that  the  purpose 
of  the  sentence  is  to  convey  the  new  information  that  a  car  is  red — interpreting  the  referent 
of  “the  car”  as  a  car  that  is  already  known  to  be  red  results  in  no  new  information  being 
learned. 

We  have  some  reservations  about  choosing  explanations  on  the  basis  of  numerical  costs. 
Nonnumerical  specification  of  preferences  is  an  important  research  topic.  Nevertheless,  we 
have  found  these  numerical  costs  to  be  quite  practical.  Numerical  costs  offer  an  easy  way 
of  specifying  that  one  literal  is  to  be  assumed  rather  than  another.  When  many  alterna¬ 
tive  explanations  are  possible,  the  summing  of  numerical  costs  in  each  explanation  and  the 
adopting  of  an  explanation  with  minimum  total  cost  provide  a  mechanism  for  trading  off 
the  costs  of  one  proof  and  set  of  assumptions  against  the  costs  of  another.  If  this  method 
of  comparing  explanations  is  too  simple,  other  means  may  be  too  complex  to  be  realizable, 
since  they  would  require  preference  choices  among  a  wide  variety  of  sets  of  assumptions  and 
proofs.  We  provide  a  procedure  for  computing  a  minimum-cost  explanation  by  enumerating 
possible  partiaJ  explanations  in  order  of  increasing  cost.  Even  a  perfect  scheme  for  specify¬ 
ing  preferences  among  alternative  explanations  may  not  lead  to  an  effective  procedure  for 
generating  a  most  preferred  one,  as  there  may  be  no  way  of  cutting  off  the  search  for  an 
explanation  with  the  certainty  that  the  best  explanation  exists  among  those  so  far  discov¬ 
ered.  Finally,  any  scheme  will  be  imperfect:  people  may  disagree  as  to  the  best  explanation 
of  some  data  and,  moreover,  sometimes  do  misinterpret  sentences. 

4  Minimum- Cost  Proofs 

We  now  present  the  inference  system  for  computing  abductive  explanations.  This  method 
applies  to  both  predicate  specific  and  least  specific  abduction.  We  have  not  tried  to  incor¬ 
porate  most  specific  abduction  into  this  scheme  because  of  its  incompleteness,  its  incompat¬ 
ibility  with  ordering  restrictions,  and  its  unsuitability  for  natural-language  interpretation. 


11 


In  predicate  specific  abduction,  the  assuinability  of  a  literal  is  determined  by  its  predicate 
symbol  and  assumption  costs  are  specified  on  a  predicate-by-predicate  basis.  In  least  specific 
abduction,  only  literals  in  the  formula  to  be  explained  are  assumable,  and  their  assumption 
costs  are  directly  associated  with  them. 

The  cost  of  a  proof  is  usually  taken  to  be  a  measure  on  the  syntactic  form  of  the  proof, 
e.g.,  the  number  of  steps  in  the  proof.  A  more  abstract  characterization  of  cost  is  called  for. 
We  want  to  assign  different  costs  to  different  inferences  by  associating  costs  with  individual 
a.xioms;  we  also  want  to  have  a  cost  measure  that  is  not  so  dependent  on  the  syntactic  form 
of  the  proof. 

We  assign  to  each  axiom  A  a  cost  cost(A)  that  is  greater  than  zero.  Likewise  we  assign 
a  cost  cost{A)  greater  than  zero  to  each  assumable  literal  A.  When  looked  at  abstractly, 
a.  proof  is  a  demonstration  that  the  goal  follows  from  a  set  S  of  substitution  instances  of 
the  axioms,  together  with,  in  the  case  of  abductive  proofs,  a  set  H  of  substitution  instances 
of  assumable  literals  that  are  assumed  in  the  proof.  We  want  to  count  the  cost  of  each 
separate  instance  of  an  axiom  or  assumption  only  once  instead  of  the  number  of  times  it 
may  appear  in  the  syntactic  form  of  the  proof.  Thus,  a  natural  measure  of  the  cost  of  the 
proof  is 

Y.  cosi{A)+  Y  cost{A) 

Au&S  Acr^H 

Consider  the  example  of  explaining  Q{x)  A  R{x)  A  5'(.'c)  with  a  knowledge  base  that 
includes  P(a),  P{x)  D  Q{x),  and  Q{x)AR{x)  D  5'{.t)  and  with  R  being  assumable  by  using 
Prolog  plus  an  inference  rule  for  assuming  literals: 


1.  <-  Q(x), 

R(x)  , 

S(x). 

to 

A 

1 

R(x) , 

S(x). 

'/,  resolve  1  with  Q(x) 

<-  P(x) 

3.  <-  R(a), 

S(a). 

'/.  resolve  2  with  P(a) 

4.  <-  S(a). 

y,  assume  R(a)  in  3 

5.  <-  Q(a) , 

R(a). 

y,  resolve  4  with  S(x) 

<-  Q(x),  R(x) 

6.  <-  P(a), 

R(a). 

y,  resolve  5  with  Q(x) 

<-  P(x) 

7.  <-  R(a) 

y,  resolve  6  with  P(a) 

8 .  <-  true 

y,  assume  R(a)  in  7 

Q{x)  A  R{x)  A  S{x)  has  been  explained  with  x  having  the  value  a  under  the  assumption 
that  R{a)  is  true. 


12 


The  cost  of  the  proof  is  the  sum  of  the  costs  of  the  axiom  instances  P{a),  P{a)  D  Q(a), 
and  <5(fi)  A  P(a)  D  S(a),  plus  the  cost  of  assuming  il(a).  The  costs  of  using  P(a)  and 
P(x)  D  Q(x)  and  assuming  R(a)  are  not  counted  twice  even  though  they  ■were  used  twice, 
since  the  same  instances  were  used  or  assumed.  If  we  had  had  occasion  to  use  P(x)  D  Q(x) 
with  b  as  well  as  a  substituted  for  x,  then  the  cost  of  P(x)  A  Q(x)  would  have  been  added 
in  twice. 

In  general ,  the  cost  of  a  proof  can  be  determined  by  extracting  the  sets  of  axiom  instances 
S  and  assumptions  //  from  the  proof  tree  and  performing  the  above  computation.  However, 
it  is  an  enormous  convenience  if  there  always  exists  a  simple  proof  tree  such  that  each 
separate  instance  of  an  axiom  or  assumption  actually  occurs  only  once  in  the  proof  tree. 
That  way,  as  the  inferences  are  performed,  costs  can  simply  be  added  to  compute  the 
cost  of  the  current  partial  proof.  (Even  if  the  same  instance  of  an  axiom  or  assumption 
happens  to  be  used  and  counted  twice,  a  different,  cheaper  derivation  ■would  use  and  count 
it  only  once.)  Partial  proofs  can  be  enumerated  in  order  of  increasing  cost  by  employing 
breadth-first  or  iterative-deepening  search  methods  and  minimum-cost  explanations  can  be 
discovered  effectively.  Iterative-deepending  search  is  compatible  with  maintaining  Prolog- 
style  implementation  and  performance  [14,15]. 

We  shall  describe  our  inference  system  as  an  extension  of  pure  Prolog.  Prolog,  though 
complete  for  Horn  sets  of  clauses,  lacks  this  very  desirable  property  of  always  being  able  to 
find  a  simple  proof  tree. 

Prolog’s  inference  system — ordered  input  resolution  without  factoring — would  have  to 
both  eliminate  the  ordering  restriction  and  add  the  factoring  operation  to  remain  a  form 
of  resolution  and  be  able  to  prove  Q,R  from  Q  P,  R  <—  P,  and  P  without  using  P 
twice.  Elimination  of  the  ordering  restriction  is  potentially  very  expensive.  For  example, 
there  are  7i!  proofs  of  Qi, . . .  ,Qn  from  the  axioms  Q\,  •  •  ■  iQn  when  unordered  input 
resolution  is  used,  but  only  one  with  ordered  input  resolution.  (Most  specific  abduction 
performs  unordered  input  resolution  [11,4,5].) 

We  present  a  resolution-like  inference  system,  an  extension  of  pure  Prolog,  that  preserves 


13 


the  ordering  restriction  and  does  not  require  repeated  use  of  the  same  instances  of  axioms. 
Unlike  Prolog,  literals  in  goals  can  be  marked  with  information  that  dictates  how  the  literals 
are  to  be  treated  by  the  inference  system  (in  Prolog,  all  literals  in  goals  are  treated  alike 
and  must  be  proved).  A  literal  can  be  marked  as  one  of  the  following; 

proved  The  literal  has  been  proved  or  is  in  the  process  of  being  proved.® 

assumed  The  literal  is  being  assumed. 

unsolved  The  literal  is  neither  proved  nor  assumed. 

The  initial  goal  clause  Qit  ■  ■  ,Qn  in  n  deduction  consists  of  literals  Qk  that  are 
either  unsolved  or  assumed.  If  any  assumed  literals  are  present,  they  must  precede  the 
unsolved  literals.  Unsolved  literals  must  either  be  proved  from  the  knowledge  base,  plus 
any  assumptions  that  appear  in  the  initial  goal  clause  or  are  made  during  the  proof,  or,  in 
the  case  of  assumable  literals,  be  directly  assumed.  Literals  that  are  proved  or  assumed  are 
retained  in  all  successor  goal  clauses  in  the  deduction  and  are  used  to  eliminate  matching 
goals.  The  final  goal  clause  i—  Pi, ..  .,Pm  in  a  deduction  must  consist  entirely  of  proved  or 
assumed  literals  Pk- 

4.1  Inference  Rules 

Suppose  the  current  goal  is  <—  Qi , . . .,  CJn  s-nd  that  Qi  is  the  leftmost  unsolved  literal.  Then 
the  following  inferences  are  possible. 

Resolution  with  a  fact.  Let  Q  be  a  fact  with  its  variables  renamed,  if  necessary,  so 
that  it  has  no  variables  in  common  with  the  goal  -s—  Q\,  ■  ■  ■  ,Qn-  Then,  if  Qi  and  Q  are 
unifiable  with  most  general  unifier  cr,  the  goal 

^In  this  inference  system,  a  literal  marked  as  proved  will  have  been  fully  proved  when  no  literal  to  its  left 
remains  unsolved. 


14 


can  be  derived,  where  Q;cr  is  marked  ris  proved.''  The  cost  of  the  resulting  goal  is  the  cost 
of  the  original  goal  plus  the  cost  of  the  axiom  Q. 

Resolution  with  a  rule.  Let  Q  ^  7^i,. .  be  a  rule  with  its  variables  renamed,  if 
necessary,  so  that  it  has  no  variables  in  common  with  the  goal  ■*—  Qi, . .  •,Qn-  Then,  if  Qi 
and  Q  are  unifiable  with  most  general  unifier  u,  the  goal 

. .  .,Prna,Qia, . .  ..Q^cr 

can  be  derived,  where  Qicr  is  marked  as  proved  and  each  is  unsolved.®  The  cost  of  the 
resulting  goal  is  the  cost  of  the  original  goal  plus  the  cost  of  the  axiom  Q  •*—  Pi, . . . , 
Making  an  assumption.  If  Q,  is  assumable  in  the  goal  •!—  Qi,  •  •  •,Qm  then 

Ql,-  ■  -iQn 

can  be  derived,  where  Qt  is  assumed.®  The  cost  of  the  resulting  goal  is  the  cost  of  the 
original  goal  plus  the  cost  of  assuming  Qi. 

Factoring  with  a  proved  or  assumed  literal.  If  Qi  and  Qj  {j  <  iy  are  unifiable 
with  most  general  unifier  cr,  the  goal 

Ql^^f  •  ■  •  ^  Qi-l^}  Qi+l<^y  •  •  •  ^  Qn^ 

can  be  derived.  The  cost  of  the  resulting  goal  is  the  same  as  the  cost  of  the  original  goal.  In 
addition,  only  when  least  specific  abduction  is  done,  Qi  can  be  eliminated  by  factoring  with 
^Each  literal  Qk  or  Qktr  iu  a  goal  resulting  from  one  of  these  inference  rules  is  proved  or  assumed  precisely 

when  Qk  in  the  parent  goal  is,  unless  it  is  stated  otherwise. 

^Note  that  the  resolution  with  a  fact  and  resolution  with  a  rule  operations  differ  from  Prolog’s 

principally  in  their  retention  of  Q,<t  (marked  as  proved)  in  the  result. 

®The  same  result,  except  for  Qi’s  being  assumed,  can  be  derived  by  the  resolution  with  a  fact  operation 

if  assumable  literals  are  asserted  as  axioms.  The  fiual  proof  could  be  examined  to  distinguish  between  proved 
and  assumed  literals.  Although  using  a  fact  and  makiug  an  assumption  can  be  merged  operationally  in  this 
way,  we  prefer  to  regard  them  as  separate  operations.  An  important  distinction  between  facts  and  assumable 
literals  is  that  facts  are  consistent  with  the  [assumed-to-be-consistent]  knowledge  base;  assumptions  made  in 
an  abductive  explanation  should  be  checked  for  consistency  with  the  knowledge  base  before  being  accepted. 
‘  Qj  must  have  been  proved  or  assumed,  since  it  precedes  Qi. 


15 


Qj,  where  {j  >  i)  and  Qj  is  assumable;  Qja  is  assumed  in  the  result.  If  Qj  was  already 
assumed  in  the  original  goal,  the  cost  of  the  resulting  goal  is  the  same  as  the  cost  of  the 
original  one;  otherwise  it  is  the  cost  of  the  original  goal  plus  the  cost  of  assuming  Qj. 

Consider  again  the  example  of  explaining  Q{x)  A  Jt(x)  A  S(x)  with  E  assumable  from  a 
knowledge  base  that  includes  P(a),  ^*(3;)  D  Q(x),  and  Q(x)  A  R(x)  D  S{x).  Proved  literals 
are  marked  by  brackets  [],  assumed  literals  by  braces  {}. 


1. 

2. 

3 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 


<-  q(x) ,  R(x) ,  S(x) . 

<-  P(x),  [q(x)],  R(x),  S(x). 

<-  CP(a)].  [Q(a)],  R(a),  S(a) . 
<-  [P(a)],  [Q(a)] 

<-  [P(a)],  [q(a)] 


<- 

<- 


[P(a)] 

[P(a)] 


[Q(a)] 

Cq(a)] 


7.  resolve  1  with  q(x)  <-  P(x) 
7.  resolve  2  with  P(^.'' 

7.  assume  R(a)  in  3 
[S(a)]. 

7,  resolve  4  with  S(x)  <-  Q(x)  ,  R(x) 
{R(a)},  R(a),  [S(a)]  .  7.  factor  5 
■CR(a)},  [S(a)]  .  7.  factor  6 


{R(a)>,  S(a). 
{R(a)},  q(a),  R(a), 


The  abductive  proof  is  complete  when  all  literals  are  either  proved  or  assumed.  Each 
axiom  instance  and  assumption  was  used  or  made  only  once  in  the  proof.  The  cost  of  the 
proof  can  be  determined  quickly  by  adding  the  costs  of  the  axioms  or  assumed  literals  in 
each  step  of  the  proof. 

If  110  literals  are  assumed,  the  procedure  is  a  disguised  form  of  Shostak’s  graph  construc¬ 
tion  (GC)  procedure  [12]  restricted  to  Horn  clauses,  where  proved  literals  play  the  role  of 
Sliostak’s  C-literals.  It  also  resembles  Finger’s  ordered  residue  procedure  [6],  except  that 
the  latter  retains  assumed  literals  (rotating  them  to  the  end  of  the  clause)  but  not  proved 
literals.  Thus,  it  combines  the  GC  procedure’s  ability  to  compute  simple  proof  trees  for 
Horn  clauses  with  the  ordered  residue  procedure’s  ability  to  make  assumptions  in  abductive 
proofs. 


5  Future  Directions 


Many  extensions  of  this  work  are  possible.  The  most  important  to  us  right  now  are  a  more 
flexible  assignment  of  assumption  costs  and  a  procedure  for  dealing  with  non-Horn  clause 
formulas. 


16 


5.1  Assumption  Costs 

The  designation  of  which  literals  are  assumable  and  the  assignment  of  assumption  costs  are 
more  rigid  than  we  would  like. 

In  predicate  specific  abduction,  any  literal  with  an  assumable  predicate  is  assumable, 
but  its  assumption  cost  is  fixed.  For  example,  in  interpreting  the  sentence  “The  man  hit 
another  man,”  we  would  want  to  prove  abductively  a  logical  form  such  as  man{x)  Aman{y) 
Jiit(z^y)  A  X  ^  y.  Predicate  specific  abduction  would  require  that  m.an{x)  and  man(y)  be 
assumable  with  equal  cost;  the  definite  reference  for  the  first  man  suggests  that  man(y) 
should  be  assumed  more  easily. 

In  least  specific  abduction,  only  literals  in  the  initial  formula  can  be  assumed.  Although 
this  yields  correct  results  in  many  cases,  it  is  clearly  sometimes  necessary  to  make  deeper 
assumptions  that  imply  the  initial  formula.  When  interpreting  a  piece  of  text,  wliich  includes 
references  to  fish  and  pets,  with  logical  form 

fish{x)  A  pet(y)  A  •  •  ■ 

we  are  forced  to  assume  fish{x)  and  pei{y)  if  no  fish  or  pets  are  in  the  knowledge  base.  But 
we  would  really  like  to  consider  the  possibility  that  x  and  y  refer  to  the  same  entity,  i.e.,  a 
pet  fish,  which  we  could  have  done,  were  it  the  case  (according  to  our  knowledge  base)  that 
all  fish  are  pets  or  all  pets  are  fish,  by  assuming  one  and  using  it  to  prove  the  other.  What 
is  needed  are  a^doms  like 

f  ish{x)  A  f p{x)  D  pei{x)  and  pei{x)  A  pf{x)  D  fish{x) 

where  fp  and  pf  are  predicates  expressing  the  extra  requirements  for  a  fish  to  be  a  pet 
and  a  pet  to  be  a  fish.  With  the  former  axiom,  fish{x)  Apei{y)  A  ■  •  •  can  be  explained  by 
assuming  fish{x)  and  pei{y),  as  before,  or  by  assuming  fish{x)  and  fp{x),  with  pet{x)  a 
consequence. 

Such  reasoning  requires  that  literals  other  than  those  in  the  original  formula  be  assum¬ 
able  and  that  there  must  be  a  way  of  assigning  assumption  costs  to  them. 


17 


The  method  we  have  adopted,  which  has  not  yet  been  fully  analyzed  and  is  described 
more  extensively  elsewhere  [8],  is  to  allow  assumability  and  assumption  costs  to  be  propa¬ 
gated  from  consequent  literals  to  antecedent  literals  in  implications. 

Thus,  the  implication 

A  Pp  D  Q 

states  that  Pi  and  P2  imply  Q,  but  also  that,  if  Q  is  assumable  with  cost  c,  then  Pi 
is  assumable  with  cost  lUjc  and  P^  is  assumable  with  cost  W2C  in  the  result  of  backward 
chaining  from  Q  by  the  implication.  If  u,!]  vj2  <  most  specific  abduction  is  favored, 
since  the  cost  of  assuming  Pi  and  P2  is  less  than  the  cost  of  assuming  Q.  If  wiP  W2  >  1, 
least  specific  abduction  is  favored:  Q  will  be  assumed  in  preference  to  Pi  and  P2.  But, 
depending  on  the  weights,  P,-  might  be  assumed  in  preference  to  Q  if  Pj  is  provable. 

Factoring  can  also  reduce  the  cost  of  assuming  antecedent  literals.  When  is  Q  A  R  is 
explained  from 

Pi  A  P2DQ 
P2  A  P3D  R 

the  cost  of  assuming  Pi,  P2,  and  P3  may  be  less  than  the  cost  of  assuming  Q  and  R,  even 
though  Pi  and  P2  cost  more  than  Q,  and  P2  and  P3  cost  more  than  R. 

5.2  Non-Horn  Clause  Proofs 

Computing  minimum-cost  proofs  from  non-Horn  sets  of  axioms  is  more  difficult  and  would 
take  us  farther  from  Prolog-like  inference  systems.  A  mutually  resolving  set  of  clauses  is  a 
set  of  clauses  such  that  each  clause  can  be  resolved  with  every  other.  Shostak  [13]  proved 
that  mutually  resolving  sets  of  clauses  (having  no  tautologies)  with  no  single  atom  occurring 
in  every  clause  do  not  have  simple  proof  trees.  This  result  is  true  of  the  GC  procedure  as 
well  as  of  resolution.  So,  although  we  were  able  to  use  the  GC  procedure  to  compute  simple 
proof  trees  for  sets  of  Horn  clauses,  this  cannot  be  done  for  non-Horn  sets. 


18 


For  non-Horn  clause  proofs,  an  assumption  mechanism  can  be  added  to  a  resolution- 
based  inference  system  that  is  complete  for  non- Horn  clauses  (such  as  the  GC  procedure  or 
the  model  elimination  procedure  that  is  implemented  in  PTTP  [14]),  with  more  complicated 
rules  for  counting  costs  to  compensate  for  the  absence  of  simple  proof  trees. 

Alternatively,  an  assumption  mechanism  can  be  added  to  the  matings  or  connection 
method  [1,2],  These  proof  procedures  do  not  require  multiple  occurrences  of  the  same 
instances  of  axioms.  This  approach  would  reduce  requirements  on  the  syntactic  form  of 
the  axioms  (e.g.,  the  need  for  clauses)  so  that  a  cost  could  be  associated  with  an  arbitrary 
axiom  formula  instead  of  a  clause. 

6  Conclusion 

We  have  formulated  part  of  the  natural-language-interpretation  task  as  abductive  inference. 
The  process  of  interpreting  sentences  in  discourse  can  be  viewed  as  the  abductive  inference 
of  what  assumptions  must  be  made  for  the  listener  to  know  that  the  sentence  is  true. 
The  forms  of  abduction  suggested  for  diagnosis,  and  for  design  synthesis  and  planning, 
are  generally  unsuitable  for  natural-language  interpretation.  We  suggest  that  least  specific 
abduction,  in  which  only  literals  in  the  logical  form  can  be  assumed,  is  especially  useful  for 
natural-language  interpretation. 

Numerical  costs  can  be  assigned  to  axioms  and  assumable  literals  so  that  the  intended 
interpretation  of  a  sentence  will  hopefully  be  obtained  by  computing  the  minimum-cost 
abductive  explanation  of  the  sentence’s  logical  form.  Axioms  can  be  assigned  different 
costs  to  reflect  their  relevance  to  the  sentence.  Different  literals  in  the  logical  form  can  be 
assigned  different  assumption  costs  according  to  the  form  of  the  sentence,  with  literals  from 
indefinite  references  being  more  readily  assumable  than  those  from  definite  references. 

We  presented  a  Prolog-like  inference  system  that  computes  abductive  explanations  by 
means  of  either  predicate  specific  or  least  specific  abduction.  The  inference  system  is  de¬ 
signed  to  compute  the  cost  of  an  explanation  correctly,  so  that  multiple  occurrences  of  the 
same  instance  of  an  axiom  or  assumption  are  not  charged  for  more  than  once. 


19 


We  suggested,  but  have  not  yet  fully  developed,  an  approach  that  extends  least  specific 
abduction  to  allow  assumability  and  assumption  costs  to  be  propagated  from  consequent  lit¬ 
erals  to  antecedent  literals  in  implications.  This  is  intended  for  cases  in  which  our  preferred 
method  of  least  specific  abduction  is  unable  to  produce  the  intended  interpretation. 

Most  of  the  ideas  presented  here  have  been  implemented  in  the  TaCITUS  project  at 
SRI  [7,8]. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  has  been  greatly  facilitated  by  discussions  with  Jerry  Hobbs,  Douglas  Edwards, 
Todd  Davies,  John  Lowrance,  and  Mabry  Tyson. 


References 

[l]  Andrews,  P.B.  Theorem  proving  via  general  matings.  Journal  of  the  ACM  28,  2  (April 
1981),  193-214. 

|2]  Bibel,  W.  Automated  Theorem  Proving.  Friedr.  Vieweg  &  Sohn,  Braunschweig,  West 
Germany,  1982. 

[3]  Charniak,  E.  Motivation  analysis,  abductive  unification,  and  nonmonotonic  equality. 
Artificial  Intelligence  34,  3  (April  1988),  275-295. 

[4]  Cox,  P.T.  and  T.  Pietrzykowski.  Causes  for  events:  their  computation  and  applications. 
Proceedings  of  the  8th  Conference  on  Automated  Deduction,  Oxford,  England,  July 
1986,  608-621. 

[5]  Cox,  P.T.  and  T.  Pietrzykowski.  General  diagnosis  by  abductive  inference.  Proceedings 
of  the  1987  Symposium  on  Logic  Programming,  San  Francisco,  California,  August  1987, 
183-189. 

[6]  Finger,  J.J.  Exploiting  Constraints  in  Design  Synthesis.  Ph.D.  dissertation.  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Computer  Science,  Stanford  University,  Stanford,  California,  February  1987. 

[7]  Hobbs,  J.R.  and  P.  Martin.  Local  pragmatics.  Proceedings  of  the  Tenth  International 
Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Milan,  Italy,  August  1987,  520-523. 

[8]  Hobbs,  J.R.,  M.  Stickel,  P.  Martin,  and  D.  Edwards.  Interpretation  as  abduction.  Pro¬ 
ceedings  of  the  26th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association  for  Computational  Linguistics, 
Buffalo,  New  York,  June  1988,  95-103. 


20 


[9]  Maier,  D.  and  D.S.  Warren.  Computing  with  Logic.  Benjamin/Cummings,  Menlo  Park, 
California,  1988. 

[10]  Norvig,  P.  Inference  in  text  under.sta.nding.  Proceedings  of  the  AAAI-87  Sixth  National 
Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Seattle,  Washington,  July  1987,  561-565. 

[11]  Pople,  H.E.,Jr.  On  the  mechanization  of  abductive  logic.  Proceedings  of  the  Third 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Stanford,  California,  August 
1973,  147-152. 

[12]  Shostak,  R.E.  Refutation  graphs.  Artificial  Intelligence  7,  1  (Spring  1976),  51-64. 

[13]  Shostak,  R.E.  On  the  complexity  of  resolution  derivations. 

[14]  Stickel,  M.E.  A  Prolog  technology  theorem  prover:  implementation  by  an  extended 
Prolog  compiler.  Proceedings  of  the  8th  International  Conference  on  Automated  Deduc¬ 
tion,  Oxford,  England,  July  1986,  573-587.  Revised  and  expanded  version  to  appear 
in  Journal  of  Automated  Reasoning. 

[15]  Stickel,  M.E.  and  W.M.  Tyson.  An  analysis  of  consecutively  bounded  depth-first  search 
with  applications  in  automated  deduction.  Proceedings  of  the  Ninth  International  Joint 
Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence,  Los  Angeles,  California,  August  1985,  1073-1075. 


21 


