AD-A012  916 


A MULTI-LEVEL  ORGANIZATION  FOR  PROBLEM  SOLVING 
USING  MANY,  DIVERSE,  COOPERATING  SOURCES  OF 
KNOWLEDGE 

Lee  D.  Erman,  et  al 
Carfiegie-Mellon  University 


Prepared  for: 

Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research 
Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 


March  1975 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 


PraraSW/rfS 


A MUUi-l0/£L  0WSAN12AT10N  ?OR  TO9LEM  Wmm 
USING  > >,VY,  DIVERSE,  C^PiftATING 
SOURCES  Ur  '?&WL£D6E 


NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 


UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  page  ',»7i*n  Date  Entered) 


) 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

READ  INSTRUCTIONS 
BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

JrRER0RT  NUMBER.  _ „ „ _ |2.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 

«F0ST*  ~ irf-  < a * li  0 0 

3.  RiClP’ENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 

4 TITLE  (end  Subtitle)  A MULTI-LEVEL  ORGANIZATION  FOR 
PROBLEM  SOLVING  USING  MANY,  DIVERSE,  COOPERATING 
SOURCES  OF  KNOWLEDGE 

S.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  « PERIOD  COVERED 
Interim 

6.  PERFORMING  ORG.  REPORT  NUMBER 

7.  AUTHORf*) 

e.  contract  or  grant  number^*) 

Lee  D.  Erman 
Victor  R.  Lesser 

F44620-73-C-0074 

9.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Camegie-Mellon  University 
Dept  of  Computer  Science 
Pittsburgh,  PA  15213 

10.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT.  PROJECT.  TASK 
AREA  d WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

61101D 

A02466 

II.  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  -NJ  ADDRESS 

Defense  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency 

IZ.  REPORT  DATE 

March,  1975 

1400  Wilson  Blvd 
Arlington,  VA  22209 

11.  number  of  pages 

<23 

14.  MONITORING  AGENCY  N AME  A ADDRESS^//  different  from  Controlling  OKI  co) 

Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research/NM 
1400  Wilson  Blvd 
Arlington,  VA  22209 

16.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (ol  i hie  tepotl) 

UNCLASSIFIED 

15«.  DECLASSIFICATION  DOWNGRADING 
SCHEDULE 

j IS.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ot  I V.  Report) 


3 Aooroved  tor  public  release,  ui»i.«.iLutiGr.  unlimited. 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  ( of  the  ebetrect  entereo  in  Block  1C,  II  ditto  rent  from  Rmport) 


ie  supplementary  notes 


19.  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  rcvori*  wide  it  neceeeery  end  Identity  by  block  number) 


20  ABSTRACT  (Continue  on  reverte  tide  II  neceteery  end  .denliiy  by  block  number ) 

An  organization  is  presented  for  implementing  solutions  to  knowledge-based 
AI  prH  ims.  The  hypothesizc-and-test  paradigm  is  used  as  the  basis  for 
co  an  among  many  diverse  and  independent  knowledge  sources  (KS's). 

„ are  assumed  individually  to  be  errorful  and  incomplete.  j 

(Continued) 

DD  1 JAN^73  1 47  3 EDITION  OF  i nov  65  is  o'solute  UNCLASSIFIED^^^  SUBJECT  TO  CHANGE 

I 


SECURITY  CLASSlF  CATION  OF  THIS  PAGE  fHTirn  D«r»  Entered) 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  FAOEftt?>«n  £*:. 


Block  20/Abstract 

A uniform  and  integrated  multi-level  structure,  the  blackboard,  holds  the  current  state 
of  the  system.  Knowledge  sources  cooperate  by  creating,  accessing,  and  modifyrng  elements 
in  the  blackboard.  The  activation  of  a KS  is  data-driven,  based  on  the  occurrence  of  patterns 
in  the  blackboard  which  match  templates  specified  bv  the  knowledge  source. 

Each  level  in  the  blackboard  specifies  a different  representation  of  the  problem  space; 
the  soquence  of  levels  forms  a loose  hierarchy  in  which  the  elements  at  each  level  can 
approximately  be  described  as  abstractions  of  elements  at  the  next  lower  level.  This 
decompostion  can  be  thought  of  as  an  a priori  framework  of  a plan  for  solving  the  problem; 
each  level  ,o  a generic  stage  in  the  plan. 

The  elements  at  each  level  in  the  blackboard  are  hypotheses  about  some  aspeict  of 
that  level.  The  internal  structure  of  an  hypothesis  consists  of  a fixed  set  of  attributes;  this 
set  is  the  same  for  hypotheses  at  all  levels  of  representation  in  the  blackboard.  These 
attributes  are  selected  to  serve  as  mechanisms  for  implementing  the  data-directed 
hypotbesLe-and-test  paradigm  and  for  efficient  goal-directed  scheduling  of  KS’s.  Knov/leage 
sources  may  create  networks  of  structural  relationships  among  hypotheses.  These 
relationships,  which  are  explicit  in  the  blackboard,  serve  to  represent  inferences  and 
deductions  made  by  the  KS’s  about  the  hypotheses;  they  also  allow  competing  and 
overlapping  Dartial  solulions  10  De  nanaiea  in  an  imegraieu  mannei. 

The  Hearsayll  speech  -understanding  system  is  an  implementation  of  this  organization; 
it  is  used  here  as  an  example  fo : descriptive  purposes. 


UNCLASSIFIED _ 

SECUF.TY  CLASSIFICATION  of  This  PACeflFhtr,  Ot't  Er.lmred ) 


A MULTI-LEVEL  ORGANIZATION  FOR  PROBLEM  SOLVING 
USING  MANY,  DIVERSE,  COOPERATING  SOURCES  OF  KNOWLEDGE 


lee  D.  Erman  and  Vvtor  R.  Lesser 
Computer  Science  Department* 
Carneg;e-Mellon  University 
Pittsburgh,  Pa.  15213 
March,  1975 


ABSTRACT 

An  organization  is  presented  for  implementing  solutions  to  Knowledge-based  AI 
problems.  The  hypothesize-and-test  paradigm  is  used  as  the  basis  for  cooperation  among 
many  diverse  ar.d  independent  Knowledge  sources  (KS’s).  The  KS’s  are  assumed  individually 
to  be  errorful  and  incomplete. 

A uniform  and  integrated  muiti-level  structure,  the  blacKboard.  holds  the  current  state 
of  the  system.  Knowledge  sources  cooperate  by  creating,  accessing,  and  modifying  elements 
in  the  blacKboard.  The  activation  of  a KS  is  data-driven,  based  on  the  occurrence  of  patterns 
in  the  blackboard  which  match  templates  specified  the  Knowledge  source. 

Each  level  in  the  blackboard  specifies  a different  representation  of  the  problem  space; 
the  sequence  of  levels  forms  a loose  hierarchy  ir  which  the  elements  at  each  level  can 
approximately  be  described  as  abstractions  of  elements  at  the  next  lower  level  This 
decompostion  can  be  thought  of  as  an  a priori  framework  of  a plan  for  solving  the  problem; 
ee*h  level  is  a generic  stage  in  the  plan. 

The  elements  at  cacti  level  in  the  blacKboard  are  hypotheses  about  some  asptct  of 
that  level.  The  internal  structure  of  an  hypothesis  consists  of  a fixed  set  of  attributes;  this 
set  is  the  same  ror  hypotheses  at  all  levels  of  representation  in  the  blackboard.  These 
attributes  are  selected  to  serve  as  mechanisms  for  implementing  the  data-directed 
hypothesize-and-test  paradigm  and  for  efficient  goal-directed  scheduling  of  KS’s.  Knowledge 
sources  may  create  networks  of  structural  relationships  among  hypotheses.  These 
relationships,  which  are  explicit  in  the  blacKboard,  serve  to  represent  nferences  and 
deductions  made  by  the  KS’s  about  the  hypotheses;  they  also  allow  competing  and 
overlapping  partial  solutions  to  be  handled  in  an  integrated  manner. 

The  Hearsayll  speech-understanding  system  is  an  implementation  of  this  organization; 
it  is  used  here  as  an  example  for  descriptive  purposes. 


* This  research  was  supported  in  part  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Rroiects  Agency 
under  contract  no.  F44620-73-C-0074  ‘and  monitored  by  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific 
Research. 


INTRODUCTION 


This  paper  describes  an  organization  ’or  Knowledge-based  artificial  intelligence  (AI) 
programs  Although  this  organization  hns  been  derived  while  developing  several  generations 
of  spetui  «r.dcr-‘nndirf  systems,  we  t'eel  that  it  has  general  application  to  other  domains  of 
large  A!  problems  (e.g,,  vision,1 * 3 *  robotics,  chess,  natural  language  nderstandirsg,  and  protocol 
analysis;. 

Our  efforts  follow  from  the  early  work  of  Reddy  (1966)  and  Reddy  and  Vicens  (Vicens, 
),  through  the  Hearsayi  svstem  tReddy,  et  a!.,  1973a,  1 973b;  Erman,  1974),  which  was 
ti  . irst  demonstrable  ccnnec  ed-rpeech  understanding  system,  up  through  the  currently 
developing  Hearsayi!  system  (Erman,  et  ai.,  1973;  Lesser,  et  al.,  1974;  Fennell,  1975).  These 
efforts  have  increasingly  forbad  on  the  overall  system  organization  for  solving  the  problem; 
this  has  resulted  in  the  design  and  construction  of  a sophisticated  and  structured 
environment  within  which  problem-solving  strategies  are  developed.  Others  working  in  this 

area  also  consider  this  aspect  important. ^ The  Hearsayi!  system  will  be  used  here  as  the 
primary  example  for  describing  the  organization. 


THE  PROBLEM 

The  class  of  AI  problem  that  is  addressed  in  this  paper  is  characterized  by  having  a 
large  problem  space  and  the  requirement  of  a large  amount  of  knowledge  for  its  solution. 
The  large  amount  of  explicit  knowledge  differentiates  these  problems  from  other  AI  areas 
(e.g.,  theorem-proving)  in  which  very  general  "weak"  methods  are  applied  using  meager 
amounts  of  built-in  knowledge  (Newell,  1969).  Further,  the  knowledge  needed  covers  a wide 
and  diverse  set  of  arear  (some  examples  in  the  speech  understanding  problem  are  signal 
analysis,  acoustic-phonetics,  phonology,  syntax,  semantics,  and  pragmatics).  We  call  each 
such  area  a knowledge-source  (KS)  and  also  define  a KS  to  be  an  agent  which  embodies  the 
knowledge  of  its  area  and  which  can  take  actions  based  on  that  knowledge.^ 

The  sources  of  knowledge  are  often  incomplete  and  approximate.  This  errorful  nature 
may  be  traced  to  three  sources:  First,  the  theory  on  which  the  KS  is  based  may  be 


1 Reddy  (1973)  is  a comparison  of  the  speech  and  vision  problem  domains. 

^ Newell,  al.,  (1971)  contains  an  excellent  in-depth  study  of  the  speech  understanding 
problem.  The  current  state-of-the-art  is  represented  in  the  papers  of  the  1974  IEEE 
Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition  (Erman,  1974b;  Reddy,  1975).  In  particular,  Barnett 
(1973,  1S75),  and  Rovner,  it  al.,  (1974)  also  describe  highly  structured  systems;  Baker 
(1974)  has  a highly  structured  system  based  on  a simple  Markov  model. 

3 For  the  purposes  of  this  discussion,  a KS  can  be  considered  static;  i.e.,  whether  a KS  learns 

from  experience  is  an  issue  that  is  orthogonal  to  this  organization. 


1 


incomplete  or  incorrect.  For  example,  modern  phonological  theories,  a>  applied  to  the  speech 
problem,  are  often  vague  and  incomplete.  Second,  the  implementation  of  a KS  may  be 
incomplete  or  incorrect;  this  may  be  caused  by  an  incorrect  translation  of  the  theory  to  the 
program  or  by  an  intentionally  heuristic  implementation  of  the  theory.  Finally,  the  knowledge 
source  may  be  operating  on  incorrect  or  incomplete  data  supplied  to  it  by  c ser  KS’s.* 

As  one  knowledge  source  makes  errors  and  creates  ambiguities,  other  KS’s  must  be 
brought  to  bear  to  correct  and  clarify  those  actions.  This  KS  cooperation  should  Occur  as 
soon  as  possible  after  the  introduction  of  an  error  or  ambiguity  in  order  t_  limit  its 
ramifications. 

A mechanist!  for  providing  this  high  degree  cf  cooperation  is  the  hypothesize -and -test 
paradigm,  in  *his  paradigm,  solution-finding  is  viewed  as  an  iterative  process.  Each  step  in 
the  iteration  involves  a)  the  creation  of  an  hypothesis,  which  is  an  “educated  guess"  about 
some  aspect  of  the  problem,  and  b)  a test  of  the  plausibility  of  'he  hypothesis.  Both  of 
these  steps  use  a priori  knowledge  about  the  problem.,  as  well  as  the  previously  generated 
hypotheses.  This  iterative  guess-building  terminates  when  a consistent  hypothesis  is 
generated  which  satisfies  the  requirements  of  an  overall  solution 

As  a strategy  for  developing  such  systems,  one  needs  the  ability  to  add  and  replace 
sources  of  knowledge  and  to  explore  different  control  strategies.  Thus,  such  changes  must 
be  relatively  easy  to  accomplish;  there  must  also  be  ways  to  eva'uate  the  performance  of  the 
system  in  general  and  the  roles  of  the  various  knowledge  sources  and  control  strategies  in 
particular.  This  ability  to  experiment  conveniently  with  the  system  is  crucial  if  the  amount  of 
knowledge  is  large  and  many  people  are  needed  to  introduce  and  validate  it.  One  means  of 
helping  to  provide  these  flexibilities  is  to  require  that  KS’s  be  independent. 

Because  the  problems  are  large  and  require  many  computation  steps  for  their  solution, 
the  system  must  be  efficient  in  its  computation.  This  must  be  certainly  true  for  a 
"production"  application  system;  however,  it  must  also  be  reasonably  efficient  ir.  the 
development  versions  because  of  the  experimental  way  that  a complex,  knowledge-based 
system  is  developed.  That  is,  many  iterative  runs  over  a significant  amount  of  test  data  must 
be  made  to  develop  and  evaluate  the  knowledge  sources  and  control  strategies. 


^ This  may  also  include  externally  supplied  data  <e.g.,  the  digitized  acoustic  wave-form  which 
is  the  input  to  the  speech-understanding  system);  the  transducers  of  these  data  can  be 
considered  to  be  KS’s  which  also  introduce  error. 


2 


MOnEL  FOR  COOPERATION  OF  KNOWLEDGE  SOURCES 


The  requirement  that  knowledge  sources  be  independent  implies  that  the  functioning 
(and  very  existence)  of  each  must  not  be  necessary  or  crucial  to  the  others.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  KS’s  are  required  to  cooperate  in  the  iterative-  guess-building,  using  and  correcting 
one  another’s  guesses;  this  implies  that  there  must  be  interaction  among  the  processes. 
These*  two  opposii^  requirements  have  led  to  a design  in  which  each  KS  interfaces  to  the 
others  externally  in  a unifoim  way  that  is  identical  across  KS’s  and  in  which  no  knowledge 
source  knows  what  or  how  many  other  KS’s  exist.  The  interface  is  implemented  as  a dynamic 
globa  data  structure,  called  the  blackboard.  The  primary  units  in  the  blackboard  are  guesses 
about  particular  aspects  of  the  problem;  these  units,  which  have  a uniform  structure 
throughout  the  blackboard,  are  called  hypotheses.  At  any  time,  the  blackboaro  holds  the 
current  state  of  the  system;  it  contains  all  the  guesses  about  the  problem  that  exist.  Subsets 
of  hypotheses  represent  partial  solutions  to  the  entire  problem;  these  may  compete  with  this 
partial  solutions  represented  by  other  (perhaps  overlapping)  subsets. 

Each  knowledge  source  may  access  any  information  in  the  blackboard  F.och  may  add 
information  to  the  blackboard  by  creating  (or  deleting)  hypotheses,  by  modirying  existing 
hypotheses,  and  by  establishing  or  modifying  explicit  structural  -elationships  among 
hypotheses.  The  generation  and  modification  of  globally  accessible  hypotheses  is  the 
exclusive  means  of  communication  among  the  diverse  KS’s.  This  mechanism  of  coo;  eration, 
which  is  an  implementation  of  the  hypothesize-and-test  paradigm,  allows  a '<S  to  contribute 
knowledge  without  being  aware  of  which  other  KS’s  will  use  the  information  or  which  KS 
supplied  the  information  that  it  used.  It  is  in  this  way  that  knowledge  sources  are  made 
independent  and  separable.  The  structural  relationships  (whicn  are  mentioned  above  and 
which  will  be  described  below)  form  a network  of  the  hypotheses  and  are  used  to  represent 
the  deductions  and  inferences  whicn  caused  a KS  to  generate  one  hypothesis  from  others. 
The  explicit  retention  o the  blackboard  of  these  dependency  relationships  is  used  to  hold, 
among  other  things,  competing  hypotheses.  Because  these  'are  held  in  an  integrated  manner, 
selective  backtracking  for  error  recovery  and  other  search  strategies  can  be  implemented  in 
an  efficient  and  non-redundant  way. 


Decomposition  of  Knowledge 

The  decomposition  of  the  overall  task  into  various  knowledge  sources  is  regarded  as 
being  natural;  i.e.,  the  units  of  the  decomposition  represent  those  pieces  of  knowledge  which 
can  be  distinguished  and  recognized  as  being  somehow  naturally  independent.^  Such  a 


T 


The  approach  taken  in  knowledge  source  decomposition  is  not  an  attempt  to  characterize 


3 


scheme  of  "inverse  decomposition"  (or,  composition)  seems  very  naturai  for  many  problem- 
solving tasks,  and  i*  fits  well  into  the  hypothesize-and-test  approach  to  problem-solving.  As 
long  as  a sufficient  "covering  set"  of  knowledge  areas  required  for  problem  solution  is 
maintained,  one  can  freely  add  new  knowledge  sources,  or  replace  or  delete  old  ones.  Each 
knowledge  source  is  self-contained,  but  each  is  expected  to  cooperate  with  the  other 
knowledge  sources  that  happen  to  be  present  in  the  system  at  that  time. 

A knowledge  source  is  specified  in  three  parts:  a)  the  conditions  under  which  it  is  to 
be  activated  (in  terms  of  the  conditions  in  the  blackboard  in  which  it  is  interested),  b)  the 
kinds  of  changes  it  makes  to  the  blackboard,  and  3)  procedural  statement  (program)  of  the 
algorithm  which  accomplishes  those  changes.  A knowledge  source  is  thus  defined  as 
possessing  some  processing  capability  which  is  able  to  so've  some  subproblem,  given 
appropriate  circumstances  for  its  activation. 


Activation  of  Knowledge  Sources 

A knowledge  source  is  instantiated  as  a knowledge-source  process  whenever  the 
blackboard  exhibits  characteristics  which  satisfy  a "precondition"  of  the  knowledge  source.  A 
precondition  of  a KS  is  a description  of  some  partial  state  of  the  blackboard  which  defines 
when  and  where  the  KS  can  contribute  its  knowledge  by  modifying  the  blackboard.  The  KS 
contributes  Its  knowledge  through  the  mechanism  of  making  hypotheses  and  evaluating  and 
modifying  the  contributions  of  other  knowledge  sources  (by  verifying  and  rating  or  rejecting 
the  hypotheses  mads  by  other  knowledge  sources).  A KS  carries  out  these  actions  with 
respect  to  a particular  context,  the  context  being  some  subset  of  the  previously  generated 
hypotheses  in  the  blackboard  Thus,  new  hypotheses  or  modifications  to  existing  hypotneses 
are  constructed  from  the  (static)  knowledge  of  the  KS  end  the  educated  guesses  made  at 
some  previous  time  by  other  knowledge  sources. 

The  modifications  made  by  any  given  knowledge-source  process  are  expected  to 
trig  further  knowledge  sources  by  creating  new  conditions  in  the  blackboard  to  which 
those  knowledge  sources,  in  turn,  respond.  The  structure  of  a hypothesis  is  so  designed  as 
to  allow  the  preconditions  of  most  KS’s  to  be  sensitive  to  a single,  simple  change  in  some 
hypothesis  (such  as  the  creation  of  a new  hypothesis  of  a particular  type,  a change  of  a 
rating,  or  the  creation  of  a structural  link  between  particular  kinds  of  hypotheses).  Through 


somehow  the  overall  problem  solution  process  and  then  apply  some  sort  of  traffic  flow 
analysis  to  its  internal  workings  in  order  to  decompose  the  total  process  mtc  minimally 
interacting  knowledge  sources.  Rather,  knowledge  sources  are  defined  by  starting  with 
soma  intuitive  notion  about  the  various  p>ces  of  knowledge  which  could  be  incorporated 
in  a useful  way  to  help  achieve  a solution, 


_ 4 

—u  irui  i i i 


MiimH. 


this  data-direeted  interpretation  of  the  hypothesize-and-test  paradigm.  KS’s  can  also  exhibit 
a high  degree  of  asynchronous  activity  and  potential  parallelism.^ 

Control  schemes  in  which  one  KS  explicitly  invokes  other  KS’s  are  not  appropriate 
because  of  the  requirement  that  KS’s  be  independent  and  because  the  invocation  of  a KS  may 
depend  on  a complex  set  of  cond  tions  which  is  created  by  the  combined  actions  of  several 
KS’s.  Further,  such  direct-calling  schemes  complicate  KS’s  by  requiring  that  they  contain 
information  about  the  KS’s  that  they  will  cail.  These  same  arguments  apply  against  a 
centralized  control  scheme  which  is  explicitly  predefined  for  a set  of  KS’s. 


Decomposition  of  the  Blackboard 

The  blackboard  is  partitioned  into  distinct  information  levels;  each  level  is  used  to  hold 
a different  representation  of  the  problem  space.  (Examples  of  levels  in  the  speech  problem 
are  "syntactic",  "lexical",  "phonetic",  end  "acoustic";  examples  in  scene  aru!ysis  are  "picture 
point",  "line  segment",  "region",  and  "object".)  Associated  with  each  level  is  i set  of  primitive 
elements  appropriate  for  representing  the  problem  at  that  level.  (In  the  speech  system,  for 
example,  the  elements  at  the  lexical  level  are  the  words  of  the  vocabulary  to  be  recognized, 
while  the  elements  at  ihe  phonetic  level  are  the  phones  (sounds)  of  English.)  Each 

hypothesis  exists  at  a particular  level  ard  is  labeled  as  be.ng  a particular  element  of  the  set 
of  primitive  elements  at  that  level. 

The  decomposition  of  the  problem  space  into  levels  is  a natural  parallel  to  the 

decomposition  into  KS’s  of  the  knowledge  that  is  to  be  brought  to  bear.  For  many  KS’s,  the 
KS  needs  to  deal  with  only  one  or  a few  levels  to  apply  its  knowledge;  it  need  not  even  be 
aware  of  the  existence  cf  other  levels.  Thus,  each  KS  can  be  made  as  simple  as  its 
knowledge  allows;  its  interface  to  the  rest  of  the  system  is  in  units  and  conc^^ts  which  are 
natural  to  it.  Also,  new  levels  can  be  added  as  new  soun.es  of  knowledge  are  designed 

which  need  to  use  them.  Finally,  it  will  be  shown  that  the  multi-level  representation  allows 

for  efficiency  sequencing  the  activity  of  the  KS’s  in  a non-deterministic  manner  and  for 
making  use  of  multiprocessing. 

^ One  might  think  of  this  model  for  data-dkected  activation  of  KS’s  as  a production  system 
(Newell,  1973)  which  is  executed  asynchronously.  The  preconditions  correspond  to  the 
left-hand  sides  (conditions)  of  productions,  and  the  knowledge  sources  correspond  to  the 
right-hand  sides  (actions)  of  the  productions.  Conceptually,  these  left-hand  sides  are 
evaluated  continuously.  When  a precondition  is  satisfied,  an  instantiation  of  the 
corresponding  right-hand  side  of  ;ts  production  is  created;  this  instantiation  is  executed  at 
some  arbitrary  subsequent  time  (peihaps  subject  to  instantiation  scheduling  constraints). 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  general!,  ed  form  of  hypothesize-and-test  leads  to  a 
system  organizatio  \ n some  characteristics  also  similar  to  QA4  (Rulifson,  et  al , 1973) 
ana  PLANNER  (Hew.  1972).  In  particular,  there  are  strong  similarities  in  the  data-directed 

sequencing  of  pre  ses 


5 


The  sequence  of  levels  forms  a loose  hierarchical  structure  in  which  the  elements  at 
each  level  can  approximately  be  described  as  abstractions  of  elements  at  the  next  lower 
levei.*  (For  examp'e,  an  utterance  is  composed  of  phrases,  which  are  mode  of  words,  put 
together  as  syllables,  ea,.1'  of  which  can  be  described  as  a sequence  of  phones,  each  of 
which  is  composed  of  acoustic  segments,  each  of  which  can  be  described  by  a sequence  cf 
te i-millisecond  intervals  with  certain  lends  of  acoustic  characteristics.) 

Most  of  the  relationships  of  a hypothesis  are  with  hypotheses  at  its  levol  or  adjacent 
levels;  further,  these  relationships  can  usually  be  derived  (by  a K$  appropriate  to  the  ievnl) 
without  having  to  delve  below  the  level  of  abstraction  of  the  hypothesis.  This  locality  of 
context  simplifies  the  function  of  knowledge  sources.  (Or  from  the  other  point  of  view,  the 
decomposition  of  knowledge  into  sufficiently  simple-acting  KS’s  also  simplifies  and  localizes 
relationships  in  the  blackboard.)^ 

The  decomposition  of  the  blackboard  into  distinct  levels  of  representation  can  also  be 
thought  of  as  an  a priori  framework  of  a plan  for  problem-solving.  Each  level  is  a generic 
stage  in  the  plan.  The  goal  at  each  level  is  to  create  and  validate  hypotheses  at  that  level. 
The  overall  goal  of  the  system  is  lo  create  the  most  plausible  network  of  hypotheses  that 
sufficiently  covers  the  levels.  ('Plausible’  and  'sufficiently’  here  mean  "plausible  and 
sufficient  in  the  judgment  of  the  knowledge  sources".)  In  speech  understanding,  for  example, 
the  goal  at  the  phonetic  level  is  a phonetic  transcription  of  the  utterance,  while  the  overall 
goal  is  a network  which  connects  hypotheses  directly  derived  from  the  acoustic  input  to 
hypotheses  which  describe  the  semantic  content  of  the  utterance. 

The  creation  or  modification  of  an  hypothesis  which  is  based  on  a context  of 
hypotheses  ai  a lower  level  (or  levels)  can  be  considered  an  action  of  synthesis,  or 
abstraction;  conversely,  manipulations  of  an  hypothesis  based  on  a higher  level  context  can 
be  considered  analysis,  or  elaboratio-  In  order  to  overcome  the  errorfulness  of  the  KS’s 
and  also  make  use  of  their  redundant  nature,  both  kinds  of  action  are  desirable  in  the 
system 


1 Many  of  the  ideas  here  fit  neatly  into  Simon’s  description  of  a "nearly  decomposable 
hierarchical  system"  (Simon,  1962). 

p 

This  simplification  of  form  and  interaction  is  an  expected  characteristic  of  a nearly 
decomposable  hierarchical  system  (ibid.). 

The  use  of  the  terms  ’analysis’  and  'synthesis’  here  are  reversed  from  their  usual  uses  in 
the  speech  recognition  domain.  Traditionally,  'synthesis’  means  going  from  a higher-level 
representation  (e.g.,  lexical)  to  the  speech  signal,  while  analysis  refers  to  the  other 
direction.  In  speech  recognition,  however,  the  object  is  really  to  synthesize  a meaning  for 
the  utterance  from  the  pieces  of  data  which  make  up  the  speech  signal. 


6 


Often,  the  context  for  an  analysis  or  synthesis  action  is  localised  to  the  level  just 
above  or  below  the  level  at  which  the  action  takes  place.  However,  this  is  not  a requirement; 
in  fact,  an  action  which  skips  over  several  levels  can  serve  strongly  to  direct  the  activity  of 
the  system  and  thereby  significantly  prune  the  search  space.  Such  a jump  over  levels  Is 
equivalent  to  constructing  a major  step  in  a plan.  Further,  there  is  no  requirement  that  a 
lump  necessarily  be  filled  in  completely  (or  even  partially)  if  KS’s  are  confident  enough  in  the 
consistency  of  the  larger  step.  Thus,  the  KS’s  cart  dynamically  define  the  granularity  in  the 
hypothesis  network  necessary  to  assure  the  desired  degree  of  consistency;  th'  granularity 
may  vary  at  different  places  in  the  blackboard,  depending  on  the  particular  structures  that 
occur. 


Appendix  A contains  a description  of  the  blackboard  and  KS  decompositions  for  the 
Hearsay!!  'peech-understanding  system. 


Hypotheses:  Structure  and  Interrelationships 

The  internal  structure  of  an  hypothesis  consists  of  a fixed  set  of  attributes  (named 
fields);  this  set  is  the  same  for  hypotheses  at  all  levels  of  representation  in  the  blackboard. 
These  attributes  are  selected  to  serve  as  mechanisms  for  implementing  trie  data-directed 
hyprith05i>e-and-test  paradigm.*  The  values  of  the  attributes  are  defined  and  modified  by 
the  KS‘s. 


A tributes  car,  be  grouped  into  several  classes: 

The  first  class  of  attributes  names  the  hypothesis:  it  contains  the  unique  name  of  the 
hypothesis,  the  name  oi  its  level,  and  its  label  from  the  element  set  at  that  ievel. 

The  next  class  of  attributes  is  composed  of  parameters  which  rate  ’.he  hypothesis. 
These  include  separate  numerical  ratings  derived  from  a)  a priori  information  about 
the  hypothesis,  b)  analysis  actions  performed  on  hie  hypothesis,  c)  synthesis  actions, 
and  d)  co  nbinations  of  (a),  (b),  and  (c). 

Another  set  of  attributes  contains  information  about  KS  attention  to  the  hypothesis. 
These  include  a cumulative  measure  of  the  amount  of  computation  that  \as  already 
been  expended  on  the  hypothesis  as  well  as  suggestions  for  how  much  more 
processing  should  occur  and  of  what  type  (e.g.,  ano.ysis  or  synthesis). 

One  very  important  set  of  attributes  describes  the  structural  relationships  with  ether 
hypotheses,  as  descr  bed  below. 

For  each  problem  domain,  it  is  likely  that  there  are  other  attributes  which  are  ba*-1'- 


* " In  Hearsayll,  a KS  can  specify  particular  attributes  of  hypotheses  at  particular  levels 
which  it  wants  to  have  monitored.  Whenever  a change  is  made  to  one  of  these  monitored 
attributes,  the  KS  can  be  activated  and  notified  of  the  nature  of  the  change.  The  section 
below  on  "Data-Directed  Activation  of  Knowledge  Sources"  contavis  :•  more  complete 
description  of  this  process. 


7 


to  *he  oroblem  and  which  should  be  provided  in  the  structure  if  the  hypotheses; 
these  form  a problem-specific  class  of  attributes.  In  speech  understanding,  for 
instance,  time  is  a fundamental  concept,  so  the  Hearsayll  system  has  a class  of 
attributes  for  describing  the  begin-  and  end-time  and  the  duration  of  the  event  which 
the  hypothesis  represents.  (These  attributes  include  ways  of  c«,Jiciily  representing 
fuzzy  r.otiuns  of  the  times.)  For  vision,  like iy  attributes  would  include  the  location 
and  dimens  on  ci  the  element  and  trajectory  information  for  moving  objects. 

The  carjoi  ity  fo - arbitrary  KS-specific  attributes  is  also  included.  This  can  be  used 
by  a KS  to  told  arbitrary  information  about  the  hypothesis;  in  this  way  a KG  need  not 
hold  state  information  about  the  hy  oothesis  across  activations  of  the  KS  and  allows, 
for  example,  the  easy  implementation  of  generator  functions.  If  several  KS’s  share 
knowledge  of  the  name  of  one  of  these  attributes,  ''ach  of  them  can  access  and 
modify  the  attribute’s  value  and  thus  communicate  just  as  if  it  were  a "standard" 
attribute;  this  can  be  used  as  an  escape  mechamsm  for  explicit  KS  intercommunication. 

A unique  class  of  lypothesis  attributes,  called  processing  state  attributes,  contains 
succinct  summaries  and  classification*,  of  the  values  of  the  other  attributes.  For 
example,  the  alues  of  the  rating  aunbutes  are  summarized  and  die  hypothesis  is 
classified  as  either  "unrated",  "neutral"  (noncommittal),  “verified",  "guaranteed" 
(strongly  verified  and  unique),  or  "rejected".  Other  processing  state  attributes 
summarize  the  structural  relationships  with  othei  hypotheses  and  characterize,  for 
example,  whether  the  hypothesis  has  been  "sufficiently  and  consistently"  described 
synthetically  (i.e.,  as  an  abstraction  of  hypotheses  at  lower  levels).  The  process. ■'g 
state  attributes  are  especially  useful  for  efficiently  triggering  knowledge  sources;  f<v 
e ample,  a KS  may  specify  in  its  precondition  that  it  is  to  be  activated  whenever  a 
hypothesis  at  a particular  level  becomes  "v  mified".  These  attributes  are  also  used 
for  the  goal-directed  scheduling  of  knowleu-e  sources,  as  describee1  in  the  next 
section. 

Given  a specific  hypothesis,  a KS  can  examine  the  value  of  any  of  its  attributes.  A 
knowledge  source  also  needs  the  ability  to  retrieve  sets  of  hypotheses  whose  attributes 
satisfy  Conditions  in  which  the  KS  is  interested.  (E,g.,  a KS  in  th.  speech  system  may  want  to 
find  all  hypot  ies  at  the  phonetic  levei  which  arc  vowels  and  which  oc  ur  within  a 
particular  time  range.)  The  system  provides  an  associative  retrieval  search  mechanism  for 
accomplisning  this  The  search  condition  is  specified  by  a matching  -prototype,  which  is  a 
partial  specification  of  tne  components  of  a hypothesis.  This  partial  specification  permits  a 
component  to  be  char*cterized  by:  a)  a set  of  desired  values  or  fc)  a don’t-care  condition. 
A matching -prototype  is  applied  to  a set  of  hypotheses;^  those  hypotheses  whose 
component  values  match  those  pecifieo  by  the  matching-prototype  a.-e  returned  as  the 
result  of  the  search.  (Associa'u  » retrieval  of  strur  al  relationships  among  hypotheses  is 
also  ovided.)  More  complex  retrievals  can  be  acc  i p I i * 1 i by  combining  the  retrieval 
primitives  in  appropriate  ways. 

* This  set  can  be  derived  by  the  KS  from  several  sources.  The  Hearsayl!  implementation 
includes  the  following  primitive  sources:  a)  all  Hypotheses  (in  the  blackboard),  b)  all 
hypotneses  at  a particular  level,  c)  all  hypotheses  at  a particular  level  whose  time 
attributes  overlap  a given  interval  (this  provides  an  extremely  efficient,  two-dimensicn 
partition  of  the  blackboard),  and  d)  all  hypotheses  whose  attributes  which  are  being 
monitored  (for  (he  KS)  have  changed. 


8 


Structural  relationships  between  nodes  (hypotheses)  in  the  blackboard  are 
repre  ented  through  the  use  of  links;  links  provide  a means  of  specifying  contextual 
abstractions  about  the  relationships  of  hypotheses.  A link  is  an  element  which  associates 
two  hypotheses  as  an  ordered  pair;  one  of  the  nodes  is  termed  the  upper  hypothesis,  and 
the  other  is  called  the  lower  hypothesis.  The  lower  hypothesis  is  sai^  to  support  the  upper 
hypothesis  while  the  upper  hypothesis  is  called  a use  of  the  lower  *•  n general,  the  lower 
hypothecs  is  at  the  same  or  a lower  level  in  the  blackboard  than  the  upper  hypothesis. 

There  are  several  types  of  links,  with  the  types  describing  various  kinds  of 
relationships.^  Consider  this  structure; 


HI 


HI  is  the  upper  hypothesis  „nd  H2,  H3,  and  HA  aie  the  lower  hypotheses  of  links  LI,  L2,  and 
L3,  respf  ctively.  If  the  links  are  all  of  type  OR,  the  interpretation  is  that  HI  is  either  an  H2 
or  an  H3  or  an  H4.  This  is  one  way  that  alternative  aescriptions  are  possible.  If  the  i.nks  in 
the  figure  are  of  type  AND,  the  interpretation  is  that  all  of  the  lower  hypotheses  are 
necessary  to  support  the  existence  cf  HI.  (Note  that,  in  general,  ill  of  the  supporting 
(lower)  I;,iks  of  a hypothesis  are  of  the  same  type;  one  can  thus  talk  of  the  "type  of  the 
hypothesis",  which  is  the  same  as  the  type  of  all  of  its  lower  links.) 

These  two  types  of  node  represent  different  kin, .j  of  abstractions:  the  OR-node 
specifies  a set/member  relationship  while  the  AND-node  defines  a composition  abstraction. 
Variants  of  the  AND-  and  OR-links  are  also  possible.  For  example,  a SEQUENCE  link  is  similar 
to  the  AND-link  except  that  an  ordering  is  implied  on  the  set  of  lover  hypotheses  supporting 
the  upper  hypothesis.  (For  the  Hearsayll  speech  understanding  system,  this  O'dering  usually 
is  .nterpreted  as  indicating  a time  ordering  of  the  ower  hypotheses.) 

Besides  showing  analysis  and  synthesis  relationships  between  hypotheses  (e.g.,  that 
one  hypothesis  is  composed  of  several  other  units),  a link  is  a statement  about  the  degree  to 
which  one  hypothesis  implies  (i.e.,  "gives  evidence  for  the  existence  of")  another  hypothesis. 
The  strength  of  the  implication  i*  held  as  attributes  of  the  link.  The  sense  of  the  implication 
may  be  negative;  that  is,  a link  may  indicate  that  one  hypothesis  is  evidence  for  the  in/alidity 
of  another.  This  statement  of  implication  may  he  bi-directional;  the  existence  of  the  upper 
hypothesis  may  give  credence  to  the  existence  of  the  lower  hypothesis  a^d  vice  versa. 

^ The  particular  kinds  of  relationships  described  here  are  some  of  those  that  were  were 
designed  for  the  speech  problem.  Although  they  undoubtedly  ar ' not  the  complete  set  for 
all  conceivable  needs,  ihey  do  represent  the  kinds  of  relation;.  ..,'S  that  rieeH  to  be  and  are 
expressable  in  the  blackboard. 


9 


Finally,  these  relationships  can  bo  constructed  in  an  iterative  manner;  links  can  be  added 
between  existing  hypotheses  by  KS’s  as  they  discover  new  evidence  for  suppct. 

Just  as  an  hypothesis  can  have  more  than  one  lower  link,  so  it  can  have  several  upper 
linkf.  Each  of  these  represents  a different  use  of  the  hypothesis;  tne  uses  may  be  competing 
or  complementary.  The  ability  to  have  multipie  uses  and  supports  of  the  same  hypothesis,  as- 
opposed  to  creating  duplicates  for  each  competing  use  and  abstraction,  serves  to  keep  the 
blackboard  compact  and  thereby  reduces  the  combinatoric  explosion  in  the  search  space. 
Further,  since  all  the  information  about  the  hypothesis  is  localized,  all  uses  and  supports  of 
the  hypothesis  automatically  and  immediately  share  any  new  information  added  to  the 
hypothesis  by  any  knowledge  sources. 

A problem  with  this  localization  can  occur  if  the  infractions  between  hypotheses  span 
more  than  one  level. * In  this  case,  a particular  support  of  the  hypothesis  (at  a lower  level) 
may  be  inconsistent  with  one  (or  more)  of  the  uses  cf  the  hypothesis  (at  a higher  level)  but 
is  consistent  with  other  uses  (or  potential  uses)  of  the  hypothesis.  In  order  to  avoid 
duplicating  the  hypothesis,  a mechanism.  . tiled  a connechon  matrix,  exists  in  the  system.  A 
connection  matrix  is  an  attribute  of  a hypothesis;  its  value  specifies  which  of  the  alternative 
supports  of  the  hypothesis  are  applicable  ("connected  to")  which  of  its  uses.  The  use  of  a 
connection  matrix  allows  the  results  of  previous  decisions  of  KS’s  to  be  accumulated  for 
future  use  and  modification  without  necessitating  contextual  duplication  of  parts  of  the  datj 
base.  This  kind  of  reusage  and  multiple  usage  of  blackboard  structures  reduces  much  of  the 
expensive  backtracking  that  characterizes  many  problem-solving  systems. 

Appendix  B contains  an  example  of  a structure  built  in  the  blackboard  of  the  Hearsayll 
system. 


Goal-Directed  Scheduling  of  Knowledge  Sources 

As  described  earlier,  the  overall  goal  of  the  system  is  to  create  the  most  plausible 
network  of  hypotheses  that  sufficiently  spans  the  levels.  At  any  instant  of  time,  (he 
blackboard  may  contain  many  incomplete  networks,  each  of  which  is  plausible  as  far  as  it 
goes.  Some  of  these  incomplete  networks  may  also  share  subnetworks.  Through  the  results 
of  analysis  and  svnthesis  actions  of  knowledge  sources,  incomplete  networks  c;  n be 
expanded  (or  contracted.)  and  may  be  joined  together  (or  fragmented).  At  any  time,  there 
may  be  many  places  in  the  blackboard  which  satisfy  the  (precondition)  context-  for  the 
activation  of  particular  KS’s.  The  task  of  goal-directed  schedr'ing  Is  to  decide  to  which  of 
these  sites  to  allocate  computing  resources. 

^ Again,  this  "**  'veil  into  Simon’s  formulation  of  hierarchical  systems. 


10 


Several  of  the  attribute  classes  of  a hypothesis  can  be  helpful  in  making  schedu!:.ig 
decision*.  Particularly  valuable  are  the  values  of  the  attention  attributes,  which,  as  described 
earlLr,  are  indicators  telling  how  much  computation  has  been  expended  on  the  hypotheses 
and  suggestions  by  KS’s  of  how  desirable  it  is  to  devote  further  effort  on  the  hypothesis 
(along  with  the  kinds  of  processing  that  are  dasiraole).  The  processing  state  attributes  are 
also  valuable  for  making  scheduling  decisions. 

Using  these  kinds  of  information,  a knowledge  source  might  be  scheduled  for  execution 
because  it  p ssesses  the  only  processing  capability  available  to  be  applied  to  an  important 
incompletely  explored  area  of  the  blackboard.  For  example,  if  the  blackboard  contains 
focusing  factors  which  highlight  activity  in  a blackboard  region  in  which  there  are  no 
structural  connections  between  two  adjoining  levels,  the  scheduler  should  give  a higher 
priority  to  a knowledge  sourer,  which  will  attempt  (as  indicated  in  its  external  specifications) 
to  make  such  a connection  than  to  a knowledge  soiirce  which  is  likely  merely  to  perform  a 
minor  refinement  on  the  ratings  in  one  of  the  Irvels.  However,  if  there  are  no  such 
processes  ready  to  execute,  the  scheduling  algorithm  can  perform  a type  of  means-ends 
analysis  in  which  it  schedules  those  knowledge  sources  which  are  likely  to  produce 
blackboard  changes  which,  in  turn,  might  trigger  the  activation  of  K'S’s  in  which  the  system  is 
currently  interested. 

The  implementation  of  the  goal-directed  scheduling  strategy  is  separated  from  the 
actions  of  individual  knowledge  sources.  Th2t  is,  the  decision  of  whether  a KS  can  contribute 
in  a particular  context  is  local  to  the  KS,  while  the  assignment  of  that  KS  to  one  of  the  many 
contexts  on  which  it  can  possibly  operate  is  made  more  globally.  The  three  aspects  of 
a)  decoupling  of  focusing  strategy  from  knowledge-source  activity,  b)  decoupling  of  the  data 
environment  (blackboard)  from  the  control  flow  (KS  activation),  and  c)  the  limited  context  in 
which  a KS  operates,  together  permit  a quick  refocusing  of  attention  ot  KS’s.  The  ability  to 
refocus  quickly  is  very  important  because  the  errorful  nature  of  the  KS  activity  leads  to 
many  incomplete  and  possibly  contradictory  hypothesis  networks;  thus,  as  soor,  as  possible 
alter  a network  no  longer  seems  promising,  th?  resources  of  the  system  should  be  employed 
elsewhere.* 


T 


Hayes-Roth  e$  al  (1975)  desenbe  the  implementation  of  goal-directed  scheduling  in  the 
Hearsayll  system. 


11 


IMPLEMENTATION  OF  DATA-DIRECTED  ACTIVATION  OF  KNOWLEDGE  SOURCES 


Associated  with  jvery  Knowledge  source  is  a specification  of  the  blackboard  conditions 
required  for  the  activation  of  that  Knowledge  source.  This  specification,  called  a 

precondition,  is  a decision  orocedure  whose  tests  are  matching-prototypes  and  structural 
relationships  which,  when  appliec  to  the  blackboard  in  an  associative  manner,  detect  the 
regions  of  the  blackboard  in  which  the  Knowledge  source  is  interested.  This  procedure  may 
contain  arbitrarily  complex  decisions  (based  on  current  and  past  modifications  to  the 
blackboard)  resulting  in  the  activation  of  desired  knowledge  sources  within  the  chosen 
contexts.  The  context  corresponding  to  the  discovered  blackboard  region  which  satisfies 
some  knowledge  source’s  precondition  is  used  as  an  initial  context  in  which  to  activate  that 
knowledge  source.  The  efficiency  of  the  KS  precondition  evaluation  is  an  important  aspect  of 
the  system’s  implementation,  especially  as  the  knowledge  is  decomposed  into  more  and 
smal'er  KS’s  and  each  KS  activation  requires  less  computation. 

The  Hearsayll  system,  as  an  example  of  an  implementation,  makes  precondition 

evaluation  efficient  by  placing  additional  functions  in  the  routines  which  modify  the 

blackboard.  These  functions  are  activated  whenever  any  KS  modifies  an  attribute  in  the 

blackboard  which  some  other  KS  has  asked  to  be  monitored.  The  essence  of  the  modification 
is  preserved  in  a data  structure,  called  a change  set,  which  is  specific  to  the  attribute 
changed  and  the  KS  which  requested  the  monitoring.  A KS  specifies  in  a non- procedural  way 
(either  statically  or  dynamically)  those  attributes  which  it  wants  to  monitor,  in  order  to 
increase  the  efficiency,  monitoring  can  further  be  localized  to  particular  levels  or  even 
individual  hypotheses. 

Change  sets  serve  to  categorize  blackboard  modifications  (events)  and  are  thus  useful 
in  precondition  evaluation  since  they  limit  the  areas  in  the  blackboard  that  need  be  examined 
in  detail.  As  currently  implemented  in  Hearsayll,  the  precondition  evaluator  of  each 
knowledge  source  exists  as  a separate  process  which  monitors  changes  in  the  data  base  (i.e., 
it  monitors  additions  to  those  change  sets  in  which  the  KS  is  interested).  The  precondition 
process  is  itself  data-directed  in  that  it  is  activated  only  when  sufficient  changes  have  been 
made  in  the  blackboard  (i.e.,  when  on  entry  is  made  into  one  of  its  change  sets,  as  a side- 
effect  of  a relevant  blackboard  modification).  In  effect,  the  precondition  processes 
themselves  have  preconditions,  albeit  of  a much  simpler  form  than  those  possible  for 
knowledge  sources.  For  example,  a precondition  process  in  the  speech  system  may  specify 
that  it  should  be  activated  whenever  changes  occur  to  two  adjacent  hypotheses  at  the  word 
level  or  whenever  support  is  added  to  the  phrasal  levei.  By  using  the  (coarse)  classifications 
afforded  by  change  sets,  the  system  avoids  most  unnecessary  executions  of  the  precondition 
processes.  The  major  point  is  that  the  scheme  of  precond'tion  evaluation  is  evert-driven, 
being  based  on  the  occurrence  of  changes  in  the  blackboard;  i.e.,  it  is  only  at  points  of 


12 


modification  to  the  blackboard  that  a precondition  th*t  was  previously  unsatisfied  may 
become  satisfied.  In  particular,  precondition  evaluators  aie  not  involved  in  a form  of  busy 
waiting  in  which  they  are  constantly  looking  for  something  tfr1  is  not  yet  there. 

Oncn*  invoked,  a precondition  procedure  uses  sequences  of  associative  retrievals  and 
structural  matches  on  portions  of  the  blackboard  in  an  attempt  to  establish  a context 
satisfying  the  preconditions  of  one  or  more  of  "its"  knowledge  sources;  any  given 
precondition  procedure  may  be  responsible  for  instantiating  several  (related)  knowledge 
sources.  Notice  that  the  data-direc‘ed  nature  of  precondition  evaluation  and  knowledge- 
source  activation  is  linked  closely  to  the  primitive  functions  that  are  able  to  modify  the  data 
base,  for  it  is  only  at  points  of  modification  that  a precondition  that  was  unsatisfied  before 
may  become  satisfied.  Hence,  data  base  modification  routines  have  the  responsibility 
(although  perhaps  indirectly)  of  activating  the  precondition  evaluation  mechanism. 


Implementation  on  Parallel  Computers 

Because  of  the  independence  of  KS’s  and  their  data-directed  activation,  there  is  ? 
great  deal  of  potential  parallelism  in  this  organization.  Trends  in  computer  architecture 
indicate  that  large  amounts  of  computing  power  will  be  'aconomically  realized  in  asynchronous 
multiprocessor  networks.  Thus,  the  implementation  of  such  large  A1  programs  on 
multiprocessors  becomes  an  attractive  goal.  There  are,  however,  a set  of  issues  in  such  an 
implementation;  most  of  these  deal  with  interterence  among  KS’s  whor  they  attempt 
simultaneously  to  access  the  blackboard.  Effective  solutions  t:>  tho-.e  problems  have  been 
developed  in  the  Hearsayll  implementation;  Lesser,  et  al.,  (1974),  Lesser  (1975),  and  Fennell 
and  Lesser  (1975)  describe  these  solutions. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We  wish  to  acknowledge  the  contributions  of  the  following  people-  Richa-d  Fennell  for 
his  major  role  in  the  development  of  Hearsayl  and  II  (and,  in  particular,  the  multi;jrocessing 
aspects  of  the  system  organization)  and  for  helpful  suggestions  for  this  paper,  Raj  Redd-/  for 
many  of  ihe  basic  ideas  which  have  led  to  the  organization  described  here,  Allen  Newell  for 
his  insights  into  the  task  of  problem-solving,  Gregory  Gill  for  his  untiring  efforts  in  system 
implementation,  and  Frederick  Hayes-Roth  for  suggestions  for  this  paper. 


13 


Appendix  A: 

EXAMPLE  OF  BLACKBOARD  AND  KS  DECOMPOSITION  IN  HEARSAY II1 


Figure  1 shows  a schematic  of  the  levels  of  Hearsayll. 


Conceptual 

Phrasal 

Lexical 

Syllabic 

Surface- phonemic 
Phonetic 
Segmental 
Parametric 


Figure  1.  The  Levels  in  Hearsayll. 


Parametric  Level  - The  parametric  level  holds  the  most  basic  representation  of  the 
utterance  that  the  system  has;  it  is  the  only  direct  input  to  the  machine  about  the 
acoustic  signal.  Several  different  sets  of  parameters  are  being  used  in  Hearsayll 
interchangeably:  1/3-ociave  filter-band  energies  measured  every  10  msec.,  LPC-derived 
vocal-tract  parameters,  ar  d wide-bar.d  energies  and  zero-crossing  counts. 

Segmental  Level  - This  levei  represents  the  utterance  as  labeled  acoustic  segments. 
Although  the  set  of  labels  may  be  phonetic-like,  the  level  is  not  intended  *o  be  phonetic 
— the  segmentation  and  labeling  reflect  acoustic  manifestation  and  do  not,  for  example, 
attempt  to  compensate  for  the  context  of  the  segments  or  attempt  to  combine 
acoustically  dissimilar  segments  into  (phonetic)  units.  As  with  ail  levels,  any  particular 
portion  of  the  utterance  may  be  represented  by  more  than  one  competing  hypoth  sis 
• (i.e.,  multiple  segmentations  and  labelings  may  co-exist). 

Phonetic  Levs,  - At  this  level,  the  utterance  is  represented  by  a phonetic  description.  This 
is  a broad  phonetic  description  in  th,  e size  (duration)  of  the  units  is  on  the  order  of 
the  "size"  of  phonemes;  it  is  a fine  p^  tic  description  to  the  extent  that  each  element 
is  labeled  with  a fairly  detailed  alle  umc  classification  (eg.,  "stressed,  nasalized  [I]"). 
Surface-Phonemic  Level  - This  levei,  named  by  seemingly  contradicting  terms,  represents 
the  utterance  by  phoneme-like  units,  with  the  addition  of  modifiers  such  os  stress  and 
boundary  (word,  morpheme,  syllable)  markings. 

Syllabic  i.evel  - The  unit  ot  representation  here  is  the  syllable. 

Lexical  Level  - The  uni'  of  information  at  this  level  is  the  word. 

Phrasal  L.evel  - Syntactic  elements  appear  at  this  level.  In  fact,  since  a level  may  contain 
arbitrarily  many  "sub-levels"  of  elements  using  the  AND  and  OR  links,  traditional  kinds  yf 
syntactic  trees  can  be  directly  represented  here. 

Conceptual  Level  - The  units  at  this  level  arc*  "concepts."  As  with  the  phrasal  level,  it  may 
be  appropriate  to  use  the  graph  structure  of  the  data  base  to  indicate  relationships 
am or.g  different  concepts. 

As  examples  of  knowledge  sources,  Figure  2 shows  the  first  sex  implemented  for 
Hearsayli.  The  levels  are  indicated  ar  horizontal  lines  in  the  figure  and  are  labeled  at  the 
left.  The  knowledge  sources  are  indicated  by  arcs  connecting  levels;  the  starting  point(s)  of 


^ Appendices  A and  B are  reprinted  from  Lesser,  et  al  (1974);  they  are  included  here  for 
convenience. 

14 


an  arc  indicates  the  level(s)  of  major  "input"  for  the  KS,  and  the  end  point  indicates  the 
"output"  level  where  the  Knowledge  source’s  major  actions  occur.  e general,  the  action  of 
most  of  these  particular  knowledge  sources  is  to  create  links  between  hypotheses  on  its 
input  level(s)  and:  1)  existing  hypotheres  on  its  output  level,  if  appropriate  ones  are  already 
there,  or  2)  hypotheses  that  it  creates  on  its  output  level. 


- Levels  - - Knowledge  Sources  - 


CONCEPTUAL 
PHRASAL 


• Semantic  Word  Hypothesizer 


LEXICAL 

SYLLABIC 


SURFACE- 

PHONEMIC 


PHONETIC 


SEGMENTAL 


^ — f—\  — Syntactic  Parser 

Syntactic  Word  Hypothesizer 


PARAMETRIC 


£ -Phoneme  Hypothesizer 


i 


& 


Word  Candidate  Generator 
'Phono'ogica!  Rule  Appl'er 


I -Phone--Phoneme  Synchronizer 

^-Phone  Synthesizer 
— Segment-- Phone  Synchronizer 


^ Parameter—Segment 

Synchronizer 


3—4 


I — — Segmenter-Classifier 


Figure  2.  A Set  of  Knowledge  Sources  for  Hearsayll. 


The  Segmenter-Classifier  knowledge  source  uses  the  description  of  the  speech  signal  to 
produce  a labeled  acoustic  segmentation.  For  any  portion  of  the  utterance,  several 
possible  alternative  segmentations  and  labels  may  be  produced. 

The  Phone  Synthesizer  uses  labeled  acoustic  segments  to  generate  elements  at  the 
phonetic  level.  This  procedure  is  sometimes  a fairly  direct  renaming  of  an  hypothesis  at 
the  segmental  level,  perhaps  using  the  context  of  adjacent  segments.  In  other  cases, 
phone  synthesis  requires  the  combining  of  several  segments  (e.g.,  the  generation  of  [t] 
from  a segment  of  silence  followed  by  a segment  of  aspiration)  or  the  insertion  of 
phones  not  indicated  directly  by  the  segmentation  (e.g.,  hypothesizing  the  existence  of 
an  [I]  if  a vowel  seems  velarized  and  there  is  no  [I]  in  the  neighborhood).  This  KS  is 
trggered  whenever  a new  hypothesis  is  created  at  the  segmental  level. 


15 


The  Word  Candidate  Generator  uses  phonetic  information  (primarily  just  at  stressed 
locations  and  other  areas  of  high  phonetic  reliability)  to  generate  word  hypotheses. 
This  is  accomplished  in  a two-stage  process,  with  a stop  at  the  syllabic  level,  from  which 
lexical  retrieval  is  more  effective. 

The  Semantic  Word  Hypothesizer  uses  semantic  and  pragmatic  information  about  the  task 
(news  retrieval,  in  this  case)  to  predict  words  at  the  lexica!  leva!. 

The  Syntactic  Word  Hypothesizer  uses  knowledge  at  the  phrasal  level  to  predict  possible 
new  words  at  the  lexical  level  which  are  adjacent  (left  or  right)  to  words  previously 
generated  at  the  lexical  levei.  This  knowledge  source  is  activated  at  the  beginning  of  an 
utterance  recognition  attempt  and,  subsequently,  whenever  a new  word  is  created  at 
the  lexical  level. 

The  Phoneme  Hypothesizer  knowledge  source  is  activated  whenever  a word  hypothesis  is 
created  (at  the  lexical  level)  which  is  not  yet  supported  by  hypotheses  at  the  surface- 
phonemic  level.  Its  action  is  to  create  one  or  more  sequences  at  the  surrace-phonemic 
levei  which  represent  alternative  pronounciations  of  the  word.  (These  pronounciations 
are  currently  pre-specified  as  entries  in  a dictionary.) 

The  Phonological  Rule  Applier  rewrites  sequences  at  the  surfE-a-phcnemic  level.  This  KS 
is  used:  1)  to  augment  the  dictionary  lookup  of  the  Phoneme  Hypothesizer,  and  2)  to 
handle  word  boundary  conditions  that  can  be  predicted  by  rule. 

The  Phone-Phoneme  Synchronizer  is  triggered  whenever  an  hypothesis  is  created  at 
either  the  phonetic  or  the  surface-phonemic  level.  This  KS  attempts  to  link  up  the  new 
hypothesis  with  hypotheses  at  the  other  level.  This  linking  may  be  many-to-one  in 
either  direction. 

The  Syntactic  Parser  uses  a syntactic  definition  of  the  input  language  to  determine  if  a 
complete  sentence  may  be  assembled  from  words  at  the  lexical  level. 

The  primary  duties  of  the  Segment-Phone  Synchronizer  and  the  Parameter-Segment 
Synchronizer  are  similar:  to  recover  from  mistakes  made  by  the  (bottom-up)  actions  of 
the  Phone  Synthesizer  and  Segmenter-Classifier,  respecti/ely,  by  allowing  feedback 
from  the  higher  to  the  lower  level. 

In  addition  to  the  knowledge  source  modules  described  above,  all  of  which  embody 
speech  knowledge,  several  policy  modules  exist.  These  modules,  which  interface  to  the 
system  in  a manner  identical  to  the  speech  modules,  execute  policy  decisions,  e.g., 
propagation  of  : atings  and  calculation  of  processing -state  attributes. 


Appendix  B; 

EXAMPLE  OF  A BLACKBOARD  FRAGMENT  IN  HEARSAY  II 


Figure  3 is  an  example  ' o fragment  that  might  occur  in  Hearsayll’s  blackboard.  The 
level  of  an  hypothesis  is  indicated  by  its  vertical  position;  the  names  of  the  levels  are  given 
on  the  left.  Time  location  is  approximately  indicated  by  horizontal  placement,  but  duration  is 
only  very  roughly  indicated  (e.g.,  the  boxes  surrounding  the  two  hypotheses  at  the  phrasal 
level  should  be  much  wider).  Alternatives  are  indicated  by  proximity;  for  example,  'will’  and 
'would’  are  word  hypotheses  covering  the  same  time  span.  Likewise,  'question’  and  'modal- 
question’,  'youl’  and  'you2’,  and  'J’  and  'V’  all  represent  pairs  of  alternatives. 

This  example  illustrates  several  features  of  the  data  structure: 

The  hypothesis  'you!  at  the  lexical  level,  has  two  alternative  phonemic  "spellings" 
indicated;  the  hypotheses  labeled  'youl’  and  ’you2’  are  nodes  created,  also  at  the 
lexical  level,  to  held  those  alternatives.  In  general,  such  sub-levels  may  be  created 
arbitrarily. 


16 


PHRASAL 


Figure  3.  An  Example  of  a Fragment  in  the  Blackboard. 

The  link  between  'youl'  ?nd  'O’  is  a special  kind  of  SEQUENCE  link  (indicated  here  by 
a dashed  line)  called  a CONTEXT  link;  a CONTEXT  link  indicates  that  the  lower 
hypothesis  supports  the  upper  one  and  is  contiguous  to  its  brother  links,  but  it  is  not 
"part  of”  the  upper  hypothesis  in  the  sense  that  it  is  not  within  the  time  interval  of 
the  upper  hypothesis  — rather,  it  supplies  a context  for  its  brother(s).  In  this  case, 
one  may  "read"  the  structure  as  stating  "'youl’  is  composed  of  *,•’  followed  by  'AX’ 
(schwa)  in  the  context  of  the  preceding  'D\"  (This  reflects  the  phonological  rule  that 
"would  you"  is  often  spoken  as  "would-js.")  Thus,  a CONTEXT  link  allows  important 
contextual  relationships  to  be  represented  without  violating  the  implicit  time 
assumptions  about  SEQUENCE  nodes. 

Whereas  the  phonemic  spelling  of  the  word  "you"  held  by  'youl’  includes  a contextual 
constraint,  the  'you2’  option  does  not  have  this  constraint.  However,  'youl’  and 
'you2’  are  such  similar  hypotheses  that  there  is  strong  reason  for  wanting  to  retain 
them  as  alternative  options  under  *you’  (as  indicated  in  Figure  3).  rather  than 
representing  them  unconnectedly.  A connection  matrix  is  used  here  to  represent  this 
kind  of  relationship;  the  connection  matrix  of  'you’  (symbolized  in  Figure  3 by  the  2- 
dimensional  binary  matrix  in  the  node)  specifies  that  support  'youl’  is  relevant  to  use 
'question’  (but  not  to  'modal-question’)  and  that  support  'you2’  is  relevant  to  both 
uses. 

The  nature  of  the  implications  represented  by  the  links  provides  a uniform  basis  for 
propagating  changes  made  in  one  part  of  the  data  structure  to  other  relevant  parts  without 
necessarily  requiring  the  intervention  of  particular  knowledge  sources  at  each  step. 
Considering  the  example  of  Figure  3,  assume  that  Ine  validity  of  the  hypothesis  labeled  'J’  is 
modified  by  some  KS  (presumably  operating  at  the  phonetic  level)  and  becomes  very  low. 
One  possible  scenario  for  rippling  this  change  through  the  data  base  is  given  here: 

First,  the  estimated  validity  of  'youl’  is  reduced,  because  'J’  is  a lower  hypothesis  of 
'youl! 

This,  in  turn,  may  cause  the  rating  of  'you’  to  be  reduced. 


17 


The  connection  matrix  at  'you’  specifies  that  ’youl’  is  not  relevant  to  ’modal-question,’ 
so  the  latter  hypothesis  is  not  affected  by  the  change  in  rating  of  the  former.  Notice 
that  the  existence  of  the  connection  matrix  allows  this  decision  to  be  made  locally  in 
the  data  structure,  without  having  to  search  back  down  to  the  ’D’  and  'J! 

’Question!  however,  is  supported  by  ’youl’  (through  the  connection  matrix  at  ’you’),  so 
its  rating  is  affected 

Further  propagations  can  continue  to  occur,  perhaps  down  the  other  SEQUENCE  links 
under  ’auestion’  and  ’youl! 

Notice  that  all  of  these  modifications  are  "speech-knowledge  independent"  and  can  be 
accomplished  uniformly  at  all  levels  of  the  blackboard  by  a single  policy  knowledge  source. 
This  policy  KS  does  not  need  to  access  or  trigger  any  other  KS  but  can  directly  derive  all  the 
information  it  needs  from  the  hypothesis  and  link  fields  that  are  uniformly  present  and  from 
the  implicit  semantics  of  the  structures  in  the  blackboard. 


REFERENCES 


Baker,  James  (1974),  "The  DRAGON  System  --  An  Overview,"  in  Erman  (1974b). 

Barnett,  J.  (1973),  "A  Vocal  Data  Management  System,"  IEEE  Trans.  Audio  and  Electroacoustics, 
AU-21,  3. 

Barnett,  J.  (1975,  in  press),  "Module  Linkage  and  Communication  in  Large  Systems,"  in  Reddy 
(1C75). 

Erman,  L.  D.,  R.  D.  Fennell,  V.  R.  Lecser,  and  D.  R.  Reddy  (1973),  "System  Organizations  for 
Speech  Understanding:  Implications  of  Network  and  Multiprocessor  Computer 

Architectures  for  AI"  Proc.  3rd  Inter.  Joint  Conf.  on  Artificial  Intel.,  Stanford,  Ca., 
pp.  194-199. 

Erman,  L.  D.  (1974),  "An  Environment  and  System  for  Machine  Understanding  of  Connected 
Speech”  Ph.D.  thesis,  Comp.  Sci.  Dept,  Stanford  Univ. 

Erman,  L.  D.  (ed.)  (1974b),  Contributed  Papers  of  the  IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech  Recognition, 
April  15-19,  1974,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  IEEE  Cat.  No.  74CH0878-9AE.  Many  of  these 
papers  have  been  reprinted  ir,  IEEE  Tr?  s.  on  Acoustics,  Speech,  and  Signal  Processing, 
ASSP-23,  no.  1 (Feb.,  1975). 

Fennell,  R.  D.,  and  V.  R.  Lesser  (1975),  "Parallelism  in  A.I.  Problem-Solving:  A Case  Study  of 
Hearsayll"  Tech.  Report,  Comp.  Sci.  Dept.,  Carnegie-Mslion  Univ.,  Pittsburgh,  Pa. 

Fennell,  R.  D.  (1975b,  in  preparation),  Ph.D.  thesis,  Comp.  Sci.  Dept.,  Carnegie-Mellon  Univ. 

Hayes-Roth,  F.,  V.  R.  Lesser,  and  D.  W.  Kosy  (1975,  in  preparation),  "A  Design  for  Attentional 
Control  in  a Distributed-Logic  Speech  Understanding  System"  Tech.  Report,  Comp.  Sci. 
Dept.,  Carnegie-Mellon  Univ.,  Pittsburgh,  pa. 

Hewitt,  C.  (1972),  "Description  and  Theoretical  Analysis  (Using  Schemata)  of  Planner:  A 
Language  for  Proving  Theorems  and  Manipulating  Models  in  a Robot"  AI  Memo  No. 
251,  MIT  Project  MAC. 

Lesser,  V.  R.,  R.  D.  Fennell,  L.  D.  Erman,  & D.  R.  Reddy  (1974),  "Organization  of  the  HEARSAY  II 
Speech  Understanding  System"  in  Erman  (1974b).  Also  appeared  in  IEEE  Trans,  on 
Acoustics,  Speech,  and  Signal  Processing,  ASSP-23,  no.  1,  pp.  11-23  (Feb.,  1975). 

Lesser,  V.  R.  (1975.  in  press),  "Parallel  Processing  in  Speech  Understanding  Systems:  A 
Survey  of  Design  Problems"  in  Reddy  (1975). 


18 


Newoll,  A.  (1969),  "Heuristic  Programming:  !II-Structered  Prob  ms,"  in  J.  S.  Aronofsky  (ed.), 
Progress  in  Operations  Research,  3,  Wiley,  363-415. 

Newell,  A.,  J.  Barnett,  J.  Forgie,  C.  Green,  D.  k'latt,  J.  C.  R.  Licklider,  J.  Munson,  R.  Reddy,  and 
W.  Woods  (1971),  Speech  Understanding  System  ::  Final  Report  of  a Study  Group,  pub. 
by  North-Holland  (1973). 

Nev.ell,  A.  (1973),  “Production  Systems:  Models  of  Control  Structures"  in  W C.  Chase  (ed.) 
Visual  Information  Processing,  Academic  Press,  pp.  463-526. 

Reddy,  D.  R.  ( 1 CCS),  "An  Approach  to  Computer  Speed:  Recognition  by  Direct  Analysis  of  the 
Speech  Wave"  (Ph.D.  thesis)  A1  Memo  No.  43,  Comp.  Fci.  Dept.,  Stanford  Univ , 
Stanford,  Ca. 

Reddy,  D.  R.,  L.  D.  Erman,  and  R.  B.  Neely  (197da),  "A  Model  and  a System  fur  Machine 
Recognition  of  Speech"  IEEE  Trans.  Audio  and  Electroacoustics,  AU-21,  3,  pp.  229-238. 

Reddy,  D.  R.,  L.  D.  Erman,  R.  D.  Fennell,  and  R.  B.  Neely  (1973b),  "The  HEARSAY  Speech 
Understanding  System:  An  Example  of  the  Recognition  Process,"  Proc.  3rd  Inter.  Joint 
Conf.  on  Artificial  Intel.,  Stanford,  Ca.,  pp.  185-193. 

Reddy,  D.  R.  (1973),  "Eyes  and  Ears  for  Computers;1  Tech.  Report,  Comp.  Sci.  Dept.,  Carnegie- 
Mellon  University,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.  Keynote  speech  presented  at  Conf.  on  Cognitive 
Processes  and  Artifical  Intelligence,  Hamburg,  April,  1973. 

Reddy,  R.,  and  A.  Newell  (1S74),  "Knowledge  and  its  Representation  in  a Speech 
Understanding  System}1  in  L.  W.  Gregg  (ed.)  Knowledge  and  Cognition,  Lawrence 
Eribaum  Assoc.,  Washington,  D.  C.,  chap.  10,  (in  press). 

Reddy,  D.  R.  (ed.)  (1975,  in  press),  Invited  Papers  of  the  IEEE  Symposium  on  Speech 
Recognition,  April  15-19,  1974,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  Academic  Press. 

Ruvner,  P.,  Nash-Webb-^r,  B.,  and  Woods,  W.  (1974),  “Control  Concepts  in  a Speech 
Understanding  System,"  in  Erman  (1974b).  Also  appeared  in  IEEE  Trans,  on  Acoustics, 
Speech,  and  Signal  Processing,  ASSP-23,  no.  .,  pp.  136-140  (Feb.,  .1975). 

Rulifson,  J.  F.,  et  at.,  (1973),  "QA4:  A Procedural  Caicuius  for  Intuitive  Reasoning,"  Technical 
Note  73,  AI  Center,  Stanford  Res.  Inst.,  Menlo  Park,  Ca. 

Simon,  H.  A.,  (1962),  "The  Architecture  of  Complexity",  Proc.  Amer.  Philosophical  Society,  105, 
pp.  467-482. 

Vicens,  P.  (1969),  "Aspects  of  Speech  Recognition,"  Report  CS-127,  (Ph.D.  Thesis),  Comp.  Sci. 
Dept.,  Stanford  Univ. 


19 


