Best 

Available 

Copy 


coj  t Soviet  R £ D Articles 


£ l-i  T C 


International  Co'jft  retir.c  on  Artificial  Intelligence 

Radioinot of  Oil  Si'.ci.i- 

1 l’*;r*!ir.f>Jastic  Film  Joe  Optica]  Stern 

i*  indicator 

In  laying  (.  h'.  vt  i ri:  t it.:-  on  I It  ore:  • < > j » 1 ; l ?. j cr  . 

Di  s-c  rctc  Optical  i may. in  ft 

Improved  Glass  for  Optical  Registry 

Radioactive  j her.  n''ivi ' i c r? 

Imploded  j-'u > i • <i  Hanii.i 

M ctallio  V.  r A r ...... 

Haiti: rv  '.Vit*.  >V  .i --r  Odcd /.«■-, 

Magnetic  : Ming  rap]./ 

J.ascr  Pimped  !»v  i.<  ! ,;\i.  f.%  i 

Romania  ' O'.  [.Me  Kesta;  : cli  instile*  o 

Character ' f ; ics  ! ' r.  c-.  . • 

Model  ! \> v .1  ,>c.!f  it;;,  ' C ' •!!  :-  t K 

Ucc«  nt  Public:;.  


APPROVt D FOR  PUi-li*.  Rill  AVI.  1,'lal ! Sift  !OK  UNIiMlIlP 


UNCLASSIFIED 


31M  no 


IfCUDlTV  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PACE  fUTlAn  Oolo  Fnlotod)  

r- — _kl  _ . HEAD  INSTKI '<TKi*;s 

I REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE ! CF.FORF.  rOMPI  I TINT,  M'K' 

I,  report  number la.  govt  accession  no.  > necpient-s  catalog  num  ... 


4 TITLE  (fid  Sobtltlo) 

SOVRaD  - A Digest  of  Recent  Soviet  R&D 
Articles,  Vol.  1,  no.  9,  1975 


S TYPE  OF  REPORT  & PERIOD 


Scientific  . . . Interim 


6 PERFORMING  ORG  RLF-om  •.  jUf! 


7.  authorc*; 

S.  Hibben,  L.  Boylan,  J.  Kourilo, 
R.  Shresta,  M.  Ness 


*.  performing  organi z ation  name  ano  aooress 
Informatics  Inc. 

6000  Executive  Boulevard 

Rockville,  Maryland  2085Z . 

it.  controlling  office  name  ano  aooress 
Defense  Advance  Research  Projects  Agency/TAO 
1400  Wilson  Blvd. 

Arlington.  Va,  22209 

U.  MONITORING  agency  name  4 AOORESSflf  ditteionl  hom  Controlling  Olhco) 

Defense  Supply  Service  - Washington 
Room  1D245,  Pentagon 
Washington,  D.  C.  20310 


t CONTRACT  O R OR  AN  T NUMSF  R-  . I 


MDA-903-7(»C-00«‘» 

TO  PPOGRAM  EL  LMt N T PROJt  ’ T*  • 
AREA  * PORK  UNIT  NJMBLN, 

DARPA  Order  No.  3097 
Program  Code  No.  Pol.  10, 
P6D10,  P6E20,  P6G10 


12  REPORT  DATE 

September,  1975 


n number  of  pages 

15.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (o I thin  rr j irt 

UNCLASSIFIED 

is*  declassification- dF* -75  » * d i n 
schedule 


is.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  <ol  IhU  Rr  port) 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  fof  (A*  obottoct  ontorod  In  Block  10,  II  ditto ronl  Irom  Report 


Reproduced  bv 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 

US  Ceps'TmBOl  o<  CommoK* 
Spnegfiwld,  VA  2*iV 


a 


IB  supplementary  notes 


Scientific  . . . Interim 


If  key" POROS  (Contlnuo  on  rovoroo  wldo  It  nocoooory  ornd  Identity  l>r  block  number; 

Underwater  Optics  E-Beam  Interaction 

Laser  Spectroscopy  Semiconductor  Research 

Geophysics 
Material  Science 

Oceanography 

20  ABSTRACT  fContlnuo  on  rovoroo  oldo  It  nocoooory  ond  Idonllty  by  block  numbor) 

This  is  a collection  of  brief  abstracts  on  miscellaneous  topics  from  the  currrn 
Soviet  technical  literature.  The  intent  is  to  supply  a quick  look  at  items  of 
possible  interest,  including  topics  not  necessarily  named  in  the  DARI  A mterob 
profile,  as  a supplement  to  our  reportage  on  specified  topics. 

It  is  intended  to  publish  this  collection  on  a monthly  basis,  to  continue  to 
provide  prompt  coverage  of  numerous  aspects  of  Soviet  R&D.  As  an  added 
feature,  all  recently  acquired  books  will  be  listed  as  they  are  received.  A 


J AN  73  1 473  EOITION  OF  I NOV  65  IS  OBSOLETE 


UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGE  Hl'.n  *1*  I 


INTRODUCTION 


This  is  a collection  of  brief  abstracts  on  miscellaneous 
topics  from  the  current  Soviet  technical  literature.  The  intent  is  to 
supply  a quick  look  at  items  of  possible  interest,  including  topics  not 
necessarily  named  in  the  DARPA  interest  profile,  as  a supplement  to 
our  reportage  on  specified  topics. 

It  is  intended  to  publish  this  collection  on  a monthly  basis, 
to  continue  to  provide  prompt  coverage  of  numerous  aspects  of  Soviet  RkD. 
As  an  added  feature,  all  recently  acquired  books  will  be  listed  as  they  are 
received.  A list  of  source  abbreviations  u appended. 

For  further  information  the  reader  is  invited  to  call 
Stuart  Hibben  or  Lee  Boylan  at  Informatics  on  (301  )-770-3000. 


10/ 


International  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (extract) 


The  Fourth  International  Joint  Conference  on  Artificial 
Intelligence  was  held  recently  in  Tbilisi,  USSR.  The  eleven-section 
conference  was  attended  by  more  than  1000  delegates  representing  3 5 
nations.  In  response  to  general  questions  from  a correspondent.  Candidate 
of  Technical  Sciences  Ye.  A.  Aleksandrov  describes  a mobile  robot 
platform  developed  by  the  Institute  of  Cybernetics  of  the  Ukrainian  Academy 
of  Sciences,  based  on  operating  princij  les  developed  by  N.  M.  Amosov. 

I he  platform  is  said  to  be  somewhate  similar  in  external  appearance  to 
the  Soviet  lunar  rover.  It  can  negotiate  an  obstacle  course  in  its  self- 
propelled  route  to  an  object.  Aleksandrov  concludes  that  the  conference 
demonstrated  three  areas  for  further  work:  1)  the  study  of  the  intelligence 
of  man  as  a personality;  2)  the  development  of  models  for  man's  information 
processing;  and  3)  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  sphere  of  human  endeavor 
in  which  these  models  should  be  used.  [A  thinking  machine?  Sovetskaya 
Rossiya,  23  September  1975,  p.  4 cols.  2-3J. 


Radiometry  of  Oil  Slicks  (abstract) 

laboratory  measurements  are  reported  of  the  radio 
brightness  temperature  of  a smooth  water  surface  covered  by  oil  or 
kerosene  films,  as  measured  by  a high-sensitivity  centimeter-band  radio- 
meter Experimental  data  on  dependence  of  the  increment  of  radio  brightness 
temperature  on  the  thickness  of  the  film  are  compared  to  theoretical  data 
obtained  in  an  isothermal  approximation. 

A brief  description  of  the  radiometer  is  given,  together  with 
graphical  data  on  differential  brightness  temperature  as  a function  of  film 
thickness  and  signal  polarization  for  A -2.08  cm. 

The  results  of  this  analysis  confirm  the  possibility  for 
remote  detection  of  films  of  liquid  oil  products  over  a calm  water  surface 
by  high -sensitivity  radiometry.  A centimeter-band  radiometer  should 
thus  be  able  to  detect  films  with  thickness  on  the  order  of  0.  1 mm. 

[Glotov,  A.  A.,  D,  T.  Matveyev,  V.  G.  Mirovskiy,  M.  D.  Rayev, 

V.  Yu,  Rayzer,  I.  A.  Troitskiy,  7c.  A.  Sharkov,  and  V.  S.  Etkin. 

Study  of  radio-frequency  thermal  emission  of  a water  suxface,  covered 
by  an  oil  film.  Meteorologiya  i gidrologiya,  no.  6,  1975,  90-93 J. 


.Thermoplastic  Film  for  Optical  Storage  (verbatim  > 

. . Experimental  and  theoretical  studies  have  been  made  of 
inhomogeneities  in  the  thickness  (phase  noise)  of  a new  material  for 

!hi0oumut0n-St0iagre:  th*rmoPlastic  Broadening  and  narrowinu  of 

J?*  ° I P 8!!ai0f  * coherent  optical  system,  which  transforms  sinusoidal 

nf8ra  o1ufC°  a 7 ther.m°Plastic>  are  considered.  An  evaluation  is  made 
of  resolution  and  dynamic  range  of  the  sxstem.  The  concept  of  "noise 

coefficient  of  the  information  carrier"  is  introduced  which  makes  it  possible 
to  compare  various  carriers.  A study  of  dependence  of  noise  coefficient 

on  spatial  frequency  is  also  discussed.  |Aym binder,  M.  S.  N ivl 

“S'l'  VI,aT°-  Ye-  Yu-  K.  A.  Mark'.,*. 

P.  Ya.  Melnichenko,  J.  V.  Miroshnichenko,  and  V.  V.  Slmlovskiy. 

thermoplastics  in  a coherent  optical  system.  IVUZ  Kadiofiz  1974  * 1? 
no.  10,  1493-1500.  (RZhF,  4/75,  no."  4D1048)].  ’ 


Matrix  Indicator  (verbatim) 


A matrix  indicator  is  proposed  which  contains  isolated 
transparent  substrates  with  horizontal  and  vertical  elect rodos,  and  a 
liquid -crystal  filler.  To  eliminate  crosstalk,  a transparent  plate  is 
placed  between  adjacent  substrates;  on  each  side  of  the  transparent  plate 
a transparent  conductive  coating  is  applied.  The  space  between  the  plate 
and  substrates  is  filleu  with  the  liquid  crystal  substance.  I Anisimov,  A.  i\.  , 
and  A.  V.  Veselovskiy.  Matrix  indicator.  Author's  Certificate,  USSR,  No. 
42 1 “ 71 , published  3/9/74.  (RZhElektr,  4/75,  #4P394  p)J. 


Imaging  Characteristics  on  Thermoplastic  (abst  ract) 

Effects  of  the  parameters  of  thermoplastic  information 
carriers  on  the  intensity  of  light  in  an  image  reproduction  plane  is  considered. 
Analytical  expressions  are  obtained  and  analyses  are  given  which  correlate 
gradation  of  image  with  light  wavelength,  refractive  index,  depth  of  defor- 
mation and  thickness  of  the  thermoplastic  layer,  as  well  as  with  characteristic 
of  recording  electron  beam.  Results  obtained  show  that  an  increase  in  then  >, 
plastic  layer  thickness  also  increases  the  effective  exposure  range,  and  lower 
the  coefficient  at  surface  tension,  y.  At  sufficiently  great  thickness, 
qualitative  image  repr  luction  is  possible  only  with  higher  exposure  levels. 
Increasing  the  electr-.i  beam  width  reduces  the  exposure  range  and  in<  re.is<  s 
the  image  contrast,  but  the  resolving  power  of  recorded  information  on  the 
thermoplastic  layer  is  reduced. 

The  cited  findings  enable  selection  of  concrete  valm  s of  the 
thermoplastic  layer  thickness  and  electron  beam  radius,  so  that  the  desin-d 
> and  effective  exposure  range  are  obtained.  (Valentvuk,  A.  N. , and  K.  t . 
Predko.  Characteristics  of  optical  imaging  from  thermoplastic  carrier* 

OiS.  v.  39.  no.  1,  197$,  18(»-189]. 


Discrete  Optical  Imaging  (verbatim) 

A patent  disclosure  has  been  filed  on  a system  for  quant  ixi 
and  transmitting  an  optical  image.  The  design  includes  a matrix  of  die!.  . t r:< 
waveguides  and  multimode  output  with  horn  transmitter.  To  obtain  the 
multimode  regime  for  excitation  and  conversion  of  the  focused  image  to  dis.  r<  i 
form,  the  matrix  is  designed  in  the  form  of  a two-dimensional  plate  fixed 
with  a regular  pattern  of  polymer  fibers  of  the  required  length.  | I'udacyan, 

1.  F.  , V.  F.  Dubrovin,  S.  N.  Kamlyuk,  D.  1.  Mirovitskjv,  arid  \.  S. 

Chagulov.  Device  for  quantization  and  transmission  of  an  optical  image. 
Author's  Certificate,  USSR,  no.  438070,  submitted  14  Dec.  1072.  awarded 
1 Aug.  1975.  (RZhRadiot,  7/75,  no.  7Yell6  P>], 


Improved  Class  For  Optical  Registry  (abstract) 

Various  chalcogenide  glasses  used  for  optical  recording  <>t 
data  are  discussed,  and  a Cu-As-Se-I  system  is  proposed  which  has  in>pro\» 
write/erasc  characteristics.  The  proposed  type  is  compared  to  existin', 
types,  namely  As^Se^,  A82S3  and  AsSel,  which  show  relatively  poor  erase 
and  rewrite  response.  Comparative  response  of  the  new  type  shows  good 
repeatability  of  registering  quality  up  to  seven  write/erase  cycles.  I he 

2 


governing  factors  are  discussed  in  terms  of  reordering  stability  in  the 
chain-layer  structures  of  the  glasses.  Experiments  described  used  a 
He-Ne  laser  for  data  recording.  [Kikineshi,  A.  A.,  and  D.  G.  Semak. 
Reversibility  of  photoprinting  on  glasses  of  the  Cu-As-Sc-1  system. 
ZhTF  P,  v.  1,  no.  6,  1975,  269-273J.  


i I ] Radioactive  Thermometer? 


The  possibility  of  affecting  the  decay  rate  of  a radioactive  body 
by  intense  laser  application  was  suggested,  for  example,  by  Gol'danskiy  and 
Letokhov  (ZhETE,  v.  67,  no.  2-  1974,  513-516).  A subsequent  article 
by  G.  Voronov  speculates  further  on  this  idea,  noting  that  lasers  of  the 
required  energy  are  now  available  to  realize  such  an  experiment,  for  example 
wi^h  Tcy"  as  a target.  The  intense  ionization  of  the  radioactive  specimen 
should  measurably  retard  the  decay  rate.  The  fact  that  intensity  of  radio- 
activity thus  depends  on  degree  of  ionization  suggests  the  possibility  of  uaing 
the  technique  to  measure  the  resultant  high  temperatures,  i.  e.  an  the  or.  or" 
of  10  degrees.  [Voronov,  G.  Lasers  and  radioactivity:  Sovie  scientists 
propose  use  of  a laser  to  control  radioactive  decay  rate.  Khimiva  i zhizn' 
no.  3,  ’975,  8J.  ‘ ’ 


I 

i . 

I 

l! 

0 

0 

f! 

! 

i 


Imploded  Fusion  Plasma  (abstract) 

A theta-pinch  magnetic  compression  system  using  an 
explosion -acce’erated  metallic  liner  to  initiate  a controlled  nuclear  fusion 
process  is  desc  ibed  by  a closed  set  of  equations.  The  equations  take  into 
account  compressibility  and  viscosity  of  the  liner  material  and  the  explosive. 
Solution  of  the  equations  by  the  finite  differences  method  gives  the  optimum 
parameters  of  the  system,  i.  e.  , system  geometry,  explosive  quantity, 
plasma  initial  temperature  and  density,  which  would  be  required  to  conduct 
an  experimental  verification  of  the  possibility  for  achieving  energy  conversion 
efficiency  corresponding  to  the  Lawson  criterion.  Fusion  energy  released 
in  the  experiment  should  be  equal  to  energy  stored  in  the  explosive  charge. 
[Cnurayev,  V.  A.,  K.  M.  Lobanov,  V.  P.  Fcdyakov,  V.  D.  Dyatlov,  and 
A.  M Timonin.  Plasma  compression  by  an  explosion-accelerated  conductin'’ 
liner.  ZhTF,  no.  7,  1975,  1375-1380J. 


Metallic  Water  (abstract) 

Another  in  the  series  of  high-pressure  phase  conversion  tests 
by  Vereshchagin's  group  is  reported.  In  this  experiment,  ice  at  -HO  to  - in  r 
was  compressed  atone  megabar  and  its  electric  resistance  K was  measured. 
The  data  show  that,  at  a certain  value  of  applied  force,  R at  200  K dropped 
by  six  orders  of  magnitude.  R of  the  specimen  reverted  to  its  original  value 
on  being  heated  to  220  K.  The  observed  "defrosting"  of  the  conducting  state 
led  the  authors  to  conclude  that  the  metastable  conducting  water  reverts 
to  the  original  dielectric  phase.  Thus,  R discontinuity  under  pressure  is 
related  to  a phase  conversion.  [Vereshchagin,  L.  F.  , Ye.  N.  Yakovlev, 
and  Yu.  A.  Timofeyev.  Conversion  of  water  into  conductive  state  at  - I Mbar 
static  pressure.  Zh ET F P,  v.  21,  no.  11,  1975,  643-045^ 


3 


II 

B 

[1 


Battery  With  Water  Oxidizer  (verbatim) 


The  possibility  is  shown  for  substantially  raising  the  unit 
power  characteristic  of  water -activated  current  sources  by  using  water 
as  the  oxidising  agent.  Several  anode  and  cathode  materials  are  proposed, 
whose  use  in  the  suggested  type  of  battery  could  achieve  a unit  energy 
output  of  350  watt -hr s /kg.  [Berkman,  Ye.  A.,  Ye.  G.  ivanov,  G.  M. 
Potrova,  A.  B.  Pospelov,  B.  V.  Chulkov,  and  V.  A.  Barsukov.  Elect r»- 

chemical  generators  using  water  as  oxidizer.  IN:  Sb.  rabot  po  khlrrn 

istochnikrun  toka.  Vses.  n-i.  akkumulator.  in-t. , no.  10,  1975  391-401 

(RZhElektrotekh,  21F,  8/75,  no.  8F124)J. 


Magnetic  Holography  (abstract! 


n 

1 1 

u 

r 

i j 


i 


Principles  of  holographic  recording  of  information  on 
magnetic  tapes  are  studied,  in  which  recorded  information  can  he  in  discrete 
form  or  as  a phase  hologram.  Requirements  on  the  optical  system  for 
discrete  recording  are  considered.  A major  factor  which  determines  the 
density  of  recording  of  discrete  data  by  the  cited  thcrmomagnetic  method 
is  the  quality  of  the  optical  system;  a feasible  density  is  5 x 10*'  bit/om2. 

The  important  characteristics  of  the  thermomagnetic  material  in  the  readout 
process  of  discrete  information  is  its  signal -to-noise  ratio,  and  a quality 
index  for  the  thermomagnetic  material  based  on  Faraday  rotation  and 
coefficient  of  absorption.  Materials  such  as  EuO  or  _uS  have  good  quality 
indices  (10  deg/cm)  at  cryogenic  temperatures. 


The  holographic  method  of  recording  on  magnetic  tape  is 
interesting  for  its  high  noise  rejection  as  well  as  its  high  recording  density 
arid  fast  readout.  Its  drawbacks  are  a low  diffraction  intensity  ( - 10-2%)  and 
the  need  to  use  a laser  with  high  output  power.  The  possibility  is  discussed 
for  production  of  transparencies  with  magnetooptic  control  on  the  basis  <>f 
magnetic  bubble  domains.  [Petrov,  M.  P.  Magnetic  holography.  IN: 

7.?4.Materialy  6'y  zimn°y  shkoly  po  fizike  poluprovodnikov,  1975.  Leningrad 
1974,  257-279.  (RZhRadiot,  5/75,  no.  5E261)]. 


Laser  Pumped  by  Relativistic  E-Beam  ( v e r batim ) 


Experiments  are  described  in  which  relativistic  electron 
beams  were  used  to  excite  gas  lasers.  Advantages  of  laser  p-impim:  by 
relativistic  beams,  as  compared  to  other  techniques,  are  discussed.  I he 
results  are  described  of  the  study  of  energy  transfer  from  the  relativistic 
beam  to  the  host  gases,  which  are  under  various  conditions,  so  as  to  arri  « 
at  the  optimum  operating  regimes  of  such  lasers.  Neon,  molecular  nitrogr-o 
and  hydrogen  ^lasers  were  developed.  The  maximum  output  using  nitroy.u 
attains  4x10  w at  a pulse  duration  of  8 nanoseconds.  |.Magda,  I.  1. 

Tkach,  Ya.  B.  Faynberg,  and  G.  V.  Skachek.  Use  of  relativistic'  electron 
beams  in  producing  powerful  optical  pulse  generators.  IN:  Sb  111  Ukr. 

elektron.  optike  i yeye  primeneniyam,  posvyashch.  250-lctiyu 
Tezisy  dokl.  Ch.  2.  Khar'kov,  1974,  lf>6-167.  (RZhRadiot. 


1 


4 


j 


Romania  Plans  Oceanographic  Research  Institute  and  Fleet  (abstract) 


Following  a brief  discussion  of  Romanian  participation  in 
international  oceanographic  research  projects.  Professor  M.  Hacoscu 
states  that  by  1978,  Romania  will  have  well-equipped  vessels  for  fisheries 
and  oceanographic  research.  The  problem  of  ocean  resources  development 
is  to  be  the  prime  mission  of  a "future"  Romanian  oceanographic  institute. 
[Bacescu,  M.  The  resources  of  tl.e  ocean.  Romania  Today,  no.  7,  lf»7% 
32-33]. 


Characteristics  of  Dolphin  Sonar  (verbatim) 

Results  are  summarized  on  studies  of  the  echo-ranging 
mechanism  of  dolphins.  The  techniques  are  described  of  sound  recording 
directly  on  the  head  of  the  dolphin.  These  techniques  make  it  possible  to 
detect  amplitude  and  shape  of  signals  at  different  points  on  the  surface  of 
the  dolphin's  head.  Mechanisms  of  sound  generation  are  proposed;  the  most 
probable  sound -emitting  elements  are  thought  tc  be  air  cavities  which  are 
excited  by  impact.  In  the  case  of  HF  pulses,  the  radiation  has  a non -resonant 
character,  while  for  LF  pulses,  it  is  weakly  resonant. 

Experiments  on  directivity  of  radiation  show  that  while  the 
skull  plays  a major  role,  the  soft  tissue  of  the  dolphin's  head  also  pla\  s a 
definite  part  in  narrowing  the  directional  pattern  at  high  frequencies. 

Possible  mechanisms  of  sound  reception  by  dolphins  are  also  discussed. 

The  results  are  given  of  the  study  of  noise  stability  of  the  dolphin's  echo- 
ranging mechanism,  as  well  as  the  capability  to  determine  the  direction 
toward  the  sound  source  and  to  distinguish  underwater  objects.  A method  is 
described  for  the  protection  of  the  dolphin  hearing  organ  (Tursiops  truncatus) 
against  intense  echo-ranging  pulses  by  skull  shielding  together  with  a systen 
of  air -containing  ducts.  Methods  for  evaluating  the  efficiency  of  a dolphin's 
echo- ranging  mechanism  are  given.  [Romanenko,  Ye.  V.  Some  characteristics 
of  dolphin  echo-ranging  mechanisms.  Trudy  5-y  Vscsoyuznoy  shkoly-semina ra 
po  stat.  gidroakustike  (SG-5) . Novosibirsk,  1974,  31n-331.  (RZhF,  o/75, 
#hZh979)J. 


Model  For  Focusing  an  Acoustic  Wave  (abst ract ) 

An  approximate  model  for  the  diffraction  structure  of  a focusei 
acoustic  field  in  its  focal  plane  is  offered.  The  treatment  is  mainlv 
simplified  b\  accounting  for  nonlinearity  and  diffraction  separately,  even 
though  their  effects  occur  simultaneously;  the  resulting  tppr« -xin.atmn  i 
a reasonably  accurate  description  of  the  space-time  charai  teristi*  s f ' • <• 
focused  field.  Several  variants  are  treated,  including  subsonic  and  supers"- d< 
excitation.  The  authors  note  that  neglecting  nonlinearity  is  actually  <nl\ 
justifiable  at  sufficiently  high  sonic  frequencies,  e.  g.  10  MHz  in  water. 

A numerical  example  is  given  to  illustrate  optimum  conditions 
for  the  co  nbined  nonlinear  and  diffraction  effects.  This  shows  that  for 


5 


excitation  at  1.  5 MHz  in  water,  maximum  gains  will  attain  8 kw/cm*' 
at  the  focus,  which  is  half  again  as  much  as  the  value  obtained  without 
accounting  for  nonlinearity,  but  still  below  cavitation  threshold. 
[Ostrovskiy , L.  A.,  and  A.  M.  Sutin.  Focusing  finite -amplitude  acoustii 
waves.  DANSSSR,  v.  221,  no.  n,  1975,  1300-1303). 


I 


Recent  Publications 


Ayzinov,  M.  M.,  and  A.  M.  Ray rashevskiy . Radiotekhnika 
i radionavigatsionnyye  pribory.  Uchebnik.  (Radio -frequency  techniques 
and  radio -navigational  instruments.  Textbook).  Moskva,  Transport, 

1975,  431  p,  (LC-VKP)  

Druzin,  Ya,  V,,  and  S.  E.  Koganer.  Televizionnyyc 
sistemy  otobrazheniya  informatsii.  (Television  data-di splay  systems). 
Leningrad,  Energiya,  1975,  78  p.  (LC-VKP) 

Elektronnyye  characteristiki  i elektron-fononnyye 
vzaimodeyst\  iya  sverkhprovodyashchikh  metallov  i splavov.  (Electron 
character istics  and  electron -phonon  interactions  of  superconducting 
metals  and  alloys).  Fizicheskiy  institnt  im.  P.  N.  Lebedeva.  Tr,:,i y f 
no.  82.  Moskva,  Nauka,  1975,  102  p.  (LC-VKP) 

Fedotov,  Ya.  A.  Poluprovodnikovaya  elektronika,  god 
2001  ->'•  (Semiconductor  electronics  in  the  year  2001).  Moskva,  Sov.  radio 
1975,  102  p.  (LC-VKP)  

Corn,  L.  S. , and  I).  I.  Khazanov.  Izbi ratel'nyye  radiometri 
(Selective  radiometers).  Moskva,  Atomizdat,  1975,  373  p.  (LC-VKP) 


Issledovanyye  elektricheskikh  silovykh  impuJ’snykh  sistem. 
Sbornik  nauchnykh  trudov.  (Investigation  of  electrical  pulsed  power  systems. 
Collection  of  scientific  papers).  Novosibirsk,  Institut  gornogo  dela,  1974, 

143  p.  <LC- VKP) 


Kalinina,  L.  S.  Kachestvennyv  analiz  polimerov. 
(Qualitative  analysis  of  polymers'.  Moskva,  Khimiya,  1975,  24 


p.  ( I \ K I ’ 


Kaminskiy,  o.  S.  Ustroystiv  obrahotki  signalov  na 
ul'trazvnkovyh  poverkhnostnykh  volnakh.  (Device  for  processing  ultrasonic 
surface-wave  signals).  Moskva,  Sov.  radio,  1975,  17'.  p.  (LC-VKP) 

Met rologicheskiye  voprosy  radiofiziki.  Sbornik  stato\. 

(Met rological  problems  of  radiophysics ).  Meteorologicheskive  instituty 
SSSR . Trudy,  no.  158(218).  Leningrad,  VNILM,  1974,  154  p.  fl.C-YI-  p, 


Nov-yye  metody  issledovaniya  polimerov.  Sbornik  statey. 

(New  methods  in  polymer  research.  Collection  of  articles).  Kiyov 
Nauk.  dumka,  1975,  19°  d.  (LC-VKP)  — 1 

Oleynik,  E.  F.  , A.  L.  Ruchachenko,  and  Ye.  V.  A i :ri  • 
Spectroskopicheskiye  metody  issledovaniya  polimerov.  (Spect rose  opic 
methods  of  polymer  research).  Moskva,  Znaniye,  V>75.  \,3  p.  (l.r‘-  \ i | 

Orlova,  ^ e.  ^u.,  et  al.  Oktogen  - termostoykoye 
vzry vchatoy e veshchestov.  (Octogene  - a heat-resistant  explosive).  Mosk\  . 
Nedra,  lr>75,  125  p.  (LC-VKP)  


Protsessy  rosta  i sinteza  poluprovodnikovykh  kristallov 
i plcnok.  Materialy  simpoziuma.  (Growth  and  synthesis  processes  of 
semiconductor  crystals  and  films.  Proceedings  of  symposium). 
Novosibirsk,  Nauka,  Sib.  otdeleniye,  1975.  (LC-VKP) 

Rubinchik,  L.  Ye.  Elektropechi  s nagrevatelyami  i/. 
karbida  kremniya.  (Electrical  furnaces  with  silicon  carbide  heaters). 
Moskva,  Energiya,  1975,  94  p.  (LC-VKP) 

Tekhnolog-'  <s  stroitel'nov  lerciruiki  i iskustvonnykh 
poristykh  zapolniteley.  Suornik  statey.  (Technology  of  structural  ceramic 
and  artificial  porous  fillers.  Collection  of  articles).  Gosudar  stvenny 
VNII  stroitel'nykh  materialov  i konstruktsiy,  VNllSTROM.  Sbornik 
trudov,  no.  29(57).  Moskva,  1974,  159  p.  (LC-VKP) 


H 


SOURCE  IDENTIFICATION 


IVliZ  Radiofiz 

Izvestiya  vysshikh  uchobnykh  zavcdcniy 
Radiofizika 

RZh  Elektr 

- 

Referativnyy  zhurnal.  Eleklronika  i ye 
primencniyc 

OiS 

- 

Optika  i spoktroskopiya 

RZhRadiot 

- 

Referativnyy  zhurnal.  Radiotokhnika 

ZhTF  P 

- 

Pis'ma  v Zhurnal  tekhnichoskey  fiziki 

ZhTF 

- 

Zhurnal  tekhnichoskoy  fiziki 

ZhETF  P 

- 

Pis'ma  v Zhurnal  ekspcrimental ' noy  i 
teoreticheskoy  fiziki 

R ZhElektrotekh 

- 

Referativnyy  zhurnal.  Elcktrotckhnika 

RZhF 

- 

Referativnyy  zhurnal.  Fizika 

DAN  SSSR 

- 

Akademiya  nauk  SSSR.  Doklady 

<) 


