AD-A218  939 


OTIS  f;l:  copy 


A  CONNECTIONIST/CONTROL 
*  ARCHITECTURE  FOR  WORKING 
MEMORY  AND  WORKLOAD: 

WHY  WORKING  MEMORY  IS  NOT  7+  /-2 

Technical  Report  AIP  -  26 

Mark  Detweiler  &  Walter  Schneider 

Learning  Research  and  Development  Center 
Univerity  of  Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh,  PA  15260 


The  Artificial  Intelligence 
and  Psychology  Project 


Departments  of 

Computer  Science  and  Psychology 

Carnegie  Mellon  University 


DT1C 


ELECTE 
MAR  U 1930 1 


Learning  Research  and  Development  Center1 
University  of  Pittsburgh 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 

qO  03  12  033 


(3 


A  CONNECTIONIST/CONTROL 
ARCHITECTURE  FOR  WORKING 
MEMORY  AND  WORKLOAD: 

WHY  WORKING  MEMORY  IS  NOT  7+  1-2 

Technical  Report  AIP  -  26 

Mark  Detweiier  &  Walter  Schneider 

Learning  Research  and  Development  Center 
Univerity  of  Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh,  PA  15260 


29  September  1987 


This  research  was  supported  by  the  Computer  Sciences  Division,  Office  of  Naval  Research 
and  DARPA  under  Contract  Numbers  N00014-86-K-0678  and  by  ONR,  Personnel  and 
Training  Research  Programs,  Psychological  Sciences  Division  Contract  Number  N0014-86- 
K-0107;  and  by  the  Army  Research  Institute,  under  Contract  No.  MDA903-86-C-0149. 
Reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  is  permitted  for  purposes  of  the  United  States 
Government.  Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


$ 


DTIC 

ELECTE 
MAR  14 1990 

B 


irmTTT.T  1 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


lb  RESTRICTIVE  MARKING 


Unclassified 

2*.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  AUTHORITY 

2b.  DECLASSIFICATION  /  OOWNGRAOING  SCHEDULE 

4  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  REPORT  NUMBER(S) 

AIP  26 

6*  NAME  OF  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 

6b.  OFFICE  SYMBOL 

Carnegie-Mellon  University 

(It  toeiktble) 

Sc  AOORESS  (Oty.  State,  end  ZIP  Code) 

Department  of  Psychology 

Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania  15zl3 

8a.  NAME  OF  FONOING/  SPONSORING 

Bb  OFFICE  SYMBOL 

ORGANIZATION 

(If  eoohcebte) 

Same  as  Monitoring  Organizatioc 

3  DISTRIBUTION  /  AVAILAIIUTY  OR  REPORT 

Approved  for  public  release; 
Distribution  unlimited 


S  MONITORING  ORGANIZATION  REPORT  NUMBER(S) 


7*  NAME  OR  MONITORING  ORGANIZATION 

Computer  Sciences  Division 

Office  of  Naval  Research  (Code  1133) 


7b  AOORESS  (City,  State.  end  //A  Cod*) 

300  N.  Quincy  Street 

Arlington,  Virginia  22^.17-5000 


9  PROCUREMENT  INSTRUMENT  IDENTIFICATION  NUMBER 

N00014-86- K.-G678 


10  SOURCE  OR  FUNOiNG  NUMBERS 


PROGRAM 
ELEMENT  NO 


PROJECT 

TASK 

NO 

NO 

S/A 

S/A 

3c.  ADDRESS  (Cry,  Stett.end  ZIP  Code) 


ii  Title  (Include  Security  Cltssificetion) 

A  Connectionist/Control  Architecture  for  Working  Memory  and  Workload:  Why  Working 
Memory  is  Not  7+  / -2 


'2  personal  authoR(S) 

M.  Detweiler  5  W.  Schneider 


13a  type  or  report 

Technical 


i6  supplementary  notation 


work  UNIT 
ACCESSION  NO 


13b  TIME  COVEREO  ,  lU  OATE  OR  REPORT  Yttr.  Month,  Oty)  hs  PAGE  COUNT 

prom  ooSeptluro 91 Septl^  87  September  29  |  5 


COSATi  COOES 


GROUP  |  SUBGROUP 


'8  SuSjECT  TERMS  ( Continut  on  r event  it  neceuery  end  identify  by  biock  number) 

Artificial  Intelligence,  connect ionism ,  cognitive 
pschyology,  working  memory,  long-term  memory, 


’9  ABSTRACT  Continue  on  revent  if  neceuery  end  identify  by  biock  number) 


y A  runnable  simulation  architecture  for  working  memory  isdescribed  that  provides  an  alternative  to  existing 
models  of  working  memory^.gTToTAtlMson  and  Shrffrin  (1968)  and  Baddeiey  (1986)*  It  is  used  to  interpret  a 
variety  of  phenomena,  including  multiple  resources,  workload,  chunking,  sequential  output,  skilled  and 
episodic  memories,  and  stages  of  skill  acquisition.  The  architecture  is  based  on  a  set  of  modules  organized 
into  regions  which  communicate  with  each  other  on  an  innerloop  of  processing.  A  new  feature  of  this 
architecture  is  a  proposed  context-storage  module  that  temporarily  stores  context  information  in  fast  changing 
connection  weights.  This  enables  the  system  to  expand  effective  working  memory  beyond  the  traditional  7412 
items.  The  context  storage  system  is  able  to  reload  modules  after  short-term  information  decays  or  is 
displaced;  in  addition,  it  provides  a  means  of  achieving  stable,  robust  processing  under  conditions  of  high 
workload.  if 


20  DISTRIBUTION/ AVAILABILITY  CE  ABSTRACT 
□  UNCLASSiE'60/UNLIMi  I  EQ  QQ  SAME  AS  RPT 


22*  NAME  OR  RESPONSIBLE  NOiviOUAl 

Dr.  Alan  L.  Meyrowitz 


□  0"C  V.SERS 


2'  ABSTRACT  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 


22b  telephone  (Include  Art*  Code) 

(202)  696-4302 


SYMBOL 


33  APR  edition  mtr  be  used  until  exhausted 
All  other  editiont  ere  ooiotete 


SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  this  PAGE 

Unclassified 


proceedings  Qf  the  Human  Factors  Society,  1987 


A  Connectionint/ Control  Architecture  For  Working  Memory 
and  Workload:  Why  Working  Memory  It  Not  7  +/-  2 
Mark  Detweiler  St  Walter  Schneider 

Learning  Research  and  Development  Center 
University  cf  Pittsburgh 
3939  O'Hara  St. 

|  Pittsburgh,  PA  15290 

-  \  Abatraet 

i 

■  A  runnable  simulation  architecture  for  working  memory  Is  described  that  provides  as 

alternative  to  existing  models  of  working  memory,  e.g.,  of  Atkinson  St  Sblffrln  (19M)  and 
Baddeley  (1980).  ft  Is  used  to  Interpret  a  variety  of  phenomena.  Including  multiple  resources, 
workload,  chunking,  sequential  output,  skilled  and  episodic  memories,  and  stages  of  skill 
acquisition.  The  architecture  is  based  on  a  set  of  modules  organised  Into  regions  which 
communicate  with  each  other  on  an  Innerloop  of  processing.  A  new  feature  of  thb  architecture  is 
a  proposed  context-storage  module  that  temporarily  stores  context  information  In  fast  changing 
connection  weights.  This  enables  the  system  to  expand  effective  working  memory  beyond  the 
traditional  7  +/-  2  Items.  The  context  storage  system  Is  able  to  reload  modules  a  fur  short-term 
Information  decays  or  is  displaced;  in  addition,  it  provides  a  means  or  achieving  stable,  robust 
processing  under  conditions  of  high  workload. 


More  than  30  years  ago  Miller  (19S0)  described  bis 
persecution  by  an  InUger  and  proposed  that  the  span  of 
Immediate  memory  could  be  best  understood  with 
respect  to  the  "magic  number  seven,  plus  or  minus 
two".  In  the  inurvening  years,  however,  both  Miller’s 
characterisation,  as  well  as  the  modal  model  of  short¬ 
term  memory  (e.g..  Waugh  A  Norman,  1905;  A 
Atkinson  A  Shlffrin.  1908.  1971)  have  proven  to  be 
Inadequau  models  (ef.  Crowder.  1989).  For  */•-»,  e. 
short-term  memory  can  be  both  much  smai.ci  u.  r 
larger  than  7  +/-  2.  e.g..  being  aa  small  aa  sise  2  in  ■ 
digit  cancelling  tasks  and  as  large  as  80+  digits  in  a 
spaa  task  (Chase  A  Ericsson.  1982).  Furthermore, 
Baddeley  and  HlUh  (1974)  provide  convincing  evidence 
that  short- term  memory  Is  much  more  complex  and 
differentiated  than  previously  supposed.  In  contrast  to 
the  unitary-  and  multiple-system  theories  of  the  lau 
1900s  and  early  1970s.  they  proposed  the  Idea  of  a 
working  memory  system  comprising  separable,  yet 
IhUractlng  subsysums.  Since  the  publication  of  this 
classic  paper,  the  concept  of  a  working  memory  sysum 
has  gained  even  treater  support  (see  Baddeley,  1980). 

The  kinds  of  techniques  that  Baddeley  and  Hitch 
adopted  required  Ss  to  retain  one  or  more  Items  In 
short-term  store  while  concurrently  performing 
reasoning,  language  comprehension  and  learning  tasks. 
According  to  the  modal  model,  the  concurrent  memory 
loads  should  have  occupied  some  of  the  7  +/-  2  slots, 
and  thus  have  adversely  affected  Ss’  performance. 
Although  bolding  six  items  did  result  in  some  degree  of 
decrement  on  reasoning,  eg.,  showing  a  3%  to  14% 
increase  in  errors  and  a  44%  slowing  of  the  response,  Ss 


could  still  perform  the  task,  la  addition,  they  found  no  | 
effect  on  performance  when  only  one  or  three  Items  i 
were  preloaded.  Hataao  and  Osawa  (1983)  found  a  1 
similar  lack  of  Interference  In  the  area  of  abacus  i 
calculation.  When  abacus  experts  were  required  to  I 
briefly  rehearse  a  list  of  fruit  names  prior  to  the  onset 
of  the  digit  stream  to  be  calculated,  they  showed  only  a  . 
slight  drop  in  tbelr  digit  spans.  These  results  provide  1 
strong  support  for  the  idea  that  multiple  short-term  | 
memory  stores  exbt  and  that  when  material  b  stored  In  i 
non-competing  buffer-llke  memories,  working  memory 
capacity  caa  be  much  larger  than  7  +/-  2. 

Despite  the  upsurge  In  Interest  In  describing  short¬ 
term  memory  as  a  working  memory  system,  little 
progress  has  been  made  at  illustrating  bow  such  a 
sysum  might  function  within  the  conuxt  of  a  working  ! 
simulation  model.  In  what  follows  we  briefly  describe 
one  architecture  from  a  class  of  architectures  which 
moves  beyond  box  model  descriptions  snd  embodies  a 
working  simulation  model  capable  of  accounting  for  a 
range  of  working  memory  phenomena.  A  more  detailed 
description  can  be  found  In  Schneider  snd  Detweiler 
(1987). 

A  Connectioniat/Control  Architecture 
Overview 

The  proposed  architecture  offers  a  mesas  for 
representing  a  class  of  models  of  working  memory  sod 
workload.  It  Includes  several  different  kinds  or 
processing  elements  which  result  in  mechanisms  capable 
or  achieving  stable  information  proc-ssing  of  real-world 


■I,::  )ii  ' refers  a 

iirrnul  t-'t'CCSuK'.-U 


task  components.  U  also  provides  a  five-phase  account  I 
of  skill  acquisition  that  is  both  gradual  and  continuous  I 
(see  Schneider  A  Detweller,  1887).  Before  outlining  the  I 
three  primary  levels  of  detail,  we  briefly  mention  five  i 
assumptions  which  serve  to  constrain  the  architecture.  I 
First,  we  assume  that  processing  occurs  in  networks  of 
neural-like  units  organised  Into  modules,  sets  of  which 
In  turn  are  organised  Into  levels  and  regions.  The 
regions,  e.g.,  visual,  speech,  motor,  etc.  communicate 
with  one  another  on  an  innerloop  of  connections. 
Second,  we  assume  these  modules  process  a  restricted 
class  of  inputs,  exhibiting  local  specialisation  of 
function.  Third,  we  assume  that  the  connection  weights 
among  the  neural-llke  units  store  Knowledge.  Changes 
In  knowledge  due  to  learning  are  represented  by  the 
strength  of  the  connections  among  units,  or  by  the 
magnitudes  of  their  weights.  Fourth,  we  assume  that 
connection  weights  may  operate  using  a  variety  of  rate 
constants.  These  constants  determine  how  quickly  the 
connections  change  as  a  function  of  Intervening  learning 
and  length  or  the  retention  Iterval.  Finally,  we  assume 
Information  transferred  within  and  between  processing 
regions  Is  modulated  by  a  control  processing  system  i 
which  controls  information  maintained  In  and  output  I 
from  the  modules.  This  system  Is  a  variation  of  the  i 
CAP1  system  used  to  account  for  automatic  and  i 
controlled  processing  (see  Shlffrin  A  Schneider.  1977;  A  j 
Schneider  A  Mumme.  in  preparation).  We  next  describe  i 
the  architecture  from  three  levels  of  scale.  1 

i 

There  are  three  levels  of  scale  at  which  to 
conceptualise  and  simulate  the  model.  The  first  scale 
level,  the  micro-level  structure,  represents  a  neural- 
llke  network  of  processing  units  capable  of  producing 
associative  processing  and  attenlional  phenomena. 
Information  is  transferred  between  modules  via  a 
message  vector  connecting  output  from  one  module  as 
Input  to  another  module.  The  output,  i.e..  Information 
flow,  from  a  module  Is  controlled  by  an  attenuation  unit 
within  the  module  (see  Schneider  A  Mumme,  1987;  A 
Schneider  A  Detweller,  1987  for  details).  The  second 
scale  level,  the  macro-level  struct  are,  represents  i 
Interactions  among  a  set  of  modules.  Modules  are  i[ 
organised  In  terms  of  level*  and  regions  of  processing.  ,! 
Levels  represent  successive  processing  stages,  e.g..  the  ' 
auditory  module  consists  of,  at  minimum,  stages 
corresponding  to  phonemes,  syllables,  and  words.  The 
third  scale  level,  the  system-level  structure, 
represents  interactions  among  regions  of  modules  (see 
Figure  1).  Each  region  involves  a  series  of  levels  of 
modules  and  corresponding  control  structures.  At  the 
system  level  there  are  two  types  of  processing  analogous 
to  those  at  the  macro  level.  The  first  Is  a  centra/ 
control  structure  which  receives  activity  reports  from 
all  of  the  regions  and  Is  responsible  for  modulating 
message  transmissions  on  what  we  refer  to  as  the 
innerloop  of  processing.  The  second,  the  innerloop,  ! 
represents  the  communication  links  among  modules  | 
from  regions  possessing  connections  to  one  another. 


Figure  1.  System-level  model  description.  This 
diagram  represents  a  top-down  view  of  the  processing 
regions  found  within  the  proposed  architecture.  Each 
region  is  divided  Into  a  series  of  bars  to  reflect  a  series 
of  processing  levels.  A  region's  rirat  or  last  level  (last 
level  of  Input  regions  and  first  level  for  output  regions) 

Is  assumed  to  input  to  the  Innerloop  of  connections 
among  regions.  Modules  on  the  Innerloop  have  separate 
message  vectors  (pathways)  to  each  of  the  other  modules 
they  connect  to.  All  or  the  lines  in  Figure  1  represent 
message  vectors.  The  context  module  transmits  a 
message  vector  to  all  of  the  other  modules  on  the  : 
Innerloop.  The  context  module's  output  Is  highlighted  | 
by  a  thick  line  to  Illustrate  this  connection  pattern. 


The  central  control  structure  receives  control  signals  ! 
from  each  region  and  routes  the  signab  among  the  | 
various  regions.  For  example,  if  the  motor  region  ; 
requests  an  Input,  the  central  control  structure  may  | 
route  the  request  to  the  speech  transmitting  module. 

Here  It  b  important  to  recognise  that  messages  . 
must  not  all  pass  through  a  central  executive;  Instead.  . 
regions  can  communicate  with  other  regions  directly  (see 
Figure  1).  To  minimize  such  Interference  from 
concurrent  messages,  a  central  control  structure  must 
sequence  the  region-based  transmissions.  This  type  of  I 
serlality  can  result  In  messages  being  delayed  or  omitted  . 
entirely,  thus  mlmlclng  many  of  the  Item  and  order 
dropout  phenomena  seen  in  short-term  memory 
literature  and  uoder  conditions  of  high  workload. 

To  model  the  robustness  of  human  processing  aod  i 
match  some  of  the  learning  data,  the  conneciionist/ 
control  architecture  embodies  the  notion  of  context  j 
storage.  In  a  system  In  which  considerable  Information  | 
must  be  maintained  In  working  memory,  context  serves 
a  special  function.  In  this  architecture  a  context-storage 
mechanism  is  proposed  as  a  means  of  associating  the 


•*  i:;ur:  -ti.viy 


contents  of  mes3i(i3  on  the  Innerloop  to  tlic  temporal  | 
context  in  which  they  occur.  In  short,  the  context 
storage  system  is  able  to  reload  modules  after  short¬ 
term  information  has  decayed  or  been  displaced.  It  is  | 
also  the  mechanism  responsible  for  maintaining  stable, 
robust  processing  under  conditions  of  blah  workload. 
To  Illustrate  how  context  storage  might  work  we  have 
labeled  one  of  the  regions  on  the  innerloop  as  context 
(see  Figure  1).  Context  provides  an  association  between 
the  current  time  and  what  messages  were  transmitted 
by  other  modules  of  the  Innerloop.  If  a  buffer  is  flushed 
by  processing  some  Interruption,  the  subject  can 
activate  the  previous  time  context  and  revoke  the 
previous  contents  of  the  buffer.  If  multiple  traces  are 
associated  to  the  same  context.  Interference  occurs. 
Note,  since  context  has  connections  to  many  modules 
(see  Figure  1),  It  can  provide  a  very  large  working 
memory. 

Interpretations  of  Buffering 

The  connectkintat/control  architecture  can  be  used 
to  account  for  a  number  of  phenomena  found  in  the 
working  memory  and  workload  literatures.  The  first  set 
of  phenomena  concern  buffering.  Three  major 
experimental  effects  are  often  cited  as  supporting  bufrer 
models,  namely,  recency,  decay,  and  span  effects.  The 
recency  effect  involves  better  recall  of  the  last  few  items 
from  a  list  (see  Postman  a  Phillips,  IMS).  The  decay 
effect  is  the  exponential  dropoff  In  probability  of  recall 
(Brown.  1958;  Peterson  &  Peterson.  1959).  The  third 
phenomenon  Is  a  span  effect  found  In  digit  and  word 
span.  Buffers  are  reflected  In  the  conneetionlst/control 
architecture  In  the  regional  controllers  and  provide  for 
the  possibility  of  having  them  In  multiple  leveb  within 
the  regional  controllers  as  well.  In  order  to  sequentially 
Input  and  output  information  in  a  buffering  scheme 
requires  techniques  for  clearing  a  module,  maintaining  a 
code  within  a  module,  and  outputting  a  code  from  a 
module. 

Working  Memory  Capacity 

One  of  the  misconceptions  promoted  by  Miller’s  ' 
(194b)  magic  number  seven  and  the  modal  models  of 
short-term  memory,  e  g.,  Waugh  a  Norman  (1904)  and 
Atkinson  a  Shlffrln  (1908,  1971)  is  that  short-term  i 
memory  capacity  is  limited  to  just  a  few  items. 
Recently  Card.  Moran,  and  Newell  (1983)  argued  that 
systera/loterface  designers  need  to  be  able  to  analyte 
prospective  tasks  and  to  predict  human  performance  on 
those  tasks.  They  proposed  a  simplified  human 
information  processing  model  consisting  of  a  set  of  goals, 
a  set  of  operators,  a  set  of  methods  for  achieving  goals, 
and  a  set  of  selection  rules  for  choosing  among 
competing  methods  and  goals-commonly  referred  to  as 
the  GOMS  model.  Although  the  GOMS  model  is  more 
sophisticated  than  variations  of  the  modal  model,  e  g., 
replacing  separate  memory  slots  with  slots  that  are 
subsiots  of  each  other,  it  fails  to  lake  into  account  the 


differential  Impact  of  different  memory  stores, 
rehearsing  Items  early,  and  using  context.  In  efrect,  the 
GOMS  model  offers  a  conservative  view  of  working 
memory  not  well  suited  for  making  realistic  predictions 
about  a  user’s  short-term  memory  eapabllltea, 
particularly  when  multiple  memory  stores  are  used 
concurrently. 

To  make  informed  predictions  about  working 
memory  limitations  it  is  Important  -o  begin  to  consider 
what  often  occurs  In  real-world  tasks.  For  examoie.  In 
electronic  troubleshooting  tasks  a  technician  may  be 
temporarily  interrupted  while  tracing  a. fault,  yet  within 
a  few  seconds  of  resuming  the  task  continue  as  if  it  had 
never  occurred.  An  air-traffic  controller  many  also  be 
temporarily  Interrrupted  yet  gracefully  resume  the  task. 

In  general,  as  an  operator  b  taxed  with  an  ever  greater 
mental  load,  hb/her  performance  tends  to  become 
slower  and  somewhat  more  susceptible  to  errors,  but 
there  b  no  "red  line*  beyond  which  catastroplc  failure 
b  Inevitable. 

Several  results  suggest  that  Miller’s  magic  number 
should  be  called  into  question.  Klapp,  Marshburn,  and  i 
Lester  (1983)  have  clearly  demonstrated  that  when 
subjects  are  allowed  to  briefly  rehearse  letters  In  a  spaa 
task  the  resultant  buffering  does  not  interfere  with  their 
performance  at  Judging  the  correctness  of  greater- 
than/less-than  propositions  (experiment  #6).  nor  docs  it 
greatly  Interfere  with  performance  on  a  variation  of  a 
Sternberg  scanning  task  (experiment  #7).  Klapp  and 
Pbillpoff  (1983)  also  demonstated  that  it  b  possible  to 
store  and  retain  letters  and  concurrently  process  digits 
In  a  missing-digits  task.  Both  of  these  sets  of  results 
run  counter  to  the  traditional  view  of  short-term 
memory.  Other  experiments  offer  additional  support 
Tor  the  idea  of  multiple  buffers  that  can  be  strategically 
utilised  to  Increase  storage  capacity  without  serious 
performance  degradation  In  motor  memory  (Reis berg. 
Rappaport  if  O’Shaughnesy.  1984)  and  auditory  visual 
digit  span  (Frick.  1984). 

The  results  above  are  expected  by,  and  can  be 
accommodated  within,  the  present  architecture.  In  thb 
model  we  assume  many  different  buffers  exbt  and 
suggest  that  the  actual  number  available  at  a  given  level 
of  processing  will  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  modules  “ 
themselves.  For  example,  auditory  modules  many  be  |  - 

organised  sequentially  and  visual  modules  spatially.  We  Bl 
assume  these  buffers  are  limited  in  site  and  that  the  i  j— j 

local  control  region  can  manage  only  a  very  small  p- . 

number  of  modules.  The  key  feature  of  having  may  ' 

different  buffers  segmented  Into  different  processing  — — 
classes  Is  that  by  using  several  different  classes  — — « 
simultaneously  it  Is  possible  to  enlarge  tbe  effective  j 

workspace  of  working  memory  well  beyond  7  +/-  2.  ■ 

Moreover,  the  proposed  context  storage  system  provides  _ , 

an  additional  mechanism  that  can  greatly  increase  ihe  ,<J®3 
site  of  working  memory  storage.  To  appreciate  ihe  ■  *  * 


, -pedal 


magnitude  of  this  Increase.  Imagine  one  has  R  regions  [ 
and  N  modules  connecting  to  tbe  Innerloop  from  each  j 
re ilon.  Tbe  context  vector  could  then  be  associated  to  i 
(R-I)N  modules.  If  there  are  20  re(tons  in  tbe  Innerloop  | 
and  30  modules  within  each  retion  that  connect  directly 
to  the  Inneraioop.  then  a  single  context  vector  and  Its  I 
association  matrices  could  store  $70  codes,  l.c.,  one  per  i 
module.  Such  a  system  offers  short-term  storage  i 
capacity  far  exceeding  7  +/-  2  Items. 

Mental  Workload 

The  architecture  presented  here  Is  well  suited  for 
Investigating  a  number  of  Important  phenomena 
associated  with  the  study  of  menial  workload.  It  Is  able 
to  simulate  the  performance  of  multiple  concurrent 
tasks  explicitly.  First,  as  Illustrated  In  Figure  1.  the  | 
system  encompasses  a  variety  of  resources  which  can  be  > 
variously  allocated  to  meet  demands  imposed  by 
numerous  task  combinations  (cf.  Wickens.  1080).  We 
assume  these  resources  are  limited  such  that  when  task 
demands  exceed  resource  capacity,  processing  will  be 
either  delayed  or  errors  will  occur.  Given  this  view  of 
multiple  resources.  the  connectlonlst/coatrol 
architecture  Is  consistent  with  views  such  as  Wleken’s 
(1080)  that  resources  are  differentiated  by  modality. 
These  views  divide,  however,  with  respect  to  the  nature 
of  resource  limitations.  In  addition  to  the  resource- 
specific  competition  of  multiple  resource  theory,  this 
architecture  accentuates  the  fundamental  role  played  by  ' 
competition  for  the  central  control  structure. 

) 

There  are  at  least  five  different  strategies  that  can 
be  Invoked  to  perform  concurrent  tasks  (see  Schneider 
4k  Detweller  (1087)  for  details).  Strategy  41:  Buffer 
and  delay  messages  for  one  of  the  tasks  until  the  other 
task  haa  been  completed.  Sirafcyy  #&-  Redistribute 
task  components  Into  low-use  buffers.  Strategy  43: 
Use  context  storage  to  temporarily  associate  Information 
to  the  present  context  and  utilise  it  to  load  modules. 
Attending  to  context  allows  for  the  simultaneous  loading  | 
of  modules  In  numerous  regions  and  Initiating  numerous 
concurrent  processes.  Strategy  Build  automstle 
processes  to  reduee  the  processing  load  on  tbe  central 
and  regional  controllers.  Strategy  #5:  Reduce  message 
interference  of  concurrently  transmitted  messages. 
Interference  can  be  reduced  by  decreasing  the  amount  of 
time  messages  spend  on  the  innerloop  and  by 
strengthening  region-to-region  connections  on  the 
Innerloop. 

CoaduaioD 

Human  working  memory  Is  both  very  limited  (e  g., 
t*o  digits  in  digit  cancelling)  and  large  (80  digits  skilled 
memory),  and  this  range  Is  not  interpretable  within  the 
modal  buffer  mgjnor^  models, (e  g.,  Atkinson  A  Sblffrln, 
1988).  ■'•The  new  eooneeTlonist/control  architecture 
predicts  the  very  limited  working  memory  effects  are 
the  result  of  control  processing  limitations  of  the 
management  of  message  transmission  on  an  innerloop  of 


processing  or  operating  In  a  single  region.  In  contrast.  | 
context  storage  provides  a  very  luge  working  memory  : 
as  long  aa  there  are  few  associations  of  a  given  region  to  > 
a  given  context. 

Acknowledgement 

This  research  was  sponsored  by  the  Army 
Research  Institute,  under  Contract  No.  MDA903-88- 
C-OI49  and  Personnel  and  Training  Research  Protrams. 
Psychologies!  Sciences  Division.  Office  of  Naval  1 
Research  under  Contract  Nos.  N-0014-80-K-0107  and  . 
N -0001 4-88- K-0878. 


References 

Atkinson.  R.C..  k  ShlffHn.  R.M.  (1088).  Human 
memory:  A  proposed  system  and  its  control 
process.  In  K.W.  Spence  A  J.T.  Spence  (Eds.). 
The  psychology  of  learning  and  motivation.  Vol.  2. 
New  York:  Academic  Press. 

Atkinson.  R.C..  A  Sblffrln.  R.M.  (1071).  The  control  of 
short-term  memory.  Scientific  American.  224, 
82-00. 

Baddeley,  A.D.  (1088).  Working  memory.  Oxford: 
Clarendon  Press. 

Baddeley.  A.D..  4k  Hitch.  G.  (1074).  Working  memory. 
In  G.H.  Bower  (Ed.).  The  psychology  of  learning 
and  motivation,  Vol.  8.  New  York:  Academic  I 

Press.  ”  j 

Brown,  i.  (1058).  Some  tests  of  the  decay  theory  of  j 
Immediate  memory.  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  l 
Experimental  Psychology.  io.  12-21.  ”*  j 

Card.  S.K.,  Moran.  T.P.,  4k  Newell.  A.  (1083).  The  i 
psychology  of  human-computer  Interaction.  I 

Hillsdale,  NJ:  Erlbaum.  • 

Chase,  W.G.,  4k  Ericsson,  K.A.  (1082).  Skill  and 
working  memory.  In  G.H.  Bower  (Ed.)  The 
psychology  of  learning  and  motivation.  Voi.  in. 
New  York:  Academic  Press. 

Crowder.  R.G.  (1982).  The  demise  of  short-term 
memory.  Acta  Psychologies,  50,  291-293. 

Frick,  R.W.  (1984).  Using  both  an  auditory  and  a 
visual  short-term  store  to  Increase  digit  span. 
Memory  A  Cognition,  S07-&14. 

Hatano,  G.,  A  Osawa.  K.  (1983).  Digit  memory  of 
grand  experts  in  abacus-derived  mental 
calculation.  Cognition,  15.  95-110. 


Klapp,  S.T.,  Marshburn.  E-A..  ft  P.T.  Lester  (1983).  I 
Short-term  memory  does  not  involve  the  'working 
memory*  of  Information  processing:  The  demise 
of  a  common  assumption.  Journal  of 
Experimental  Psychology  General.  112.  210-204. 

Klapp,  S.T.,  ft  Phllipoff,  A.  (1003).  Short-term  memory 
limits  in  performance.  In  A.T.  Pope  ft  L.D. 
Haugh  (Eds.)  Proceedings  of  the  human  factors 
society  27th  annual  meeting,  Santa  Monica.  CA: 
Human  Factors  Society. 

Miller,  G  A.  (1956).  The  magical  number  seven,  plus  or 
minus  two:  Some  limits  on  our  capacity  for 
processing  Information.  Psychological  Review,  63. 
81-07. 

Peterson.  L.R.,  ft  Peterson.  J.J.  (1050).  Short-term 
retention  of  Individual  verbal  Items.  Journal  of 
Experimental  Psychology,  58.  103-108. 

Postman.  L..  ft  Phillips,  L.W.  (1065).  Short-term 
retention  of  Individual  verbal  Items.  Journal  of 
Experimental  Psychology.  70„  473-478. 

Retsberg.  D..  Rappaport,  I.,  ft  O’Sbaughnessy, 
M.  (1084).  Limits  of  working  memory:  The  digit 
digit-span.  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology: 
Learning.  Memory,  and  Cognition.  10.  203-221. 

Schneider.  W,  ft  Detwetler,  M.  (1087).  A 
eonnectlonist/control  architecture  for  working 
memory.  In  G.H.  Bower  (Ed.)  The  psychology  of 
learning  and  motivation.  Vol.  2^.  New  York: 
Academic  Press. 

Schneider  W.,  ft  Mumme,  D.  (1987).  Attention, 
automatlclty  and  the  capturing  of  knowledge:  A 
two-level  cognitive  architecture.  Manuscript  for 
submission. 

Sblffrln,  R.M.,  ft  Schneider.  W.  (1077).  Controlled  and 
automatic  human  Information  processing.  II. 
Perceptual  learning,  automatic  attending  and  a 
general  theory.  Psychological  Review,  84,  127-190. 

Waugh,  N.C.,  ft  Norman.  D.A.  (1965).  Primary 
memory.  Psychological  Review.  72.  89-104. 

Wlckens.  C  D.  (1980).  The  structure  of  attentlonal 
resources.  In  R.  Nickerson  (Ed.).  Attention  and 
performance.  VIII.  Hillsdale,  NJ:  Erlbaum. 


