The -Han 
of 


••:•:• 


k 


A\jron 
Barrg^ 

Edward  A, 
Feigenbaum 


m 


VOLUME  2 


The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence 

Volumes  I  and  II  by  Avron  Barr  and  Edward  A.  Feigenbaum 
Volume  III  by  Paul  R.  Cohen  and  Edward  A.  Feigenbaum 


VOLUME  I 


I.  Introduction 

A.  Artificial  Intelligence 

B.  The  AI  Handbook 

C.  The  AI  literature 

II.  Search 

A.  Overview 

B.  Problem  representation 

1.  State-space  representation 

2.  Problem-reduction  representation 

3.  Game  trees 

C.  Search  methods 

1.  Blind  state-space  search 

2.  Blind  AND/OR  graph  search 

3.  Heuristic  state-space  search 

a.  Basic  concepts  in  heuristic  search 

b.  A* — Optimal  search  for  an  optimal  solution 

c.  Relaxing  the  optimality  requirement 

d.  Bidirectional  search 

4.  Heuristic  search  of  an  AND/OR  graph 

5.  Game  tree  search 

a.  Minimax  procedure 

b.  Alpha-beta  pruning 

c.  Heuristics  in  game  tree  search 

D.  Sample  search  programs 

1.  Logic  Theorist 

2.  General  Problem  Solver 

3.  Gelernter's  geometry  theorem-proving  machine 

4.  Symbolic  integration  programs 

5.  STRIPS 

6.  ABSTRIPS 

IDE.    Knowledge   Representation 

A.  Overview 

B.  Survey  of  representation  techniques 

C.  Representation  schemes 

1.  Logic 

2.  Procedural  representations 

3.  Semantic  networks 

4.  Production  systems 

5.  Direct  (analogical)  representations 

6.  Semantic  primitives 

7.  Frames  and  scripts 

IV.   Understanding   Natural   Language 

A.  Overview 

B.  Machine  translation 

C.  Grammars 

1.  Formal  grammars 

2.  Transformational  grammars 

3.  Systemic  grammar 

4.  Case  grammars 

D.  Parsing 

1.  Overview  of  parsing  techniques 

2.  Augmented  transition  networks 


3.  The  General  Syntactic  Processor 

E.  Text  generation 

F.  Natural  language  processing  systems 

1.  Early  natural  language  systems 

2.  Wilks's  machine  translation  system 

3.  LUNAR 

4.  SHRDLU 

5.  MARGIE 

6.  SAM  and  PAM 

7.  LIFER 

V.    Understanding   Spoken   Language 

A.  Overview 

B.  Systems  architecture 

C.  The  ARPA  SUR  projects 

1.  HEARSAY 

2.  HARPY 

3.  HWIM 

4.  The  SRI/SDC  speech  systems 


VOLUME     n 


VI.   Programming   Languages   for   AI   Research 

A.  Overview 

B.  LISP 

C.  AI  programming-language  features 

1.  Overview 

2.  Data  structures 

3.  Control  structures 

4.  Pattern  matching 

5.  Programming  environment 
Dependencies  and  assumptions 


D. 


VH.   Applications-oriented   AI  Research:    Science 

A.  Overview 

B.  TEIRESIAS 

C.  Applications  in  chemistry 

1.  Chemical  analysis 

2.  The  DENDRAL  programs 

a.  Heuristic  DENDRAL 

b.  CONGEN  and  its  extensions 

c.  Meta-DENDRAL 

3.  CRYSALIS 

4.  Applications  in  organic  synthesis 

D.  Other  scientific  applications 

1.  MACSYMA 

2.  The  SRI  Computer-based  Consultant 

3.  PROSPECTOR 

4.  Artificial  Intelligence  in  database  management 

VTH.   Applications-oriented  AI   Research:   Medicine 

A.  Overview 

B.  Medical  systems 

1.  MYCIN 

2.  CASNET 

3.  INTERNIST 


The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence 


The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence 


Volume  II 


Edited  by 

Avron  Barr 

and 

Edward  A.  Feigenbaum 

Department  of  Computer  Science 
Stanford  University 


HeurisTech  Press  William  Kaufmann,  Inc. 

Stanford,  California  Los  Altos,  California 


Library  of  Congress  Cataloging  in  Publication  Data: 

The  handbook  of  artificial  intelligence. 

Bibliography:  p.  381 
Includes  index. 

I.  Artificial  intelligence.      I.  Barr,  Avron,  1949 

II.  Feigenbaum,  F,dward  A. 

Q335.H36  001.53'5  80-28621 

ISBN  0-86576  004  7  (set) 
ISBN  0-86576  006  3  (Vol.  II) 


Copyright  ©  1982  by  William  Kaufmann,  Inc. 


All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  publication  may  be  reproduced, 
stored  in  a  retrieval  system,  or  trasmitted,  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  recording,  or  other- 
wise, without  the  prior  written  permission  of  the  publisher.  How- 
ever, this  work  may  be  reproduced  in  whole  or  in  part  for  the  official 
use  of  the  U.  S.  Government  on  the  condition  that  copyright  notice 
is  included  with  such  official  reproduction.  For  further  information, 
write  to:  Permissions,  William  Kaufmann,  Inc.,  95  First  Street, 
Los  Altos,  California  94022. 

10  9876543  2  1 

Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


To  Herbert  A.  Simon,  scholar  and  teacher, 
In  honor  of  his  sixty-fifth  birthday  and 
In  recognition  of  his  seminal  contributions 
to  the  scientific  study  of  thinking  and 
to  the  field  of  Artificial  Intelligence 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  II 


List  of  Contributors  /  ix 
Preface  /  xi 

VI.  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  /  1 

A.  Overview  /  3 

B.  LISP  /  15 

C.  AI  programming-language  features  /  30 

1.  Overview  /  30 

2.  Data  structures  /  34 

3.  Control  structures  /  45 

4.  Pattern  matching  /  58 

5.  Programming  environment  /  65 

D.  Dependencies  and  assumptions  /  72 

VII.  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  /  77 

A.  Overview  /  79 

B.  TEIRESIAS  /  87 

C.  Applications  in  chemistry  /  102 

1.  Chemical  analysis  /  102 

2.  The  DENDRAL  programs  /  106 

a.  Heuristic  DENDRAL  /  106 

b.  CONGEN  and  its  extensions  /111 

c.  Meta-DENDRAL  /  116 

3.  CRYSALIS  /  124 

4.  Applications  in  organic  synthesis  /  134 

D.  Other  scientific  applications  /  143 

1.  MACSYMA  /  143 

2.  The  SRI  Computer-based  Consultant  /  150 

3.  PROSPECTOR  /  155 

4.  Artificial  Intelligence  in  database  management  /  163 

VIII.  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  /  175 
A.  Overview  /  177 


vn 


viii  Contents 

B.  Medical  systems  /  184 

1.  MYCIN  /  184 

2.  CASNET  /  193 

3.  INTERNIST  /  197 

4.  Present  Illness  Program  /  202 

5.  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  /  206 

6.  IRIS  /  212 

7.  EXPERT  /  217 

EX.  Applications-oriented  AJ  Research:  Education  /  223 

A.  Overview  /  225 

B.  ICAI  systems  design  /  229 

C.  Intelligent  CAI  systems  /  236 

1.  SCHOLAR  /  236 

2.  WHY  /  242 

3.  SOPHIE  /  247 

4.  WEST  /  254 

5.  WUMPUS  /  261 

6.  GUIDON  /  267 

7.  BUGGY  /  279 

8.  EXCHECK  /  283 

D.  Other  applications  of  AI  to  education  /  291 

X.  Automatic  Programming  /  295 

A.  Overview  /  297 

B.  Methods  of  program  specification  /  306 

C.  Basic  approaches  /  312 

D.  Automatic  programming  systems  /  326 

1.  PSI  and  CHI  /  326 

2.  SAFE  /  336 

3.  The  Programmer's  Apprentice  /  343 

4.  PECOS  /  350 

5.  DEDALUS  /  355 

6.  Protosystem  I  /  364 

7.  NLPQ  /  370 

8.  LIBRA  /  375 

Bibliography  for  Volume  II  /  381 
Indexes  for  Volume  II  /  403 


LIST  OF  CONTRIBUTORS 


Non-Stanford  affiliations  indicated  if  known. 


Chapter  Editors 

Janice  Aikins  (Hewlett-Packard) 

James  S.  Bennett 

Victor  Ciesielski  (Rutgers  U) 

William  J.  Clancey 

Paul  R.  Cohen 

James  E.  Davidson 

Thomas  G.  Dietterich 


Bob  Elschlager  (Tymshare) 

Lawrence  Fagan 

Anne  v.d.L.  Gardner 

Takeo  Kanade  (CMU) 

Jorge  Phillips  (Kestrel) 

Steve  Tappel 

Stephen  Westfold  (Kestrel) 


Contributors 


Robert  Anderson  (Rand) 

Douglas  Appelt  (SRI) 

David  Arnold 

Michael  Ballantyne  (U  Texas) 

David  Barstow  (Schlumberger) 

Peter  Biesel  (Rutgers  U) 

Lee  Blaine  (Lockheed) 

W.  W.  Bledsoe  (U  Texas) 

David  A.  Bourne  (CMU) 

Rodney  Brooks  (MIT) 

Bruce  G.  Buchanan 

Richard  Chestek 

Kenneth  Clarkson 

Nancy  H.  Cornelius  (CMU) 

James  L.  Crowley  (CMU) 

Randall  Davis  (MIT) 

Gerard  Dechen 

Johan  de  Kleer  (Xerox) 

Jon  Doyle  (CMU) 

R.  Geoff  Dromey  (U  Wollongong) 

Richard  Duda  (Fairchild) 

Robert  S.  Engelmore  (Teknowledge) 

Ramez  El-Masri  (Honeywell) 

Susan  Epstein  (Rutgers  U) 

Robert  E.  Filman  (Hewlett-Packard) 

Fritz  Fisher  (Ramtek) 


Christian  Freksa  (Max  Plank,  Munich) 

Peter  Friedland 

Hiromichi  Fujisawa  (CMU) 

Richard  P.  Gabriel 

Michael  R.  Genesereth 

Neil  Goldman  (ISI) 

Ira  Goldstein  (Hewlett-Packard) 

George  Heidorn  (IBM) 

Martin  Herman  (CMU) 

Annette  Herskovits 

Douglas  Hofstadter  (Indiana  U) 

Elaine  Kant  (CMU) 

Fuminobu  Komura  (CMU) 

William  Laaser  (Xerox) 

Douglas  B.  Lenat 

William  J.  Long  (MIT) 

Robert  London 

Bruce  D.  Lucas  (CMU) 

Pamela  McCorduck 

Mark  L.  Miller  (Computer  Thought) 

Robert  C.  Moore  (SRI) 

Richard  Pattis 

Stanley  J.  Rosenschein  (SRI) 

Neil  C.  Rowe 

Gregory  R.  Ruth  (MIT) 

Daniel  Sagalowicz  (SRI) 


IX 


List  of  Contributors 


Contributors  (continued) 

Behrokh  Samadi  (UCLA) 
William  Scherlis  (CMU) 
Steven  A.  Shafer  (CMU) 
Andrew  Silverman 
David  R.  Smith  (CMU) 
Donald  Smith  (Rutgers  U) 
Phillip  Smith  (U  Waterloo) 
Reid  G.  Smith  (Schlumberger) 
William  R.  Swartout  (ISI) 


Steven  L.  Tanimoto  (U  Washington) 
Charles  E.  Thorpe  (CMU) 
William  van  Melle  (Xerox) 
Richard  J.  Waldinger  (SRI) 
Richard  C.  Waters  (MIT) 
Sholom  Weiss  (Rutgers  U) 
David  Wilkins  (SRI) 
Terry  Winograd 


Reviewers 


Harold  Abelson  (MIT) 

Saul  Amarel  (Rutgers  U) 

Robert  Balzer  (ISI) 

Harry  Barrow  (Fairchild) 

Thomas  Binford 

Daniel  Bobrow  (Xerox) 

John  Seely  Brown  (Xerox) 

Richard  Burton  (Xerox) 

Lewis  Creary 

Andrea  diSessa  (MIT) 

Daniel  Dolata  (UC  Santa  Cruz) 

Lee  Erman  (ISI) 

Adele  Goldberg  (Xerox) 

Cordell  Green  (Kestrel) 

Norman  Haas  (Symantec) 

Kenneth  Kahn  (MIT) 

Jonathan  J.  King  (Hewlett-Packard) 

Casimir  Kulikowski  (Rutgers  U) 

John  Kunz 

Brian  P.  McCune  (AI&DS) 

Jock  Mackinlav 


Ryszard  S.  Michalski  (U  Illinois) 

Donald  Michie  (U  Edinburgh) 

Thomas  M.  Mitchell  (Rutgers  U) 

D.  Jack  Mostow  (ISI) 

Nils  Nilsson  (SRI) 

Glen  Ouchi  (UC  Santa  Cruz) 

Ira  Pohl  (UC  Santa  Cruz) 

Arthur  L.  Samuel 

David  Shur 

Herbert  A.  Simon  (CMU) 

David  E.  Smith 

Dennis  H.  Smith  (Lederle) 

Mark  Stefik  (Xerox) 

Albert  L.  Stevens  (BBN) 

Allan  Terry 

Perry  W.  Thorndyke  (Perceptronics) 

Paul  E.  Utgoff  (Rutgers  U) 

Donald  Walker  (SRI) 

Harald  Wertz  (U  Paris) 

Keith  Wescourt  (Rand) 


Producti 


ion 


Max  Diaz 
David  Eppstein 
Lester  Ernest 
Marion  Hazen 
Janet  Feigenbaum 
David  Fuchs 
Jose  L.  Gonzalez 
Dianne  G.  Kanerva 
Jonni  M.  Kanerva 


Dikran  Karagueuzian 
Arthur  M.  Keller 
Barbara  R.  Laddaga 
Roy  Nordblom 
Thomas  C.  Rindfleisch 
Ellen  Smith 
Helen  Tognetti 
Christopher  Tucci 


PREFACE 


THE  PROJECT  to  write  the  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence  was  born  in 
the  mid-1970s,  at  a  low  ebb  in  the  fortunes  of  the  field.  AI,  in  our  view,  had 
made  remarkable  contributions  to  one  of  the  grandest  of  scientific  problems — 
the  nature  of  intelligence,  in  humans  and  in  artifacts.  Yet  it  had  failed 
to  communicate  its  concepts,  its  working  methods,  its  techniques,  and  its 
successes  to  the  broad  scientific  and  engineering  communities.  The  work 
remaining  to  be  done  was  almost  limitless,  but  the  number  of  practitioners 
was  few.  If  AI  were  to  succeed,  it  would  have  to  communicate  more  clearly 
and  widely  to  others  in  science  and  engineering.  So  we  thought,  and  thus 
were  we  motivated  to  assemble  and  edit  these  volumes. 

In  the  last  few  years,  we  have  seen  an  astonishing  change  in  the  percep- 
tion and  recognition  of  AI  as  a  science  and  as  a  technology.  Many  large 
industrial  firms  have  committed  millions  of  dollars  to  the  establishment  of 
AI  laboratories.  The  Japanese  have  even  committed  a  national  project,  the 
so-called  Fifth  Generation,  to  the  engineering  of  "knowledge  information 
processing  machines,"  that  is,  Al-oriented  hardware  and  software.  Newspaper, 
magazine,  and  broadcast  features  on  AI  are  common.  A  lively  new  professional 
society,  the  American  Association  for  Artificial  Intelligence,  has  been  formed. 
And  university  graduate-school  enrollments  in  AI  are  booming.  Indeed,  Vol- 
ume I  of  the  Handbook  was  the  main  selection,  in  August  1981,  of  one  of 
the  major  book  clubs;  it  is  now  undergoing  its  second  printing  and  is  being 
translated  into  Japanese. 

The  crisis  we  face  now  is  a  crisis  of  success,  and  many  wonder  if  the 
substance  of  the  field  can  support  the  high  hopes.  We  believe  that  it  can, 
and  we  offer  the  material  of  the  three  massive  volumes  of  the  Handbook  as 
testimony  to  the  strength  and  intellectual  vigor  of  the  enterprise. 

The  five  chapters  in  this  volume  cover  three  subfields  of  AI.  Chapter  VI, 
on  AI  programming  languages,  describes  the  kinds  of  programming-language 
features  and  environments  developed  by  AI  researchers.  These  languages  are, 
like  all  programming  languages,  not  only  software  tools  with  which  the  many 
different  kinds  of  AI  programs  are  constructed,  but  also  "tools  of  thought"  in 
which  new  ideas  and  perspectives  on  the  understanding  of  cognition  are  first 
explored.  Of  note  here  is  the  extended  discussion  of  LISP — by  far  the  most 
important  tool  of  either  kind  yet  invented  in  AI. 

Chapters  VII  through  DC  are  about  expert  systems,  in  science,  medicine, 
and  education.  These  systems,  which  vary  widely  in  structure  and  behavior, 
all  focus  on  one  important  methodology,  called  the  transfer  of  expertise.  Early 
in  AI's  history,  researchers  agreed  that  high  performance  on  difficult  problems 
would  require  large  amounts  of  real-world  knowledge,  the  knowledge  that  a 


XI 


xii  Preface 

human  expert  in  a  particular  domain  has  extracted  from  his  (or  her)  experience 
with  the  problems  he  solves.  The  idea  of  expert-systems  research  was  to  find 
ways  of  transferring  the  necessary  kinds  and  quantities  of  knowledge  from 
human  experts  to  AI  systems.  This  technology  has  advanced  to  the  point 
where  these  systems  can  perform  at  the  level  of  human  experts  and  may  be 
available  commercially  in  the  next  few  years. 

Finally,  Chapter  X  reviews  the  area  of  AI  research  called  automatic  pro- 
gramming. This  research  has  focused  on  systems  that  can  produce  a  program 
from  some  "natural"  description  of  what  it  is  to  do  or  that  attend  to  some 
other  important  aspect  of  programming,  like  verifying  that  a  program  does 
what  it  was  intended  to  do.  For  example,  some  automatic-programming  sys- 
tems produce  simple  programs  from  examples  of  input/output  pairs  or  from 
English  specifications  of  the  program's  intended  behavior.  But  there  is  a  much 
deeper  purpose  to  automatic-programming  research  than  just  easing  the  bur- 
den of  the  programmer.  To  achieve  their  pragmatic  goals,  these  systems  must 
understand  programs  just  as  other  AI  systems  understand  language  or  chess  or 
medical  diagnosis.  They  must  reason  about  programs  and  about  themselves  as 
programs,  and,  as  we  discuss  in  Chapter  X,  this  is  a  central  and  characteristic 
feature  of  many  AI  systems. 

Acknowledgments 

The  chapter  on  AI  programming  languages  was  first  drafted  by  Steve 
Tappel  and  Stephen  Westfold.  Johann  de  Kleer  and  Jon  Doyle  contributed 
the  excellent  article  on  dependencies  and  assumptions.  A  thorough  review 
and  additional  material  were  supplied  by  Christian  Freksa.  Other  reviewers 
included  Robert  Balzer,  Cordell  Green,  Brian  McCune,  and  Harald  Wertz. 

The  chapter  on  scientific-applications  research  was  edited  by  James  Ben- 
nett, Bruce  Buchanan,  Paul  Cohen,  and  Fritz  Fisher.  Original  material  and 
comments  were  contributed  by,  among  others,  James  Davidson,  Randall  Davis, 
Daniel  Dolata,  Richard  Duda,  Robert  Engelmore,  Peter  Friedland,  Michael 
Genesereth,  Jonathan  King,  Glen  Ouchi,  and  Daniel  Sagalowicz. 

Chapter  VIII,  on  research  in  medical  applications  of  AI,  was  edited  by 
Victor  Ciesielski  and  his  colleagues  at  Rutgers  University.  James  Bennett  and 
Paul  Cohen  continued  work  on  the  material.  Others  who  contributed  to  or 
reviewed  this  material  include  Saul  Amarel,  Peter  Biesel,  Bruce  Buchanan, 
Randall  Davis,  Casimir  Kulikowksi,  Donald  Smith,  William  Swartout,  and 
Sholom  Weiss. 

The  educational-applications  chapter  was  compiled  by  Avron  Barr  and 
William  Clancey,  and,  once  again,  James  Bennett  and  Paul  Cohen  continued 
the  editing  process.  Contributors  and  reviewers  included  Harold  Abelson,  Lee 
Blaine,  John  Seely  Brown,  Richard  Burton,  Andrea  diSessa,  Adele  Goldberg, 
Ira  Goldstein,  Kenneth  Kahn,  Mark  Miller,  Neil  Rowe,  Albert  Stevens,  and 
Keith  Wescourt. 


Preface  xiii 

Finally,  the  automatic-programming  chapter  was  edited  by  Bob  Elschla- 
ger  and  Jorge  Phillips,  working  from  original  material  supplied  by  David 
Barstow,  Cordell  Green,  Neil  Goldman,  George  Heidorn,  Elaine  Kant,  Zohar 
Manna,  Brian  McCune,  Gregory  Ruth,  Richard  Waldinger,  and  Richard  Waters. 

The  design  and  production  of  the  volume  were  the  responsibility  of  Dianne 
Kanerva,  our  professional  editor,  and  Jose  Gonzalez.  The  book  was  typeset 
with  TgX,  Donald  Knuth's  system  for  mathematical  typesetting,  by  David 
Eppstein,  Janet  Feigenbaum,  Jose  Gonzalez,  Jonni  Kanerva,  Dikran  Kara- 
gueuzian,  and  Barbara  Laddaga.  Our  publisher  William  Kaufmann  and  his 
staff  have  been  generous  with  their  patience,  help,  and  willingness  to  experi- 
ment. 

The  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  Defense 
and  the  Biotechnology  Resources  Program  of  the  National  Institutes  of  Health 
supported  the  Handbook  project  as  part  of  their  longstanding  and  continuing 
efforts  to  develop  and  disseminate  the  science  and  technology  of  AI.  Earlier 
versions  of  material  in  these  volumes  were  distributed  as  technical  reports  of 
the  Department  of  Computer  Science  at  Stanford  University.  The  electronic 
text-preparation  facilities  available  to  Stanford  computer  scientists  on  the 
SAIL,  SCORE,  and  SUMEX  computers  were  used  throughout  the  writing  and 
production  of  the  Handbook. 


Chapter  VI 

Programming  Languages 
for  AI  Research 


CHAPTER  VI:     PROGRAMMING  LANGUAGES 
FOR  AI  RESEARCH 


A.  Overview  /  3 

B.  LISP  /  15 

C.  AI  Programming -Language  Features  /  30 

1.  Overview  /  30 

2.  Data  Structures  /  34 

3.  Control  Structures  /  45 
4-  Pattern  Matching  /  58 

5.  Programming  Environment  /  65 

D.  Dependencies  and  Assumptions  /  72 


A.     OVERVIEW 


ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE  is  a  branch  of  computer  science— the  study  of 
the  relation  between  computation  and  cognition.  Research  in  AI  involves 
writing  programs  that  attempt  to  achieve  some  kind  of  intelligent  behavior. 
Besides  the  computers  themselves,  the  most  important  tools  in  AI  are  the  pro- 
gramming languages  in  which  these  programs  are  conceived  and  implemented. 

A  programming  language  provides  a  means  of  specifying  the  objects  and 
procedures  needed  to  solve  certain  classes  of  problems.  Languages  such  as 
FORTRAN  and  COBOL  were  developed  to  make  this  specification  easier  by 
supplying  higher  level  algebraic  and  business  primitives,  respectively  (and 
also  to  establish  vocabularies  that  could  be  used  on  a  variety  of  machines). 
Contemporaneously  with  the  development  of  these  languages,  researchers  in 
AI  were  developing  their  own  programming  languages  with  features  designed 
to  handle  AI  problems. 

Once  a  programming  language  has  been  designed,  the  implementation 
of  that  language  is  itself  a  serious  and  time-consuming  programming  task. 
There  must  at  least  be  a  translator  from  the  high-level  language  to  the 
particular  machine's  language  (a  compiler  or  interpreter)  as  well  as  a  run-time 
environment  that  supports  the  new  objects  and  procedures  allowed  in  the 
language.  For  example,  the  SIN  function  supplied  in  languages  like  FORTRAN 
makes  it  convenient  to  do  trigonometric  calculations  and  requires,  since  SIN  is 
not  a  primitive  function  on  most  computers,  a  procedure  in  the  run-time  envi- 
ronment that  calculates  the  value  of  the  function  on  the  arguments  supplied 
while  the  program  is  running.  Most  AI  programming  languages,  in  addition  to 
supporting  many  quite  novel  high-level  features,  offer  splendid  environments 
for  writing,  debugging,  and  modifying  programs. 

AI  programming  languages  have  had  a  central  role  in  the  history  of 
Artificial  Intelligence,  serving  two  important  functions.  First,  they  allow  con- 
venient implementation  and  modification  of  programs  that  demonstrate  and 
test  AI  ideas.  Second,  they  provide  vehicles  of  thought:  As  with  other  high- 
level  languages,  they  allow  the  user  to  concentrate  on  higher  level  concepts. 
Frequently,  new  ideas  in  AI  are  accompanied  by  a  new  language  in  which  it  is 
natural  to  apply  these  ideas. 

Symbol  Manipulation  and  List  Processing 

The  first  and  most  fundamental  idea  in  AI  programming  languages  was 
the  use  of  the  computer  to  manipulate  arbitrary  symbols — symbols  that  could 
stand  for  anything,   not  just  numbers.     This  idea,   and  the  list-processing 


4  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

techniques  that  followed  from  it,  were  first  introduced  in  the  IPL  language, 
one  of  the  earliest  programming  languages  of  any  kind. 

IPL  was  created  by  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon  (1957)  for  their  early  AI  work 
on  problem-solving  methods.  Its  design  was  guided  by  ideas  from  psychology, 
especially  the  intuitive  notion  of  association.  The  primary  elements  of  the 
language  were  symbols,  as  opposed  to  numbers.  To  form  associations  of  these 
symbols,  list  processing  was  introduced,  which  allowed  programs  conveniently 
to  build  data  structures  of  unpredictable  shape  and  size:  When  parsing  a 
sentence,  choosing  a  chess  move,  or  planning  robot  actions,  one  cannot  know 
ahead  of  time  the  form  of  the  data  structures  that  will  represent  the  meaning 
of  the  sentence,  the  play  of  the  game,  or  the  plan  of  action,  respectively.  The 
unconstrained  form  of  data  structures  is  an  important  characteristic  of  AI 
programs  and  is  discussed  further  in  Article  VI. CI. 

The  problem  of  unpredictable  shape  of  data  structures  was  solved  in  IPL 
by  the  use  of  primitive  data  elements  (now  commonly  called  cells)  consisting  of 
two  fields,  each  of  which  could  hold  either  a  symbol  or  a  pointer  to  another  cell. 
This  simple  arrangement,  called  a  list  structure,  allows  arbitrarily  branched 
binary  trees  to  be  constructed.  List  structure  is  an  extremely  general  data 
structure:  For  instance,  an  array,  normally  implemented  as  a  sequence  of 
words  in  memory,  can  be  thought  of  as  a  list  of  cells  whose  left  halves  each 
contain  a  symbol  and  whose  right  halves  each  contain  a  pointer  to  the  next 
memory  location.  The  problem  of  unpredictable  size  was  handled  by  having 
a  free  list  of  cells  that  are  to  be  allocated  to  the  various  data  structures  as 
required. 

As  AI  programming  languages  evolved,  these  simple  list-structure  ideas 
were  expanded  to  include  utilities  that  allowed  truly  convenient  application. 
For  instance,  a  programmer  should  not  have  to  attend  to  the  fact  that,  as  a 
program  runs,  cells  in  temporary  list  structures  have  to  be  returned  to  the 
free  list  or  else  the  program  runs  out  of  memory  space.  Eventually,  these 
chores  would  be  attended  to  automatically  by  the  operating  environments 
of  AI  programming  languages.  This  is  the  sense  in  which  a  programming 
language  can  free  the  programmer  from  attending  to  detail,  allowing  him  (or 
her)  to  think  at  a  higher  level,  that  is,  in  terms  of  list  structures  instead  of 
memory  addresses  or  even  arrays.  (See  Article  VI. B  for  a  complete  discussion 
of  list  processing.) 

Another  feature  introduced  in  IPL  is  the  generator,  a  procedure  for  com- 
puting a  series  of  values.  It  produces  one  value  each  time  it  is  called  and  is 
then  suspended,  so  that  it  starts  from  where  it  left  off  the  next  time  it  is  called 
(see  Article  VI. C3).  This  important  idea  was  to  turn  up  later  in  CONNIVER 
and  similar  languages. 

Many  of  the  first  AI  programs  were  written  in  IPL.  These  include  the 
Newell-Shaw-Simon  Chess  Program  (Article  II.C5c,  in  Vol.  I),  the  Logic  Theo- 
rist  (Article   II.Dl),    the   General   Problem   Solver   (Article  II.D2),    SAD-SAM 


A  Overview  5 

(Article  rv.Fi),  EPAM  (Article  XI. D,  in  Vol.  Ill),  Feldman's  two-choice  decision 
model,  and  Tonge's  Assembly  Line  Balancing  Program;  many  of  these  are 
described  in  the  Computers  and  Thought  collection  (Feigenbaum  and  Feldman, 
1963).  Some  later  programs  written  in  IPL  are  Quillian's  memory  model 
(Article  XI.E1,  in  Vol.  Ill)  and  REF-ARF  (Fikes,  1970). 

LISP 

In  the  very  early  years  of  AI  research,  the  idea  of  list  processing  was 
incorporated,  along  with  some  other  novel  ideas  about  programming,  into  the 
language  that  has  become  the  mainstay  of  AI  programming.  Since  its  invention 
in  1958  by  John  McCarthy,  LISP  has  been  the  primary  AI  programming 
language — used  by  the  vast  majority  of  AI  researchers  in  all  subfields.  The 
reasons  for  this  are  in  part  historical:  LISP  was  established  early,  several  large 
systems  have  been  developed  to  support  programming  in  the  language,  and 
all  students  in  AI  laboratories  learn  LISP,  so  that  it  has  become  a  shared 
language.  However,  the  language  continues  to  be  the  natural  vehicle  for  AI 
research  because  there  are  features  of  LISP  that  are  critically  important  in  AI 
programming.  As  John  McCarthy  (1978)  himself  put  it  in  an  excellent  article 
on  the  history  of  LISP: 

LISP  is  now  the  second  oldest  programming  language  in  present  widespread 
use  (after  FORTRAN). ...  Its  core  occupies  some  kind  of  local  optimum  in  the 
space  of  programming  languages  given  that  static  friction  discourages  purely 
notational  changes.  Recursive  use  of  conditional  expressions,  representation 
of  symbolic  information  externally  by  lists  and  internally  by  list  structure, 
and  representation  of  program  in  the  same  way  will  probably  have  a  very 
long  life.  (p.  221) 

In  truth,  computer  science  has  explored  the  "space  of  programming  languages" 
with  only  a  few  dozen  experiments — an  understanding  of  what  it  means  to  be 
a  "local  optimum"  must  await  major  advances  in  the  study  of  computation. 
But  LISP  has  survived  and  flourished  where  many  competing  programming 
languages  have  been  all  but  forgotten.  The  following  treatment  of  LISP's 
distinguishing  features  is  meant  to  illustrate  its  nature  and  importance.  A 
full  discussion  of  the  language,  along  with  sample  programs,  is  to  be  found  in 
Article  VI. B  and  in  the  several  references  given  there. 

Applicative  style.  Besides  its  use  of  list  structures  as  its  primitive 
(and  only)  data  type,  LISP  probably  differs  most  from  other  programming 
languages  in  its  style  of  describing  computations.  Instead  of  being  described  as 
sequences  of  steps,  LISP  programs  consist  of  functions  defined  in  a  rather 
mathematical  format.  Each  function  call  is  represented  as  a  list,  the  value  of 
whose  first  element  is  the  name  of  the  function  and  the  values  of  whose  other 
elements  are  the  arguments.  For  instance,  consider  the  LISP  definition  of  the 
function  FACTORIAL^) 


6  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

FACTORIAL    (N) : 

(COND    (    (EQUAL  N  1)  1  ) 

(  TRUE  (TIMES  N    (FACTORIAL    (DIFFERENCE  N  1)))    )), 

where  the  function  EQUAL  takes  two  arguments  and  returns  TRUE  if  they 
are  equal,  the  function  COND  takes  pairs  of  expressions  as  its  arguments 
and  evaluates  the  left  expression  in  each  pair  in  sequence  until  one  left  half 
evaluates  to  TRUE,  and  then  COND  returns  the  value  of  the  right  half  of  that 
pair.  The  LISP  definition  of  the  function  FACTORIAL  looks  very  much  like  its 
recursive  mathematical  definition: 


«.{; 


if  N  =  1 
N(N-1)\,  if  TV  >  1 


Thus,  the  basic  LISP  procedure  specification  involves,  not  a  sequence  of 
program  steps,  but  a  function  definition  in  terms  of  applications  of  func- 
tions to  arguments  (especially  recursive  applications  of  the  same  function  to 
a  "depleted"  argument).  This  applicative  style  of  programming,  pioneered 
in  LISP  (and  also  used  in  APL),  has  been  suggested  by  a  number  of  people 
(e.g.,  Backus,  1978)  to  be  a  more  appropriate  style  than  the  von  Neumann- 
machine-oriented  sequential  languages  that  currently  dominate  (in  which  a 
program  consists  of  a  sequence  of  instructions,  much  like  machine-language 
programs,  which  are  a  collection  of  instructions  in  sequential  memory  loca- 
tions). This  orientation,  and  the  use  of  embedded  parentheses  to  indicate  list 
structure,  gives  LISP  programs  a  distinctly  different  appearance  from  those  in 
other  languages.  In  fact,  people  who  know  other  programming  languages  fre- 
quently have  difficulty  learning  LISP,  while  many  people  with  a  mathematical 
background  find  LISP  an  easy  first  language  to  learn. 

The  design  of  LISP  and  of  ALGOL  overlapped  in  time,  with  McCarthy 
involved  with  both.  McCarthy  was  influential  in  the  decision  to  include  both 
conditional  expressions  and  recursion  in  ALGOL-60,  having  already  decided  to 
include  them  in  LISP.  However,  in  LISP  these  two  features,  conditionals  and 
recursion,  form  the  core  of  the  programming  style  in  procedure  definitions, 
much  as  variable  assignment  and  loops  do  in  ALGOL. 

Programs  as  data.  One  characteristic  of  LISP  that  is  unique  among 
high-level  programming  languages  and  that  seems  particularly  important  in 
AI  work  is  the  representation  of  the  programs  themselves  in  the  same  data 
structure  as  all  the  other  data,  namely,  list  structure.  This  simple  device  has 
proved  central  to  AI  programs  whose  purpose  is  often  to  manipulate  other 
programs,  sometimes  themselves.  For  instance,  a  program  that  is  to  explain 
its  line  of  reasoning  must  examine  its  operation  in  reaching  a  conclusion — 
it  must  determine  what  functions  were  called  and  with  what  values  (see, 
e.g.,  Article  DC.C6).  Programs  that  learn  to  do  some  task,  for  another  example, 


A  Overview  7 

often  involve  procedures  that  create  and  modify  new  procedures  to  accomplish 
the  task  (see  Chap.  X,  in  this  volume,  and  Chap.  XIV,  in  Vol.  III). 

The  idea  is  simply  that  in  most  programming  languages  the  executing 
program  does  not  have  access  to  the  actual  code,  while  any  procedure  in  LISP 
can  manipulate  another  procedure  as  easily  as  it  can  other  data.  For  example, 
since  the  first  element  of  a  function  call  is  the  name  of  the  function  to  be  called, 
a  general-purpose  procedure  that  returns  the  value  of  the  first  element  of  a  list 
will,  when  applied  to  a  function  call  like  (TIMES  X  Y) ,  return  the  name  of  the 
function  to  be  called,  TIMES.  Imagine  trying  to  write  a  FORTRAN  program 
that  analyzes  another  program  written  in  the  usual  FORTRAN  syntax. 

Another  ramification  of  the  program-as-data  idea  is  that  LISP  program- 
ming environments  tend  to  be  extremely  interactive:  Since  programs  can  be 
manipulated  easily  by  other  LISP  programs,  utilities  such  as  program  editors 
and  debugging  facilities  can  be  written  in  LISP.  Thus,  they  can  be  easily 
tailored  by  each  programmer  for  a  specific  application  or  even  used  by  a 
program  to  edit  or  monitor  another  program  (see  Article  VI. C5). 

Associations.  The  idea  of  associations  of  symbols,  mentioned  as  a 
central  motivation  of  IPL,  was  implemented  in  LISP  in  a  simple  and  elegant 
mechanism  called  property  lists.  Symbols  in  LISP  are  called  atoms,  and  every 
atom  can  have  several  properties  associated  with  it — more  precisely,  the  user 
can  define  properties  and  associate  them  with  each  atom.  For  instance,  there 
might  be  associated,  with  each  atom  that  represents  a  person,  a  property 
called  SEX  with  the  symbols  for  MALE  and  FEMALE  as  values.  And  there 
might  be  other  properties  of  each  person  called  MOTHER  and  FATHER  whose 
values  are  the  symbols  for  other  people.  Property  lists  are  thus  a  very  general 
way  of  associating  symbols  (see  related  work  on  knowledge  representation 
in  Chap.  Ill,  in  Vol.  i).  Once  again,  the  job  of  a  LISP  programming,  run- 
time environment  is  to  make  this  simple  but  powerful  tool  of  property  lists 
convenient  to  use  (see  Article  VI. C2). 

LISP  as  a  target  language.  Finally,  McCarthy  (1978)  points  out 
another  feature  of  LISP  that,  although  in  part  an  accidental  side  effect  of 
its  first  implementation,  proved  to  be  important.  It  is  that  programs  are 
represented  in  a  simple  syntax,  namely,  as  lists: 

One  can  even  conjecture  that  LISP  owes  its  survival  specifically  to  the  fact 

that  its  programs  are  lists,  which  everyone,  including  me,  has  regarded 

as  a  disadvantage.   Proposed  replacements  for  LISP,  e.g.,  POP-2  (Burstall, 

Collins,  and  Popplestone,  1968,  1971),  abandoned  this  feature  in  favor  of 

an  ALGOL-like  syntax  leaving  no  target  language  for  higher  level  systems. 

(P-  221) 

In  other  words,  since  the  LISP  language  syntax  is  so  simple,  LISP  programs 

that  produce  other  programs  as  their  output  do  not  have  to  worry  about 

expressing  their  results  in  a  complex  format.  Many  of  the  systems  described 

in  this  chapter  and  throughout  the  Handbook  are  indeed  programs  of  this 

sort. 


8  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

LISP  today.  Current  LISP  programming  environments  are  themselves 
very  large  LISP  programs.  MACLISP  from  M.I.T.  and  INTERLISP  from  BBN 
and  Xerox  are  the  most  highly  developed  systems,  although  there  are  several 
others.  All  of  these  systems  offer  support  for  creating  and  modifying  pro- 
cedures, for  managing  the  hundreds  of  individual  procedures  that  make  up 
a  LISP  program,  and  for  debugging  those  systems  interactively.  LISP  lends 
itself  to  incremental  program-writing.  Functions  can  be  defined  incremen- 
tally, without  declarations;  data  structures  and  variable  names  (atoms)  can  be 
created  dynamically.  Using  the  interpreted  form  of  functions,  it  is  simple  to 
make  try-and-see  modifications  to  functions.  The  implementors  of  the  major 
LISP  environments  have  tended  to  stay  in  close  contact  with  the  users  (since 
the  LISP  systems  are  LISP  programs,  the  implementors  are  users),  with  the 
result  that  the  LISP  systems  have  tended  to  evolve  relatively  rapidly. 

The  system  that  has  gone  farthest  in  including  user  facilities  is  INTERLISP 
(Teitelman  et  al.,  1978),  which  evolved  from  a  series  of  LISP  systems  at  BBN, 
notably  940  LISP  in  1967  and  BBN  LISP  in  1970.  In  addition  to  highly  devel- 
oped versions  of  the  facilities  described  above,  INTERLISP  has  the  following 
features: 

1.  A  uniform  error-handling  system,  which  allows  some  kinds  of  automatic 
error  correction,  such  as  spelling  correction,  entry  to  a  special,  flexible 
debugging  facility,  and  handling  of  particular  error  conditions  by  user 
functions; 

2.  CLISP,  which  is  an  alternative,  extensible,  expression  syntax; 

3.  Programmer's  Assistant,  which  keeps  track  of  a  user's  commands  and  so 
allows  selected  commands  to  be  undone,  retried,  or  changed  and  retried; 

4.  Master  scope,  which  is  a  cross-referencing  facility  to  create  a  model  of  a 
user's  program  that  can  be  used  to  help  manage  a  large  system; 

5.  File  Package,  which  offers  assistance  such  as  storing  functions  that  have 
been  altered  during  a  debugging  session  on  a  permanent  file. 

MACLISP  has  been  under  continuous  development  at  M.I.T.  since  about 
1966.  It  was  developed  in  parallel  with  INTERLISP,  and  frequently  a  feature 
in  one  that  was  found  to  be  useful  was  implemented  in  the  other.  There  has, 
however,  been  more  emphasis  on  efficiency  in  the  use  of  time  and  space  in 
MACLISP.  Some  of  the  main  forces  pushing  in  this  direction  were  the  increas- 
ing requirements  of  MACSYMA  (Article  VII.Dl)  and,  to  a  somewhat  lesser 
extent,  of  higher  level  Al  programming  languages  like  MICRO-PLANNER  and 
CONNIYER,  which  were  implemented  in  MACLISP.  In  contrast  to  INTERLISP, 
where  most  of  the  user  facilities  reside  in  the  system,  user  facilities  in  MACLISP 
are  in  separate  programs  and  are  loaded  automatically  when  required.  The 
code  produced  by  the  MACLISP  compiler  is  very  efficient.  Particular  effort  was 
directed  at  producing  efficient  compiled  arithmetic,  and  by  1974  this  objec- 
tive had  been  accomplished  to  such  an  extent  that  the  efficiency  of  compiled 
arithmetic  in  MACLISP  was  comparable  to  that  of  FORTRAN. 


A  Overview  9 

Several  personal  computers  designed  specifically  for  LISP  programming 
are  now  available.  These  "LISP  machines"  offer  complete,  powerful  computa- 
tion facilities,  very  good  graphics  interfaces,  interfaces  to  networks  for  sharing 
resources  between  personal  work-stations,  and  all  the  features  of  the  advanced 
LISP  programming  environments. 

PLANNER  and  CONNIVER 

We  have  said  that  a  high-level  programming  language  supplies  some  useful 
data  and  control  concepts  and  makes  it  easier  to  use  these  constructs.  For 
instance,  list  structure  is  a  high-level  data  type,  and  LISP  offers  primitives 
for  manipulating  lists  and  run-time  facilities  to  take  care  of  bookkeeping  and 
collecting  unused  cells,  thus  freeing  the  programmer  from  concern  about  these 
details  and  making  it  easier  for  him  to  think  in  terms  of  the  list-structure 
concepts. 

Representing  knowledge.  Carl  Hewitt  (1971)  developed  the  PLANNER 
language  around  an  idea  about  knowledge  and  reasoning  in  problem  solving. 
In  PLANNER,  the  programmer  expresses  his  program  in  terms  of  a  collec- 
tion of  statements,  called  theorems,  about  how  to  achieve  goals  given  cer- 
tain preconditions  and  about  what  to  do  should  certain  situations  arise  in 
the  process.  PLANNER  encourages  the  encoding  of  procedural  knowledge — 
knowledge  about  how  to  do  things — and  offers  utilities  for  using  that  kind 
of  knowledge  in  a  particular  style  of  problem  solving  (see  Article  III.C2,  in 
Vol.  I,  on  procedural  knowledge  representation).  For  example,  the  PLANNER 
theorem 

(CONSE  (MORTAL  ?X)  (GOAL  (HUMAN  <-X))) 

states  that  one  way  to  show  that  someone  (?X)  is  mortal  is  to  show  that 
they  are  human.  The  pattern  (MORTAL  ?X)  is  stored  in  a  database.  Later, 
in  solving  a  problem,  should  some  goal  come  up  that  matches  the  pattern, 
for  example,  (MORTAL  (MOTHER  HARRY) ) ,  the  system  knows  that  this  consequent 
theorem  might  be  useful;  that  is,  if  it  can  prove  that  Harry's  mother  must  be 
human,  it  can  conclude  that  she  is  mortal.  This  automatic  retrieval  of  relevant 
facts  is  called  pattern- directed  invocation  of  procedures  and  is  commonly  used 
in  expert- systems  research  in  AI  (see  Chaps.  VII,  VIII,  and  DC;  also,  Waterman 
and  Hayes-Roth,  1978).  Article  VI. C4  discusses  the  pattern-matching  facilities 
of  AI  programming  languages. 

Control  of  reasoning.  PLANNER  offers  facilities  for  automatic  back- 
tracking: The  PLANNER  run-time  environment  takes  a  goal  to  be  achieved 
and  a  collection  of  theorems  like  the  one  above  and  attempts  to  find  a  theorem 
to  achieve  the  goal.  If  the  first  theorem  that  matches  the  goal  must  in  turn 
be  proved  (e.g.,  proving  that  mothers  are  human,  so  that  one  can  conclude 
that  Harry's  mother  is  mortal),  the  system  attempts  to  prove  this  goal  in  the 


10  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

same  way,  that  is,  by  matching  it  against  the  knowledge  base  of  theorems. 
This  process  continues,  recursively,  until  either  it  succeeds  in  finding  a  fact 
that  proves  some  goal  or  the  line  of  attack  fails.  In  this  case,  the  system 
automatically  backtracks  to  the  most  recent  point  of  deciding  between  several 
alternative  theorems  for  proving  a  goal  and  tries  another  theorem. 

Only  a  portion  of  PLANNER  was  actually  implemented,  as  MICRO- 
PLANNER  (Sussman,  Winograd,  and  Charniak,  1971).  It  included  pattern- 
directed  invocation  of  procedures  and  automatic  backtracking.  There  are  two 
types  of  procedures:  consequent  theorems  and  antecedent  theorems.  A  conse- 
quent theorem  is  called  when  its  pattern  matches  a  subgoal  to  be  solved;  an 
antecedent  theorem  is  called  when  its  pattern  matches  an  assertion  added 
to  the  database  (there  is  another  kind  of  antecedent  theorem  for  assertions 
deleted  from  the  database).  An  important  program  written  in  MICRO- 
PLANNER  is  Winograd's  SHRDLU  (see  Article  IV.F4,  in  Vol.  I). 

CONNIVER  was  developed  in  reaction  to  the  rigidity  of  the  conception 
of  backtracking  in  MICRO-PLANNER  (Sussman  and  McDermott,  1972).  The 
CONNIVER  program  retained  many  of  the  ideas  of  PLANNER,  but  at  a  lower 
level,  so  that  fewer  of  the  mechanisms  were  imposed  on  the  user.  In  particular, 
Sussman  and  McDermott  objected  to  the  use  of  automatic  backtracking.  In 
MICRO-PLANNER,  most  of  the  information  gained  from  following  a  wrong 
choice  was  lost  upon  failure.  As  a  result,  programs  tended  to  get  bogged  down 
in  blind  backtracking. 

Contexts.  CONNIVER  introduced  the  idea  of  a  tree  of  contexts  in  the 
database.  This  tree  represented  simultaneously  the  different  situations  for 
different  choices  of  actions.  A  powerful  pattern  matcher  allowed  flexible 
associative  access  to  the  database.  A  version  of  the  spaghetti  stack  (see 
Article  VI. C3)  was  also  implemented  (rather  inefficiently,  because  it  used  lists 
rather  than  a  stack).  Together,  the  spaghetti  stack  and  context  tree  allowed 
a  problem  solver,  for  example,  to  suspend  a  process  that  was  working  on 
one  subproblem,  continue  work  on  another  subproblem  that  seemed  more 
promising,  and  then,  at  some  later  point,  resume  the  process  working  on  the 
original  subproblem  if  necessary.  Sussman 's  HACKER  system  (Article  XV.C, 
in  Vol.  Ill)  was  written  in  CONNIVER.  Continued  research  on  the  role  of 
contexts  in  reasoning  is  described  in  Article  VI. D. 

The  important  point  about  PLANNER  and  CONNIVER,  which  are  as 
much  knowledge-representation  languages  as  programming  languages,  is  that 
they  made  some  high-level  control  constructs  (as  well  as  data  structures) 
convenient  to  use.  These  languages  were  very  influential  in  the  history  of 
AI  (see  Article  III.A,  in  Vol.  i),  but  neither  is  used  anymore.  They  can  be 
viewed  as  empirical  studies  of  the  space  of  programming  languages — studies 
on  how  to  specify  reasoning  and  problem-solving  activities. 


A  Overview  1 1 

Other  Languages  Covered 

The  articles  in  Section  VI. C  attempt  to  analyze  the  issues  explored  in 
programming-language  research  in  AI  by  comparing  seven  major  languages: 
LISP,  PLANNER,  CONNIYER,  QLISP,  POP-2,  SAIL,  and  FUZZY.  By  way  of 
preparation  for  this  study,  the  last  four  will  be  introduced  here  briefly. 

SAIL.  Developed  in  1969  at  the  Stanford  Artificial  Intelligence  Labora- 
tory, the  SAIL  language  is  based  on  ALGOL-60  with  extended  string,  macro, 
and  input/output  capabilities  (Feldman  et  al.,  1972).  It  thus  has  the  typi- 
cal block  structure  and  is  compiler  based,  like  the  majority  of  modern  pro- 
gramming languages.  But  incorporated  into  SAIL  from  the  beginning  was  an 
associative  retrieval  formalism  called  LEAP  (Feldman  and  Rovner,  1969), 
which  allowed  rapid  lookup  of  multiply  indexed  facts  in  a  small  database. 
SAIL  was  designed  especially  for  those  AI  systems,  such  as  vision  and  speech- 
understanding  systems,  that  required  fast  arithmetic  as  well  as  some  of  the 
symbol-manipulation  facilities  available  in  LISP.  The  language  was  extended 
in  1973  to  include  listlike  data  structures,  records,  coroutining,  and  a  powerful 
interactive  debugging  environment  (Reiser,  1975,  1976). 

QLISP.  The  problem-solving  language  QA1  was  developed  by  Cordell 
Green  at  SRI  International  in  the  mid-1960s  as  an  attempt  to  formalize  the 
ideas  in  Bertram  Raphael's  SIR  program  (see  Article  IY.Fl,  in  Vol.  I).  This 
effort  was  followed  immediately  by  QA2,  which  applied  the  ideas  of  resolution 
theorem  proving  as  the  inference-making  mechanism.  QA2  introduced  the  now 
standard  method  for  extracting  answers  from  the  process  of  proving  theorems 
with  existentially  quantified  variables — that  is,  binding  values  to  the  variables 
that  satisfy  the  theorem  (see  Chap.  XII,  in  Vol.  III).  QA3  was  an  improved 
implementation  of  QA2,  in  which  Green  explored  how  to  tackle  various  types 
of  problems  with  a  resolution  theorem  prover,  including  program  synthesis, 
verification,  and  problem  solving  (Green,  1969).  QA3  was  also  used  in  STRIPS 
(Article  II.D5,  in  Vol.  I). 

QA4  was  developed  by  Rulifson  and  others  (1971)  at  SRI  around  the  time 
that  MICRO-PLANNER  was  implemented  at  M.I.T.  QA4  was  intended  to 
overcome  certain  problems  with  QA3 — specifically  the  difficulties  in  guiding 
the  search  to  relevant  facts  and  theorems  in  trying  to  derive  a  proof.  It  was 
necessary  somehow  to  specify  procedural  and  domain-specific  knowledge  about 
what  facts  to  use  and  when  to  use  them,  in  a  way  that  a  theorem  prover — the 
underlying  inference  engine — could  use.  Theorems  or  procedures  had  to  be 
indexed  by  their  purposes,  an  idea  that  led  to  the  implementation  of  pattern- 
directed  invocation  similar  to  that  of  PLANNER.  QA4  was  the  first  language 
to  develop  the  idea  of  representing  assertions  uniquely,  in  the  way  that  simple 
symbols  are  represented  uniquely,  so  that  properties  can  be  associated  with 


12  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

assertions.  QA4  adopted  a  context  mechanism  like  that  of  CONNIVER  and 
also  had  a  general  control  structure. 

To  make  the  language  more  widely  available  and  to  take  advantage  of  the 
new  facilities  in  INTERLISP,  a  cleaner  implementation  of  QA4  was  embedded 
in  INTERLISP  and  called  QLISP.  When  the  spaghetti  stack  was  implemented 
in  INTERLISP,  QLISP  was  modified  to  take  advantage  of  it.  Unlike  MICRO- 
PLANNER  and  CONNIVER,  which  are  interpreted  languages  on  top  of  LISP, 
QLISP  is  basically  a  subroutine  package  for  INTERLISP,  making  it  much  easier 
to  mix  QLISP  with  INTERLISP  in  programming.  (This  extended-language 
design  has  been  found  advantageous  in  current  representation-language 
research  as  well.) 

Some  special  features  of  QLISP  are  its  extra  data  types,  such  as  sets, 
tuples,  and  bags,  together  with  procedures  for  handling  them,  and  QLISP's 
ability  to  use  them  in  pattern  matching.  Pattern  matching  plays  a  major 
role  in  QLISP,  being  used  for  such  things  as  constructing  data.  QLISP  also 
makes  the  distinction,  blurred  in  PLANNER,  between  (a)  finding  the  truth 
of  an  assertion  by  a  simple  lookup  in  the  database  and  (b)  finding  it  by 
deduction  using  consequent  theorems,  as  described  above.  QLISP  also  intro- 
duced the  notion  of  a  team  of  procedures  that  the  programmer  could  specify 
as  worth  considering  anywhere  that  a  pattern-directed  procedure  invocation 
might  occur.  (A  team  consisting  of  a  single  procedure  corresponds  to  the 
traditional  subroutine  call.  At  the  other  extreme,  a  team  consisting  of  all  the 
goal-achieving  procedures  in  the  system  corresponds  to  the  nondeterministic 
style  of  PLANNER.)  The  NOAH  systems  (Article  XV.Dl,  in  Vol.  Ill)  and  the 
DEDALUS  systems  (Article  X.D5)  were  written  in  QLISP. 

POP-2.  AI  researchers  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh  developed  the 
POP-2  language  because  good  implementations  of  LISP  were  not  available 
on  the  machines  they  were  using  and  because  they  disagreed  about  the  use- 
fulness of  some  of  the  features  of  LISP  and  thought  that  others  could  be 
improved  (Popplestone,  1967).  POP-2  is  still  the  most  common  AI  language 
in  Great  Britain,  but  it  has  not  found  broad  use  elsewhere.  It  has  many 
of  the  properties  of  LISP  but  an  ALGOL-like  syntax.  Like  LISP,  it  is  inter- 
active and  allows  general  manipulation  of  functions,  but  it  has  several  novel 
features,  including  partially  applied  functions,  dynamic  lists  (generators),  and 
explicit  stack  manipulation,  allowing  multiple- valued  procedures.  POP-2  was 
intended  for  efficient  implementation  on  the  medium-sized  machines  available 
to  the  designers  of  the  language. 

POPLER  is  a  language  based  on  PLANNER  and  embedded  in  POP-2 
(Davies  et  al.,  1973).  It  has  an  implementation  of  the  spaghetti  stack  and 
makes  the  same  distinction  as  QLISP  between  testing  the  database  and  calling 
consequent  procedures.  POPLER  further  distinguishes  between  those  proce- 
dures that  deduce  the  value  of  an  assertion  in  a  world  model  from  those  that 
achieve  the  assertion  as  a  goal,  producing  a  new  world  model  from  the  old 
model. 


A  Overview  13 

FUZZY.  The  most  recently  developed  language  included  in  this  study 
illustrates  current  work  in  AI  programming  languages.  The  design  of  the 
FUZZY  language  (Le  Faivre,  1977)  was  motivated  by  the  theory  of  fuzzy  sets 
(Zadeh,  1965;  Gupta,  Saridis,  and  Gaines,  1977),  a  generalization  of  Boolean 
set  theory  that  allows  for  "graded"  set  membership  (rather  than  all-or-none). 
For  many  natural-language  concepts,  for  instance,  there  is  no  sharp  boundary 
between  situations  for  which  the  concept  applies  and  situations  for  which  it 
does  not.  Consider,  for  example,  the  concept  young.  We  may  say  that  people 
under  10  years  of  age  are  young  and  those  above  60  years  are  not  young. 
However,  there  is  no  particular  day  at  which  a  person's  age  switches  from 
"young"  to  "not  young";  rather,  this  is  a  gradual  transition.  In  fuzzy  set 
theory,  the  concept  of  young  in  this  context  is  expressed  by  a  "membership 
function"  representing  the  degree  to  which  a  person  of  a  particular  age  can 
be  considered  to  be  young. 

Many  AI  systems  deal  explicitly  with  fuzzy  information  (see,  e.g.,  the  cer- 
tainty factor  in  MYCIN,  Article  VIII.Bi),  and  FUZZY  is  designed  to  facilitate 
certain  types  of  reasoning  with  fuzzy  sets.  It  has  been  used  for  various 
AI  projects,  including  the  AIMDS /BELIEVER  system  at  Rutgers  University 
(Schmidt  and  Sridharan,  1977)  and  HAM-RPM,  a  knowledge-based  conver- 
sationalist at  the  University  of  Hamburg  (Wahlster,  1977). 

Logic  Programming 

Two  languages  based  on  first-order  predicate  calculus  are  PROLOG  and 
FOL.  PROLOG  programs  consist  of  "axioms"  in  first-order  logic  together 
with  a  theorem  to  be  proved.  The  axioms  are  restricted  to  implications  with 
the  left-  and  right-hand  sides  in  horn-clause  form.  If  the  theorem  contains 
existentially  quantified  variables,  the  system  will  return  instantiations  of  these 
that  make  the  theorem  true  (if  such  exist)  using  methods  developed  from  those 
of  QA3.  The  style  of  programming  is  similar  to  that  demonstrated  in  QA3 
and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  PLANNER.  Automatic  backtracking  is  used,  but  the 
programmer  may  add  annotation  to  control  the  order  in  which  clauses  and 
axioms  are  considered.  A  compiler  has  been  implemented  for  PROLOG  that 
allows  programs  in  a  variety  of  domains  to  be  executed  in  about  the  same 
time  as  corresponding  compiled  LISP  programs.  (See  Clocksin  and  Mellish, 
1981;  Warren,  Pereira,  and  Pereira,  1977.) 

Another  direction  of  logic — the  uses  of  meta-theory — has  been  explored 
in  FOL  (Weyrauch,  1979).  This  program  is  primarily  a  proof  checker  that 
accepts  logic  statements  and  proof-step  commands  that  can  be  carried  out  and 
tested  for  correctness.  However,  it  provides  a  powerful  theory-manipulating 
structure  that  allows  the  building  of  arbitrary  meta-theory.  Thus,  for  exam- 
ple, a  theorem  may  be  proved  not  only  within  a  theory  but  also  with  the  help 
of  the  meta-theory.  Proving  a  theorem  by  going  through  the  meta-theory 
corresponds  closely  to  executing  a  procedure  to  produce  the  theorem. 


14  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

Modern  AI  Programming  Environments 

Current  programming  in  AI  research  laboratories  is  done  predominantly 
on  Digital  Equipment  Corporation's  PDP-lOs  and  PDP-20s  in  LISP,  principally 
MACLISP  or  INTERLISP.  Other  LISP  dialects,  for  the  DEC  VAX  machine  and 
for  several  other  machines,  are  in  relatively  sparse  use,  as  are  some  other 
general-purpose  languages  like  SAIL,  POP-2  (used  mostly  in  Great  Britain), 
and  PROLOG  (used  mostly  in  Europe).  Work  on  languages  as  specialized 
as  PLANNER  comes  under  the  heading  of  knowledge  representation  these 
days  and  is  reported  in  Chapter  III  (in  Vol.  i).  The  recently  introduced  LISP 
machines  promise  to  alter  AI  programming  environments  radically. 

References 

The  review  article  by  Rieger,  Rosenberg,  and  Samet  (1979)  gives  examples 
of  procedures  in  several  languages.  More  complete  introductions  to  AI  pro- 
gramming include  Charniak,  Riesbeck,  and  McDermott  (1979),  Schank  and 
Riesbeck  (1981),  and  Winston  and  Horn  (1981). 


B.     LISP 


THE  BEGINNINGS  of  LISP  date  from  the  first  days  of  computing  machinery: 
John  McCarthy,  who  invented  the  language  in  1958,  states  that  he  was  moti- 
vated by  a  desire  to  implement  a  practical  list-processing  language  for  AI 
work  on  the  IBM  704  computer.  As  his  ideas  about  the  language  developed, 
McCarthy  came  to  see  LISP  as  an  elegant  mathematical  tool  as  well.  His  first 
paper  on  LISP,  in  1960,  described  it  both  as  a  practical  programming  language 
and  as  an  idealized  model  of  computation  suitable  for  use  in  recursive-function 
theory. 

McCarthy  (1978)  cites  the  following  as  the  key  ideas  about  computation 
that  are  embodied  in  LISP: 

1.  Computing  with  symbolic  expressions  rather  than  numbers;  that  is,  bit 
patterns  in  a  computer's  memory  and  registers  can  stand  for  arbitrary 
symbols,  not  just  those  of  arithmetic. 

2.  List  processing,  that  is,  representing  data  as  linked-list  structures  in  the 
machine  and  as  multilevel  lists  on  paper. 

3.  Control  structure  based  on  the  composition  of  functions  to  form  more 
complex  functions. 

4.  Recursion  as  a  way  to  describe  processes  and  problems. 

5.  Representation  of  LISP  programs  internally  as  linked  lists  and  exter- 
nally as  multilevel  lists,  that  is,  in  the  same  form  as  all  data  are 
represented. 

6.  The  function  EVAL,  written  in  LISP  itself,  serves  as  an  interpreter  for 
LISP  and  as  a  formal  definition  of  the  language. 

This  article  concentrates  on  describing  LISP  as  a  practical  programming  lan- 
guage. After  a  sketch  of  the  basic  design  of  the  language,  enough  of  the 
most  important  language  constructs  are  defined  to  allow  readers  to  under- 
stand small  LISP  programs  and  some  sample  programs  are  provided.  After 
the  definitions,  some  general  implications  of  the  structure  of  LISP  for  the  way 
it  is  used  in  AI  are  discussed,  and  some  of  its  drawbacks  are  mentioned.  A 
more  complete  introduction  to  the  language  can  be  found  in  several  books 
mentioned  at  the  end  of  this  article. 


Description  of  LISP 

Data  structure.  In  basic  LISP  there  is  only  one  data  type,  namely,  list 
structure.   In  most  LISP  programming  situations,  a  datum  takes  the  specific 


15 


16  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

form  of  a  list  or  an  atom.  Atoms  have  identifiers  such  as  I-AM-AN-ATOM,  3, 
XYZ,  or  NIL.  They  have  no  component  parts — hence,  the  name — but  various 
properties  or  attributes  can  be  attached  to  individual  atoms.  The  most 
important  attribute  an  atom  can  have,  besides  its  name,  is  a  value — in  the 
same  sense  that  variables  have  values.  Certain  atoms  have  standard  values: 
The  atom  NIL  has  the  value  NIL,  T  has  the  value  T,  and  any  numerical  atom, 
such  as  12,  1.732,  or  -1.066E3,  has  the  corresponding  integer  or  floating-point 
number  as  its  value.  (Note  that  the  atoms  are  not  "typed" — any  atom,  besides 
these  constants,  can  have  any  value  bound  to  it.) 

A  list  is  defined  recursively  as  a  sequence  of  zero  or  more  elements  enclosed 
in  parentheses, 

(elementi  .  .  .  elementn) , 

where  each  element  is  either  an  atom  or  a  list.  (The  definition  is  recursive 
because  it  mentions  the  thing  being  defined  in  the  body  of  the  definition.) 
The  null  or  empty  list  is  written  as  (  )  or  NIL.  NIL,  you  will  remember,  is 
also  an  atom.  In  fact,  NIL  has  the  distinction  of  being  the  only  LISP  datum 
that  is  both  an  atom  and  a  list.  Some  other  examples  of  LISP  lists  are: 

(SPOT  RAN  HOME) 

(SPOT  RAN  (TO  JANE)) 

(SPOT  RAN  (TO  (JANE  AND  DICK)))  . 

The  inherently  recursive  structure  of  lists  is  very  flexible  and  turns  out 
to  be  a  convenient  representation  for  many  kinds  of  information: 

(2  3  5  7   11    13   17   19)  A  set  of  numbers. 

( (-  B)    +    (SQRT    ( (B  *  B)    -    (4  *  A  *  C) ) ) )  An  algebraic  expression. 

(I    (saw    ((that    (gasoline  can))    explode)))  A  parsed  sentence. 

(GREEN  GRASS)  An  assertion. 

(AND    (ON  A  B)    (ON  A  C)    (NOT    (TOUCH  B  C)))  A  conjunctive  clause. 

The  internal  representation  of  LISP  lists  is  built  from  primitives  called  CONS 
cells.  Each  CONS  cell  is  an  address  that  contains  a  pair  of  pointers,  and  each 
pointer  can  point  either  to  an  atom  or  to  another  CONS  cell.  In  a  typical  LISP 
implementation,  the  CONS  cells  are  computer  words  with  pointers  in  their 
right  and  left  halves,  like  the  cell  z  diagrammed  below: 


CAR(z) 


The  CONS  cell  z. 


-►   CDR(z) 


The  left-half  pointer  points  to  the  CAR  of  the  cell  z;  the  right  half,  to  the 
CDR  (pronounced  cood-er;  the  names  originated  in  the  architecture  of  the 


R 


LISP 


17 


IBM  704).  The  list  (A  B  C)  is  represented  by  three  CONS  cells  whose  left  halves 
point  to  the  atoms  A,  B,  and  C,  and  whose  right  halves  are  used  to  link  the 
cells  together: 


NIL 


B 


In  mathematics,  sets  are  taken  as  the  fundamental  objects,  and  other 
concepts,  such  as  ordered  pairs,  sequences,  tuples,  and  relations,  are  defined  in 
terms  of  sets.  LISP  data  may  be  regarded  as  an  alternative  formalism  in  which 
the  ordered  pair,  represented  by  the  CONS  cell,  is  fundamental.  Sequences  and 
sets  are  then  represented  by  LISP  lists,  an  n-tuple  by  a  list  of  length  n,  and 
a  relation  by  a  list  of  tuples. 

The  list  structure  of  LISP  can  be  used  to  model  essentially  any  data 
structure.  For  example,  a  two-dimensional  array  may  be  represented  as  a 
list  of  rows,  and  each  row  in  turn  as  a  list  of  elements.  Of  course,  for 
many  purposes,  this  implementation  of  arrays  would  be  relatively  clumsy  or 
inefficient,  but  the  point  is  not  so  much  to  model  standard  data  structures 
with  lists  as  to  model  the  complicated  and  often  unpredictable  data  structures 
that  arise  in  many  symbol-manipulation  tasks  (see  below). 

Control  structure.  LISP's  control  structure  is  primarily  applicative — 
the  flow  of  control  is  guided  by  the  application  of  functions  to  arguments, 
where  the  arguments  in  turn  may  be  applications  of  functions.  This  contrasts 
with  the  sequential  control  structure  of  most  programming  languages,  in  which 
separate  statements  are  executed  one  after  another.  Compare,  for  example, 
the  ALGOL-like  and  LISP-like  versions  of  a  program  to  compute  the  two  square 
roots  of  a  nonnegative  number: 

ALGOL-like:         procedure  ROOTS    (value  X:    real;    Rl ,    R2:    real); 
begin 

Rl  <-  SQRT    (X)  ; 
R2  <-  -Rl 
end 


LISP-like:  ROOTS    (X)  :    (BOTHSIGNS    (SQRT  X) ) 

where  BOTHSIGNS  (Y) :  (LIST  Y  (MINUS  Y) )  . 

The  LISP  function  ROOTS  applies  the  duplicating  function  BOTHSIGNS  to  the 
result  of  the  function  SQRT.  In  LISP,  statements  are  not  differentiated  from 
expressions,  nor  are  procedures  differentiated  from  functions.  Each  function, 
whether  it  is  a  language  primitive  or  defined  by  the  user,  returns  a  single 
value  in  the  form  of  a  pointer  to  a  list  structure. 


18  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

Syntax.  LISP  syntax  reflects  its  uniform  control  structure.  A  LISP 
expression  is  defined  recursively  either  as  an  atom,  which  when  evaluated 
returns  its  value,  or  as  a  list  of  the  form 

(F  eie2...en). 

When  evaluated,  this  expression  first  evaluates  (again  recursively)  the  argu- 
ments e\  through  en,  which  may  be  atoms  or  lists,  and  then  calls  (evaluates) 
the  function  F  with  those  values  as  arguments.  For  example,  the  expression 
(TIMES  3    (PLUS  4  1))  would  evaluate  to  15. 

Dynamic  scoping.  The  scoping  rule  of  LISP  is  also  closely  linked  to 
its  applicative  control  structure.  Purely  dynamic  scoping  is  used:  During  the 
evaluation  of  a  function  F,  a  nonlocal  variable  x  will  have  the  value  bound 
to  it  most  recently  in  the  calling  hierarchy.  In  other  words,  if  x  was  assigned 
a  value  by  the  function  that  called  F,  say,  G,  that  will  be  its  value  when  F 
is  evaluated;  otherwise,  the  value  for  x  would  be  the  one  bound  to  it  by  the 
function  that  called  G;  and  so  on.  Scoping  in  LISP,  then,  depends  only  on  the 
calling  order  of  functions  (dynamic  scoping)  and  in  no  way  depends  on  when 
or  where  they  were  declared  in  the  program  text  (static  scoping). 

Recursion.  Dynamic  scoping  allows  the  free  use  of  recursive  functions — 
functions  that  can  call  themselves.  Recursive  functions  are  most  easily  under- 
stood as  operations  that  are  defined  in  terms  of  themselves.  For  example,  the 
factorial  function,  iV! ,  on  the  positive  integers  is  defined  as  1  when  N  =  1 
and  otherwise  as  N(N  —  1)!.  Thus,  the  control  structure  of  LISP,  like  the 
data  structure,  is  uniform  and  based  on  a  recursive  definition.  In  the  sample 
LISP  programs  presented  later  in  this  article,  we  illustrate  recursion  with  a 
LISP  version  of  the  factorial  function  and  other  LISP  programs. 

Storage  allocation  and  garbage  collection.  LISP  relies  completely  on 
dynamic  allocation  of  space  for  data  storage.  During  execution  of  a  program, 
each  evaluation  of  the  CONS  function  causes  one  CONS  cell  to  be  allocated  to 
the  list  structure  being  manipulated.  Gradually,  the  program's  available  space 
(e.g.,  the  free  list  of  CONS  cells)  is  used  up.  Fortunately,  after  the  program 
has  used  a  CONS  cell,  it  often  forgets  all  about  it — that  is,  it  retains  no  direct 
or  indirect  pointer  to  it  and  will  never  access  it  again — so  these  old  CONS  cells 
can  be  recycled.  When  the  available  storage  gets  low,  LISP  systems  suspend 
the  user  program  and  call  the  garbage  collector,  which  locates  all  the  forgotten 
cells  and  makes  them  available  again  to  the  user  program. 

Comparing  this  scheme  to  static  allocation,  in  which  each  variable  or 
array  has  a  fixed  amount  of  storage  reserved  for  it  before  the  program  is 
executed,  it  is  clear  that  static  allocation  requires  less  overhead.  But  for 
LISP,  in  which  list  structures  grow  unpredictably,  static  allocation  would  be 
hopelessly  restrictive.  The  time  spent  in  garbage  collection  is  part  of  the  price 
paid  for  the  flexibility  of  LISP's  data  structure. 


B  LISP  19 

LISP's  Primitive  Functions 

There  are  only  a  few  basic  LISP  functions  in  terms  of  which  other  LISP 
functions  can  be  defined.  (Most  LISP  programming  environments  offer  a  very 
large  set  of  utility  functions  for  the  convenience  of  the  programmer.  They 
include  systems  functions  for  writing  files,  etc.,  and  other  functions  written 
in  terms  of  these  few  primitives.)  With  the  exception  of  the  function  CONS, 
which  causes  a  CONS  cell  to  be  made,  none  of  these  basic  functions  has  any 
side  effects,  so  they  can  be  described  by  the  value  they  return. 

Most  LISP  functions  evaluate  their  arguments  before  computing  anything 
from  them.  (Here,  only  the  function  QUOTE  does  not.)  Beginner's  problems 
with  LISP  frequently  stem  from  not  making  the  distinction  between  an  expres- 
sion and  the  value  of  that  expression.  For  instance,  if  the  value  of  the  atom 
A  is  ALDO,  then  the  value  of  the  expression  A  is  ALDO,  but  the  value  of  the 
expression  (QUOTE  A)  is  A.  The  value  of  an  unbound  atom  is  undefined  in  LISP 
and  will  cause  an  error  in  all  implementations. 

In  Table  B-l,  let  the  atom  X  have  as  its  value  (TIMES  3  (PLUS  4  1)),  which 
is  a  list.  The  symbols  e,  ei,  pi,  etc.,  stand  for  any  expressions  given  as 
arguments  to  the  functions,  and  e,  ei,  pi,  etc.,  stand  for  the  values  of  those 
expressions.  The  seven  functions  have  the  power  to  compute  anything  that 
can  be  computed — they  have  the  computing  power  of  a  Turing  machine. 
However,  they  do  not  allow  one  to  write  programs  in  the  style  common 
to  most  programming  languages,  that  is,  as  a  sequence  of  statements  that 
operate  by  causing  side  effects.  The  prime  example  of  this  kind  of  statement 
is  assignment,  performed  by  the  SET  function  in  LISP: 


Expression 

Value 

Comment 

(SET  ei  e2) 

e2 

Like  all  LISP  functions,  SET 

(SET    'Y    (EVAL  X)) 

15 

returns  a  value,  but  its  real 

(SET    'Y  X) 

(TIMES 

3    (PLUS  4  1)) 

purpose  is  its  side  effect. 

(SETQ  Y  X) 

(TIMES 

3    (PLUS  4   1)) 

The  more  commonly  used 
form,  SETQ,  automatically 
quotes  its  first  argument. 

Another  construct  imported  to  LISP  from  other  programming  languages 
is  the  sequential-statement  program  format.  In  LISP,  this  is  accomplished 
with  the  PROG  function.  (It  is  really  stretching  terminology  to  call  PROG  a 
function,  since  it  is  basically  a  BEGIN-END  block  with  local  variables.  However, 
PROG  does  have  the  standard  LISP-function  syntax  and  does  always  return  a 
value.)  Here  is  what  a  PROG  block  looks  like: 

(PROG  (atomi  . . .  atom^)  e\e2  •  •  •  en) . 


20 


Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research 


VI 


TABLE  B-l 
LISP  Primitive  Functions 


Expression 


Value 


Comments 


e 
X 

(QUOTE  e) 
(QUOTE  X) 


(CAR  e) 
(CAR  X) 


(TIMES  3    (PLUS  4   1)) 

e 
X 


first  element  of  e 
TIMES 


An  expression  is  an  atom  or  a 
list  of  the  form  (F  e\  . . .  en) . 

QUOTE  is  essential  to  manipulate 
an  expression  itself,  rather  than 
its  value.  We  abbreviate 
(QUOTE  e)  as  'e. 

Not  defined  if  e  is  not  a  list. 


(CDR  e) 
(CDR  X) 
(CADDR  X) 


the  rest  of  e 
(3   (PLUS  4  1)) 
(PLUS  4  1) 


Not  defined  if  e  is  not-  a  list. 
(CAR  (CDR  e))  is  abbreviated 
(CADR  €),  (CDR  (CDR  (CAR  e))) 
is  abbreviated  (CDDAR  e),  etc. 


(CONS  e,  e2) 

(CONS  'F  X) 

(CONS  ' (A  B)  '  (A  B) ) 

(CONS  NIL  NIL) 


prefix  ei   onto  e2  Has  side  effect  of  setting  up  a 

(F    (TIMES  3    (PLUS  4  1)))      CONS  cell.  (CAR  (CONS  tx  e2)) 

((A  B)   A  B)  is  d,  (CDR  (CONS  t\  e2))  is  e2. 
(NIL) 


(EQUAL  e,e2) 

(EQUAL    '(B)    (CONS    'B  NIL)) 

(EQUAL  X  15) 

(EQUAL    (EVAL  X)    15) 

(ATOM  e) 
(ATOM    (CAR  X)) 
(ATOM    (CADDR  X)) 

(COND    (Pl  ej)  ...  (pn  en)) 

(COND    (NIL    'A)    (T    'B)) 


T  ife, 

=  e2 

T 

NIL 

T 

T   ife 

is  an  atom 

T 

NIL 

Ife,  = 

=  T  then  pi 

else 

if  en 

=  T  then  pv 

Note  how  NIL  is  used  to  mean  "False. 
(EQUAL  e  'e))  =  NIL,  usually,  but 
(EQUAL  NIL  '  NIL)  =  T. 


(ATOM  NIL) 


This  is  the  basic  branching 
function  of  LISP. 


(EVAL  c) 
(EVAL  X) 


value  of  e 
15 


EVAL  is  the  opposite  of  QUOTE; 
(EVAL  'e)  =  value(e). 


B  LISP  21 

PROG  does  not  evaluate  its  first  argument,  which  has  to  be  a  list  (possibly 
empty)  of  atoms.  Each  of  these  atoms  is  a  local  variable  inside  the  PROG 
block.  The  subsequent  expressions  ei,  e2,  etc.,  are  evaluated  in  that  order. 
The  special  function  (RETURN  eo)  causes  termination  of  the  PROG,  returning 
the  value  of  eo . 

A  few  of  the  more  commonly  used  nonprimitive  functions  are  defined  here 
in  terms  of  LISP  primitives: 

(NULL  e)  or  (NOT  e)  <-*  (COND  (e  NIL)  (T  T)) 

(ORei...en)  *->  (COND  (ei  T) ...  (en  T)  (T  NIL)) 

(AND  ei  .  .  .  en)  *-►  (COND  ((NOT  ex)  NIL) .  .  .  ((NOT  en)  NIL)  (T  T)) 

(LIST  ei  .  .  .  en)  <-►  (CONS  d  (CONS  . . .  (CONS  en  NIL) ...)). 

Thus,  (NULL  e)  returns  T  only  if  e  evaluates  to  NIL,  and  (OR  e\  . . .  en)  returns 
T  if  and  only  if  e  evaluates  to  TRUE. 

User-defined  functions  in  LISP  are  written  in  a  notation  derived  from  the 
lambda-calculus  of  Church  (1941).  The  LAMBDA  function  in  LISP  corresponds 
loosely  to  a  procedure  declaration  in  an  ALGOL-like  language,  in  the  same 
way  that  PROG  corresponds  to  a  BEGIN-END  block.  The  expression 

(LAMBDA  (atomi  .  . .  atomm)  e) 

evaluates  to  a  function  of  m  parameters,  where  e  is  the  LISP  form  of  an 
expression  to  be  evaluated.  When  a  function  is  called,  giving  m  expressions 
as  actual  parameters,  all  actual  parameters  are  evaluated  and  their  values  are 
bound  to  the  formal  parameter  atoms.  Thus,  if  the  user  defines  the  function 
EXCHANGE  as: 

EXCHANGE:  (LAMBDA  (Y)  (LIST  (CADR  Y)  (CARY))), 

the  value  of  (EXCHANGE  '(A  B))  would  be  (B  A).  We  have  now  introduced 
enough  of  LISP  to  go  through  some  sample  programs. 

Examples  of  LISP  Programming 

FACTORIAL — A  simple  recursive  program.  This  example  was  chosen 
for  the  sole  purpose  of  showing  how  recursion  works  in  LISP.  Even  so,  it  is 
not  unrealistically  simple. 

FACTORIAL:   (LAMBDA  (N)  (COND  ((EQUAL  N  1)  1) 

(T  (TIMES  N  (FACTORIAL  (SUB1  N)))))) 

The  evaluation  of  an  expression  like  (FACTORIAL  3)  proceeds  as  follows:  First, 
N  is  bound  to  3  and  then  the  (COND. . .)  expression  is  evaluated.  COND  takes  a 
list  of  pairs  of  expressions  as  its  arguments — the  first  pair  is  composed  of  the 


22  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

expressions  (EQUAL  N  1)  and  1.  If  the  left  half  of  the  pair  evaluates  to  TRUE, 
the  value  of  the  right  half  is  returned  as  the  value  of  the  COND.  Otherwise, 
the  next  pair  is  processed. 

In  this  case,  since  (EQUAL  N  1)  evaluates  to  NIL,  that  is,  "false,"  the  next 
pair,  composed  of  T  and  (TIMES  N  (FACTORIAL  (SUB1  N)))  must  be  evaluated. 
Since  T  always  evaluates  to  TRUE — it  is  a  special  symbol — the  value  of  the 
COND  expression  is  the  value  of  (TIMES  3  (FACTORIAL  2) ) ,  so  FACTORIAL  must 
be  called  again  with  an  argument  of  2.  These  recursive  calls  in  the  evaluation 
of  (FACTORIAL  3)  can  be  summarized  as  follows: 

value  of  (FACTORIAL  3)=3X  value  of  (FACTORIAL  2) 
value  of  (FACTORIAL  2)  =  2  X  value  of  (FACTORIAL  1) 
value  of  (FACTORIAL  1)  =  1  . 

The  third  call  of  FACTORIAL  in  this  evaluation  binds  N  to  1  and,  since  the 
case  of  N  =  1  is  treated  specially  in  the  definition  of  the  function,  it  can 
return  a  numeric  value,  namely,  1,  without  recursion.  Most  recursive-function 
definitions  are  of  this  form:  a  general  case  involving  a  recursive  call  with 
a  "diminished"  argument  and  a  special  case  for  some  known  value  of  the 
argument. 

The  various  calls  to  FACTORIAL  are  "stacked"  like  any  other  procedure 
calls,  so  that  after  (FACTORIAL  1)  is  evaluated — "returns"  a  value — the  evalua- 
tion of  (FACTORIAL  2)  continues;  and  so  on. 

Recursion  is  a  programming  method  of  great  power  in  tasks  that  have  an 
inherently  recursive  structure,  which  is  the  case  in  much  of  AI  problem  solving. 
If  the  programmer  can  think  of  a  way  to  reduce  the  general  problem  to 
simpler  problems  of  the  same  form,  which  finally  reduce  to  one  or  two  special 
cases,  he  need  not  state  the  step-by-step  solution  to  the  general  case.  In  our 
FACTORIAL  example,  this  reduction  was  accomplished  in  the  very  definition 
of  the  FACTORIAL  function,  N\  =  N(N  -  1)! ,  which  was  itself  recursive.  If 
we  had  been  given  an  alternate  definition  of  FACTORIAL,  like 

AM  =  N(N-l)(N-2)---  1, 

we  might  have  written  a  more  standard  program,  perhaps  using  a  loop,  to 
evaluate  the  function.  The  power  of  thinking  recursively  in  AI  is  illustrated 
in  the  next  example. 

"Tower  of  Hanoi" — Recursive  problem  solving.  In  the  "Tower  of 
Hanoi"  puzzle,  a  tower  formed  by  disks  stacked  on  a  peg  must  be  transferred 
to  another  peg,  say,  from  peg  A  to  peg  B  in  Figure  B-l,  moving  only  one  disk 
at  a  time  and  never  placing  a  larger  disk  on  top  of  a  smaller.  (Peg  C  may  be 
used  for  temporary  storage.) 


B 


LISP 


23 


Figure  B-l.     The  "Tower  of  Hanoi"  puzzle. 

In  looking  for  a  recursive  solution  to  the  problem,  one  would  notice  that 
to  move  a  tower  of  just  two  disks,  one  would  move  the  smaller  disk  from  peg  A 
to  peg  C,  then  move  the  big  disk  from  peg  A  to  peg  B,  and  finally  move  the 
little  disk  back  on  top  on  peg  B.  Now  the  general  problem  of  moving  a  tower 
of  TV  disks  can  be  reduced  to  three  steps,  as  shown  in  Figure  B-2:  Transfer 
the  subtower  of  disks  1  through  TV  —  1  from  peg  A  to  peg  C,  move  the  biggest 
disk,  TV,  from  peg  A  to  peg  B,  and  then  transfer  the  subtower  back  from  peg  C 
to  peg  B. 

Of  course,  in  the  special  case  of  only  one  disk  (TV  =1),  the  solution  is 
trivial — just  move  the  disk  from  peg  A  to  peg  B.  Now  we  can  directly  write 
a  recursive  program  to  find  the  general  solution. 

MOVETOWER : 

(LAMBDA  (DiskList  PegA  PegB  PegC) 
(IF  DiskList  THEN 
(PROG  () 

(MOVETOWER  (CDR  DiskList)  PegA  PegC  PegB) 

(PRINT  (LIST  'Move  (CAR  DiskList)  'from  PegA  'to  PegB)) 

(MOVETOWER  (CDR  DiskList)  PegC  PegB  PegA))))  . 


Figure  B-2.  Solution  of  the  "Tower  of  Hanoi1'  puzzle. 


24  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

The  IF . . .  THEN  construct  here  is  an  abbreviation  of  the  COND  statement 
that  is  very  commonly  used.  If  DiskList  is  not  empty,  the  MOVETOWER 
function  will  first  execute  a  recursive  call  on  the  rest  of  DiskList  to  move 
the  subtower  to  peg  C,  print  that  it  is  moving  the  last  disk,  and  then  execute 
another  recursive  call  to  move  the  subtower  back  to  peg  B.  Here  is  the  printout 
resulting  from  evaluation  of  MOVETOWER  with  a  three-disk  tower: 

(MOVETOWER    ' (Diskl  Disk2  Disk3)    'A    'B    'C) : 

(Move  Diskl   from  A  to  B) 

(Move  Disk2  from  A  to  C) 

(Move  Diskl   from  B  to  C) 

(Move  Disk3  from  A  to  B) 

(Move  Diskl   from  C  to  A) 

(Move  Disk2  from  C  to  B) 

(Move  Diskl   from  A  to  B) 
NIL    . 

Observe  the  following  points: 

1.  NIL  is  returned  as  the  value  of  the  PROG. 

2.  Each  instance  of  the  function  MOVETOWER  calls  two  other  instances. 
The  reader  is  invited  to  draw  the  tree  of  recursive  calls  to  MOVETOWER 
and  calculate  how  many  moves  it  takes  for  N  disks.  By  the  way,  it  is 
not  hard  to  see  that  this  solution  is  optimal. 

3.  One  may  regard  the  tree  of  calls  to  MOVETOWER  as  a  problem-reduction 
tree  consisting  entirely  of  AND  nodes  (see  Article  II. B2,  in  Vol.  I).  When 
the  subproblems  are  of  the  same  form  as  their  parent  nodes,  problem- 
reduction  methods  lead  to  recursive  solutions — a  very  general  situation 
in  AI  and  a  strong  point  of  LISP. 

Manipulating  facts  and  rules.  This  sample  program  makes  simple 
logical  deductions  from  a  database  of  assertions  represented  as  LISP  lists. 
The  assertions  are  of  two  kinds:  facts  indicating  a  certain  predicate  is  true 
of  a  certain  object  (e.g.,  (MAN  Socrates)  asserts  that  Socrates  is  a  man)  and 
a  general  rule  saying  that  one  predicate  implies  another.  These  rules  will 
be  represented  as  lists  of  the  form  (ALL  predicatei  predicate2);  for  example, 
(ALL  MAN  MORTAL)  asserts  that  all  men  are  mortal. 

The  program  PROVE,  described  below,  takes  two  arguments,  a  statement 
such  as  (MORTAL  Socrates)  and  a  database  in  the  form  of  a  list  of  assertions, 
and  returns  T  if  the  statement  can  be  deduced  from  its  database,  NIL  if  not. 
PROVE  uses  two  auxiliary  functions,  FINDASSERTION  and  PROVESIT. 

PROVE: 

(LAMBDA  (Statement  DataBase)  (FINDASSERTION  DataBase)) 


B  LISP  25 

FINDASSERTION : 

(LAMBDA  (RestOfDataBase) 

(COND  ((NULL  RestOfDataBase)  NIL) 

((OR  (PROVESIT  (CAR  RestOfDataBase))) 

(FINDASSERTION  (CDR  RestOfDataBase))))) 
PROVESIT: 

(LAMBDA  (Assertion) 

(OR  (EQUAL  Statement  Assertion) 

(AND  (EQUAL  (CAR  Assertion)  'ALL) 

(EQUAL  (CADDR  Assertion)  (CAR  Statement)) 
(PROVE  (CONS  (CADR  Assertion)  (CDR  Statement)) 
DataBase)))) 

We  would  describe  this  system  of  three  functions  in  English  by  saying  that  a 
statement  can  be  proved  from  a  database  if  the  first  assertion  in  the  database 
proves  it,  or  it  can  be  proved  from  the  rest  of  the  database.  (The  LISP  function 
OR  returns  the  value  of  the  first  clause  that  does  not  evaluate  to  NIL.)  An 
assertion  in  the  database  proves  a  statement  of  the  form  (predicate  object) 
if  it  is  either  identical  with  the  statement  or  of  the  form  (ALL  predicate2 
predicate)  and  the  new  statement  (predicate2  object)  can  be  proved  from  the 
database. 

Evaluation  of  the  form  (PROVE  '(MORTAL  Socrates)  '((MAN  Socrates) 
(ALL  MAN  MORTAL) ) )  builds  up  the  following  tree  of  function  calls  before  return- 
ing T: 

PROVE  ...  to  prove  (MORTAL  Socrates) 

FINDASSERTION 

/  \ 

PROVESIT        FINDASSERTION 

I 
PROVESIT 

I 
PROVE        ...  to  prove  (MAN  Socrates) 

I 
FINDASSERTION 

I 
PROVESIT  . 

Observe  the  following  points: 

1.  Clarity  is  enhanced  by  splitting  the  prover,  which  could  be  written  as 
a  single  function,  into  three  smaller  functions  that  each  perform  an 
identifiable  subtask. 

2.  The  three  functions  are  purely  applicative — no  assignments  or  PROG 
statements.  LISP  programs  tend  to  be  most  elegant  when  written  in  this 
style,  but  for  MOVETOWER  it  would  have  been  clumsy. 


26  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

3.  Though  they  do  not  directly  call  themselves,  the  functions  PROVE  and 
PROVESIT  are  still  considered  recursive,  since  the  system  of  three  func- 
tions is  mutually  recursive — from  each  function,  there  is  a  chain  of  calls 
leading  back  to  itself: 

PROVE 


FINDASSERTION  — ►  PROVESIT 


4.  FINDASSERTION  illustrates  a  very  common  scheme  for  recursion  "down 
a  list,"  meaning  that  the  diminished  argument  of  the  recursive  call  is  the 
rest  of  the  original  list  argument  after  processing  its  CAR.  This  general 
form  can  be  expressed  symbolically  as  the  pattern: 

F:     (LAMBDA    (X)     (COND    ((NULL    (X)    NIL) 

(T    (G    (H    (CAR  X))(F    (CDR  X))))))), 

where    F,    G,    and    H    are    arbitrary    functions.       In    FINDASSERTION, 
G  =  OR  and  H  =  PROVESIT,  making 

(FINDASSERTION  •  (ex  .  . . en)) 

=  (OR    (PROVESIT  eO  ...  (PROVESIT  en))  . 

If  G  were  CONS  instead  of  OR,  another  very  common  pattern  would 
result: 

(F    '  (ex  ...en))  =  ((H  eO  ...  (H  en))  , 

that  is,  the  values  of  H  on  the  elements  e\  to  en  would  be  CONSed  into 
a  new  list  that  is  returned  as  the  value  of  the  function  call. 

5.  The  variable  statement  is  not  defined  as  a  parameter  to  PROVESIT,  and 
so  the  dynamic  scoping  rule  of  LISP  applies.  The  variable  statement  is 
defined  by  the  function  PROVE,  which  calls  FINDASSERTION,  which 
in  turn  calls  PROVESIT,  so  the  value  of  statement  in  the  function 
PROVESIT  is  the  one  established  in  PROVE.  If  PROVESIT  now  calls 
PROVE  and  passes  it  a  new  value  of  statement  as  a  parameter,  this  new 
value  is  used  in  the  next  instantiation  of  PROVESIT. 


Some  Important  Features  of  LISP 

As  described  above,  data  and  programs  in  LISP  are  highly  recursive  and 
are  represented  as  nested  lists.  There  are  even  closer  connections  between 
them. 

Programs  mirror  data.  In  LISP,  functions  may  be  written  so  as  to 
mirror  the  structure  of  the  data  they  operate  upon.    As  an  example,  the 


B  LISP  27 

function  SUBSTITUTE  takes  any  list  Object  and  generates  a  copy  of  it  in  which 
every  occurrence  of  a  given  atom  Old  is  replaced  by  another  list  or  atom  New. 

SUBSTITUTE: 

(LAMBDA  (Object  Old  New) 

(COND  ((ATOM  Object)  (COND  ((EQUAL  Object  Old)  New)  (T  Object))) 
(T  (CONS  (SUBSTITUTE  (CAR  Object)  Old  New) 

(SUBSTITUTE  (CDR  Object)  Old  New))))) 

Suppose  we  evaluate  (SUBSTITUTE  '(PLUS  (TIMES  A  X)  X)  'X  (PLUS  2  3)), 
replacing  all  occurrences  of  X  with  (PLUS  2  3) .  SUBSTITUTE  is  called  a  total  of 
13  times.  If  we  draw  out  the  internal  representation  of  (PLUS  (TIMES  A  X)  B) 
in  terms  of  CONS  cells  and  pointers,  we  find  that  it  contains  six  CONS  cells  and 
seven  atoms.  In  evaluating  this  structure,  SUBSTITUTE  is  called  exactly  once 
for  each  of  these  pieces,  and  the  tree  structure  of  instances  of  SUBSTITUTE  is, 
in  general,  isomorphic  to  the  internal  structure  of  its  argument.  There  are  two 
cases:  Either  Object  is  an  atom,  and  the  appropriate  value  is  returned  without 
recursion,  or  Object  is  a  list,  in  which  case  SUBSTITUTE  is  applied  recursively 
to  the  CAR  and  CDR  of  Object  and  the  results  CONSed  together.  Note  that 
should  Old  not  occur  in  Object,  the  body  of  SUBSTITUTE  simplifies  to: 

(IF  (ATOM  Object) 

THEN  Object 

ELSE  (CONS  (CAR  Object)  (CDR  Object)))  . 

This  parallelism  of  control  structure  to  data  structure  is  an  enormous  help 
in  dealing  with  complex  nested  data.  It  is  very  characteristic  of  programming 
in  LISP  that,  in  writing  functions,  one  need  only  concern  oneself  with  the 
recursive  definition  of  the  data  and  not  with  all  possible  cases,  much  as  a 
language  is  adequately  and  conveniently  described  by  its  grammar  for  many 
purposes. 

Programs  are  data.  The  internal  representation  of  a  LISP  program 
(assuming  it  has  not  been  compiled)  is  the  same  as  that  of  any  other  multi- 
level list,  that  is,  CONS  cells  and  atoms.  LISP  is  unique  among  programming 
languages  in  storing  its  programs  as  structured  data.  (Of  course,  many  lan- 
guages store  programs  unstructured,  as  bit  strings  or  sequences  of  tokens.) 
This  property  is  very  important,  for  several  reasons. 

First,  it  is  particularly  easy  to  write  LISP  programs  that  generate  LISP 
expressions  and  programs,  as  in  automatic -programming  research  (Chap.  X). 
Second,  functions  can  be  passed  as  parameters  to  other  functions  (just  as  any 
list  structure  can).  For  instance,  suppose  we  had  a  function  to  do  minimax 
game-tree  search  as  in  chess-playing  programs  (see  Article  II.C5a,  in  Vol.  i).  We 
could  pass  as  a  parameter  to  the  search  routine  its  evaluation  function — the 
code  that  evaluates  the  positions  to  determine  which  are  "best"  to  pursue. 
Changing  this  parameter,  under  the  control  of  some  strategy,  would  cause 
different  moves  to  be  chosen,  depending  possibly  on  global  strategy,  known 


28  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

traits  of  the  opponent,  or  other  considerations.  Third,  there  is  procedural 
representation  of  knowledge:  LISP  procedures  for  deducing  facts  can  be  stored 
in  a  database  as  if  they  were  facts. 

Last,  and  most  important,  is  the  manner  in  which  LISP  can  be  a  founda- 
tion for  more  advanced  languages.  The  method  is  to  write  an  interpreter,  in 
LISP,  for  a  new  LISP-like  language.  Syntactic  constructs  of  the  new  language 
are  represented  as  multilevel  lists  just  as  in  LISP  itself,  making  the  inter- 
pretation relatively  easy  to  do.  The  special  AI  languages  MICRO-PLANNER, 
CONNIVER,  and  QLISP  were  all  implemented  in  this  way. 

LISP  is  interpretive.  Originally  LISP  was  to  be  a  compiler-based  lan- 
guage. While  design  of  the  first  compiler  was  under  way,  it  was  recognized 
that  the  LISP  function  EVAL  was  in  essence  a  LISP  interpreter.  Before,  EVAL 
had  been  of  only  theoretical  interest  and  existed  only  on  paper.  It  was  soon 
hand-coded,  and  long  before  a  compiler  had  been  implemented,  a  LISP  inter- 
preter became  available. 

Interpretive  execution  (or  evaluation)  has  strong  advantages  during  pro- 
gram development,  chiefly  in  that  it  permits  interactive  programming.  Once  a 
program  is  fully  operational,  it  is  usually  compiled  for  greater  speed.  Another 
important  consequence  of  interpretation  is  greater  flexibility  of  the  language 
itself.  An  interpreter  is  much  more  accessible  to  change  than  a  compiler, 
especially  LISP  interpreters,  which  tend  to  be  written  almost  entirely  in  LISP 
itself. 

LISP  is  interactive.  Any  interactive  language  system  must  be  inter- 
preter based  rather  than  compiler  based.  Interpretation  for  LISP  is  far  easier 
than  for  most  languages,  because  of  its  uniform  syntax.  Other  features  like 
dynamic  allocation  and  the  absence  of  type  declarations  also  suit  it  to  inter- 
active use.  Essentially  all  existing  LISP  systems  are  interactive. 

Since  LISP  encourages  the  composition  of  large  programs  out  of  many 
small  functions,  large  programs  can  be  developed  incrementally  by  writing 
and  debugging  the  component  functions  one  at  a  time.  There  are  a  few 
large  LISP  systems  that  provide  not  only  the  direct  language  support  but 
also  an  entire  "environment"  for  interactive  LISP  programming,  including 
editors,  debugging  and  tracing  facilities,  and  alternative  syntactic  forms  more 
convenient  than  the  pure  list  notation.  These  LISP  systems  also  extend  the 
basic  language  with  additional  special-purpose  functions  and  sometimes  new 
data  types  (see  Sec.  VI. C). 

Disadvantages  of  LISP 

Ugly  syntax.  A  common  complaint  about  the  list-structure  format  of 
LISP  programs  is  that  it  makes  them  difficult  to  read.  The  only  syntactic 
items  are  separators,  such  as  spaces  and  parentheses,  which  provide  most 
of  the  structure.  This  way  of  representing  structure  is  convenient  for  the 
machine  to  read,  but  inconvenient  for  humans.     In  practice,   facilities  are 


B  LISP  29 

provided  for  printing  out  programs  so  that  the  structure  is  also  indicated  with 
indention.  No  attempted  alternative  formats  have  caught  on  (with,  perhaps, 
the  exception  of  the  CLISP  dialect  provided  in  the  INTERLISP  system).  The 
utility  of  LISP's  structured  representation  of  code  outweighs  the  nuisance  of 
its  external  form. 

One  data  type.  Not  having  distinct  data  types  is  harmful  when  it 
prevents  type-checking  at  run  time,  where  bugs  can  often  be  detected  early. 
However,  many  LISP  systems  do  support  additional  data  types,  such  as  strings, 
arrays,  and  records  (see  also  QLISP  in  Article  VI. C2). 

Inefficiency.  Any  language  is  relatively  slow  when  executed  interpre- 
tively.  Speed  is  traded  for  convenience  and  extensibility.  Some  LISP  compil- 
ers, however,  produce  fairly  efficient  code:  Because  of  its  use  in  the  MACSYMA 
system,  MACLISP  produces  very  efficient  code  for  numeric  calculations. 

Lack  of  a  language  standard.  Unlike  FORTRAN  and  other  well-known 
languages,  there  has  never  been  an  attempt  to  agree  on  a  standardized  LISP. 
The  absence  of  a  language  standard  and  the  proliferation  of  incompatible 
versions  make  LISP  badly  suited  to  be  a  production  language,  and  in  AI 
research  work  there  are  severe  difficulties  in  transporting  LISP  programs  to 
machines  running  a  different  LISP. 

Conclusion 

It  has  always  been  the  case  that  almost  all  LISP  use  has  been  in  the  AI 
community  and  that  almost  all  AI  research  employs  LISP  or  a  language  built 
on  LISP.  Although  it  is  really  a  general-purpose,  list-processing  language,  LISP 
has  not  found  a  niche  outside  of  the  AI  community.  But  among  AI  researchers, 
the  various  shortcomings  of  the  language  have  never  outweighed  their  feeling 
for  its  power  and  elegance  as  a  tool  for  programming  and  for  thought. 

References 

Introductory  texts  on  LISP  include  the  books  by  Weissman  (1967),  Fried- 
man (1974),  and  Siklossy  (1976),  and  the  second  half  of  Winston's  (1977) 
text  on  Artificial  Intelligence.  Allen  (1978)  gives  a  complete  introduction  to 
the  theory  and  practice  of  LISP  programming.  Pratt  (1979)  is  an  excellent, 
short  introduction.  McCarthy  (1978)  is  a  fascinating  historical  study  of  the 
theoretical  origins  of  the  language. 

The  practical  side  of  AI  programming  is  covered  more  thoroughly  in  the 
books  by  Winston  and  Horn  (1981);  Charniak,  Riesbeck,  and  McDermott 
(1979);  and  Schank  and  Riesbeck  (1981). 


C.     AI  PROGRAMMING-LANGUAGE  FEATURES 
CI.     Overview 


THE  PURPOSE  of  this  section  on  AI  programming-language  features  is 
two- fold:  to  present  some  powerful  programming  techniques  and  to  show  how 
they  are  implemented  in  some  major  AI  languages.  We  describe  the  special 
data  representations,  control  structures,  pattern-matching  capabilities,  and 
programming  environments  that  have  been  developed  for  AI  programming — 
each  representing  a  data  point  in  AI  researchers'  exploration  of  the  "space 
of  programming  languages."  We  attempt  to  explain  why  these  peculiar  fea- 
tures developed  by  discussing  some  of  the  applications  they  have  found  in  AI 
languages. 

In  these  articles,  we  focus  on  more  advanced  features,  built  on  the  basic 
features  of  LISP:  symbol  manipulation,  list  processing,  and  recursion.  These 
are  attempts  to  supply  primitives  in  the  languages  for  some  higher  level 
conception  of  data  or  control.  We  look  at  seven  AI  languages:  basic  LISP, 
PLANNER,  CONNIYER,  QLISP,  SAIL,  POP-2,  and  FUZZY.  While  the 
approach  we  take  is  largely  comparative,  the  comparisons  are  intended  to 
bring  out  significant  trade-offs  and  alternatives  rather  than  suggest  a  best 
language  for  a  particular  purpose.  In  fact,  except  for  LISP,  none  of  these 
languages  is  in  widespread  use  (see  Article  VIA). 

No  previous  knowledge  of  the  languages  is  assumed  here.  Nor  is  any 
attempt  made  to  help  the  reader  learn  how  to  program  in  them.  Experience 
in  programming  and  familiarity  with  basic  concepts  of  computer  science  (data 
types,  variables,  procedures,  etc.)  will  be  very  helpful,  but  not  essential,  in 
understanding  the  discussion. 

AI  Programming 

From  the  start,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  class  of  "AI  programs"  is 
not  clearly  defined.  As  discussed  in  Article  VI.A,  some  general  features  of  AI 
problems,  such  as  recursive  processing  and  the  unpredictable  form  of  data, 
dictate  some  of  the  structure  of  the  programs.  But  the  variety  of  the  language 
features  developed  to  handle  even  these  basic  issues  shows  that  the  practice 
of  AI  programming  is  still  more  of  an  art  form  than  a  technology. 

Data  structure.  Some  feeling  for  the  difficulties  of  designing  data 
structures  for  an  AI  program  may  be  gained  from  Chapter  III  (in  Vol.  i)  on 
knowledge  representation.    The  simple  representation  known  as  a  semantic 


30 


Cl  Overview  31 

network — a  collection  of  nodes,  representing  objects  and  properties,  linked 
together  by  a  network  of  labeled  links — will  serve  to  illustrate  these  problems 
(see  Article  III.C3,  in  Vol.  i).  As  a  first  cut,  a  semantic  net  can  be  implemented 
as  a  set  of  records,  one  per  node  of  the  net,  each  having  a  field  for  each  kind 
of  link  that  can  emanate  from  the  node.  However,  a  host  of  difficult  issues 
soon  arises: 

1.  What  happens  if  there  are  many  kinds  of  links  (although  any  node  has 
only  a  few)?  In  this  case,  records  would  be  impractical  and  a  property 
list,  that  is,  a  list  of  name- value  pairs  for  each  property  a  given  node 
has,  would  be  more  appropriate. 

2.  Suppose  we  need  to  find  all  nodes  having  a  certain  kind  of  link — do  we 
need  some  kind  of  index? 

3.  How  is  inconsistency  in  the  net  to  be  detected  as  new  facts  are  added? 
For  example,  if  "Terry  ISA  man"  is  already  encoded,  what  happens  when 
"Terry  ISA  woman"  is  asserted? 

These  sorts  of  issues  demonstrate  the  trade-offs  between  alternative  data 
structures.  Each  programming  language  offers  primitives  for  certain  types  of 
data  structures,  including  a  wide  range  of  data  types  (each  with  appropriate 
operations  and  semantics)  and  facilities  for  dealing  with  large  databases.  But 
to  the  extent  that  an  AJ  language  attempts  to  offer  standard  data  facilities, 
it  will  have  to  embody  choices  on  difficult  issues  like  those  listed  above,  and 
it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  the  choices  will  be  optimal  for  all  applications. 

Control  structure.  AI  programs  are  generally  quite  large  and,  like  most 
large  systems,  are  made  up  of  many  modules  each  carrying  out  a  certain  kind 
of  subtask.  These  subtasks  must  be  intelligently  sequenced  to  perform  the 
whole  task  properly.  How  the  task  can  be  divided  up  and  how  the  sequencing 
can  be  accomplished  are  highly  dependent  on  the  control-structure  facilities 
offered  by  the  programming  language. 

In  most  programming  languages,  modules  must  obey  a  strict  calling  hier- 
archy: At  any  point  in  the  execution,  the  options  are  very  limited  as  to  what 
to  do  next — that  is,  only  a  few  alternatives  can  be  indicated  by  conditional 
statements  (IF-THEN  statements,  CASE  statements,  loop-exit  tests,  etc.).  This 
primitive  control  structure  is  inappropriate  in  many  situations  in  which  the 
programmer  wishes  to  specify  the  alternatives  less  rigidly,  leaving  the  decision 
to  the  program. 

In  the  HEARSAY-II  speech-understanding  system  (Article  V.Cl,  in  Vol.  i), 
for  example,  several  modules  monitor  a  global  database,  called  the  blackboard, 
for  situations  in  which  they  can  act.  The  action  of  one  module  (e.g.,  phonetic 
analysis,  syntactic  analysis)  modifies  the  blackboard  and  may  trigger  activity 
in  other  modules.  The  actual  flow  of  control  in  the  system  is  radically 
different  on  each  new  utterance  it  analyzes,  with  some  analyses  depending 
much  more  on  syntactic  constraints  and  some  being  driven  more  by  the  data. 
In  HEARSAY-II,  each  activation  of  a  given  module  is  independent  of  its  last 


32  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

activation.  In  other  control  structures,  it  is  possible  for  modules  to  have  an 
internal  state  that  survives  from  activation  to  activation. 

Pattern  matching.  Both  the  data  structures  and  the  control  mecha- 
nisms of  AI  programs  are  less  rigidly  specified  and  more  complex  than  those  of 
more  general  languages.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  greater  complexity  in  their 
interaction.  On  the  one  hand,  the  control  structure  becomes  increasingly 
"data  driven" — procedures  are  invoked  by  the  situation  rather  than  being 
called  in  a  planned  sequence.  On  the  other  hand,  more  powerful  operations 
for  accessing  the  data  structures  are  introduced.  A  striking  fact  about  AI 
programming  languages  is  the  extensive  use  of  pattern  matching  to  mediate 
both  directions  of  interaction,  and  so  pattern  matching  is  taken  up  here  as  a 
separate  type  of  language  feature. 

In  HEARSAY-II,  for  example,  the  program  modules  can  be  described  as 
looking  for  certain  patterns  in  the  global  blackboard.  The  use  of  pattern- 
matching  in  controlling  the  execution  is  called  pattern- directed  invocation  of 
procedures  and  was  introduced  in  the  PLANNER  language.  In  the  other 
direction,  consider  the  problem  of  finding  an  object  with  certain  properties  in  a 
semantic-network  database.  Since  the  object  being  sought  can  be  described  in 
terms  of  a  small  network  fragment,  the  retrieval  process  is  really  just  matching 
the  fragment  to  the  same  pattern  in  the  database — a  subgraph-isomorphism 
problem.  Unfortunately,  the  best  known  algorithms  for  subgraph  isomorphism 
require  exponential  time,  so  it  is  not  practical  as  a  pattern-matching  method. 
Different  AI  programming  languages  have  offered  various  compromise  retrieval 
schemes. 

Programming  environment.  AI  programs  are  among  the  largest  and 
most  complex  computer  systems  ever  developed  and  present  formidable  design 
and  implementation  problems.  This  brings  up  the  fourth  aspect  on  which 
we  compare  AI  programming  languages,  namely,  their  programming-support 
facilities.  Because  they  are  usually  developed  as  research  projects,  AI  pro- 
grams tend  to  undergo  drastic  revisions.  And  since  they  are  quite  large,  pro- 
grammers have  difficulty  keeping  track  of  things.  However,  this  is  a  human 
limitation  that  the  machine  can  help  overcome.  AI  researchers,  in  their 
capacity  as  language  designers  and  programmers,  have  pioneered  an  interac- 
tive mode  of  programming  in  environments  with  extensive  support:  editors, 
trace  and  debugging  packages,  and  other  aids  for  the  construction  of  large, 
complex  systems. 

Languages  Covered 

High-level  computer  languages  tend  to  fall  into  two  broad  classes.  The 
programs  that  are  written  in  the  ALGOL-like,  or  block-structured,  languages 
are  recognizable  by  the  many  block-delimiting  BEGIN  and  END  statements. 
These  languages  usually  allocate  space  for  variables,  arrays,  and  other  data 
before  the  program  is  executed  (at  compile  time),  so  that  during  execution 


CI  Overview  33 

the  space  available  for  its  data  is  fixed.  The  nested  structure  of  the  blocks 
defines  the  scope  of  the  program  variables,  that  is,  the  region  of  the  program 
in  which  they  are  accessible,  and  similarly  defines  which  procedures  can  call 
which  other  procedures.  Only  one  of  the  seven  AI  programming  languages 
discussed  in  this  chapter,  SAIL,  is  of  the  block-structured  type. 

The  LISP-like  languages  are  characterized  by  dynamic  allocation  and 
dynamic  scoping.  Dynamic  allocation  means  that  the  space  to  be  used  by 
a  data  object  is  not  fixed  ahead  of  time  but  is  allowed  to  grow  and  shrink 
as  needed — an  essential  attribute  for  list  processing.  Dynamic  scoping  means 
that  any  procedure  can  call  any  other,  and  variable  values  are  passed  down 
the  control  chain  rather  than  being  determined  by  the  static  block  structure. 
That  is,  once  a  variable  is  declared  or  otherwise  allocated  during  the  execution 
of,  say,  procedure  A,  it  can  be  accessed  from  within  any  procedure  B  that 
A  calls,  or  any  procedure  C  that  B  calls,  and  so  forth,  regardless  of  where 
A,  B,  and  C  appear  in  the  actual  program  text.  LISP-like  languages  are 
often  interpreted — the  run-time  environment  is  available  during  the  program- 
writing  process  so  that  procedures  can  be  easily  tested — which  encourages  an 
interactive  style  of  programming.  PLANNER,  CONNIVER,  and  QLISP  are  all 
LISP-like,  being  built  upon  LISP  itself.  (To  avoid  confusion  of  LISP  dialects, 
we  speak  here  of  "basic  LISP,"  which  corresponds  roughly  to  the  LISP  1.5 
defined  by  McCarthy  et  al.,  1962.) 

The  POP-2  language  shares  characteristics  of  both  ALGOL-like  and  LISP- 
like  languages.  It  was  developed  at  Edinburgh  University  as  an  attempt  to 
implement  LISP-like  ideas  in  an  ALGOL-like  syntax.  The  newest  language 
covered,  FUZZY,  brings  together  many  of  the  constructs  of  previous  languages 
in  a  LISP-embedded  form  much  like  that  of  QLISP. 

References 

A  thorough  introduction  to  some  AI  programming-language  features  in 
the  context  of  detailed  examples  of  AI  programming  techniques  can  be  found 
in  the  book  Artificial  Intelligence  Programming  by  Charniak,  Riesbeck,  and 
McDermott  (1979). 


C2.     Data  Structures 


THE  GENERAL  GOALS  of  a  data  representation  are  (a)  to  mirror,  in  a  natural 
and  convenient  way,  certain  features  of  the  entities  in  which  the  programmer 
views  the  problem  at  hand  and  (b)  to  be  efficient  in  storage  space  and  in  the 
time  required  to  operate  on  the  data.  These  goals  often  come  into  conflict. 
In  AI  programs,  data  structures  tend  to  become  large  and  complex.  But 
complex  data  structures  are  inefficient,  so  there  is  a  tendency  to  sacrifice 
some  naturalness  and  convenience  in  order  to  make  do  with  simpler  data 
structures.  The  data-structure  offerings  of  various  languages  may  be  viewed  as 
compromises  toward  some  kind  of  optimum.  In  the  context  of  AI  programming 
languages,  we  will  discuss  three  data-structure  issues:  data  types,  problems 
of  storage  and  retrieval  in  large  databases,  and  division  of  the  database  into 
contexts. 

Data  Types 

Every  computer-programming  language  offers  a  selection  of  data  types: 
integers,  reals,  arrays,  strings,  records,  and  so  on.  AJ  programming  languages 
always  include  some  "list"  data  type  or  types  because  of  the  fundamental 
importance  of  list  processing  in  AI  programs.  Lists  and  list  processing  are 
discussed  in  the  LISP  article  (Article  VI. B).  Here,  our  main  concern  will  be 
with  the  new  data  types  introduced  in  AI  languages,  including: 

1.  Set — a  collection;  unlike  a  list  in  that  it  is  not  ordered  and  each  symbol 
can  appear  only  once. 

2.  Bag — like  a  set,  but  with  repeated  elements. 

3.  Tuple — basically  a  list  of  fixed  length;  for  example,  an  ordered  pair  is  a 
2-tuple. 

4.  Record — like  a  tuple  with  named  components,  so  the  progammer  need  not 
keep  track  of  their  actual  position. 

5.  Function — a  procedure  treated  as  data  (see  Article  VI. A). 
Some  languages  also  allow  users  to  define  their  own  data  types. 

Database  Storage  and  Retrieval 

As  AI  systems  involve  the  application  of  ever  more  knowledge  to  the 
problems  they  address,  there  is  a  growing  concern  with  questions  of  how  to 
organize  and  access  large  knowledge  bases.  The  term  knowledge  base  indicates 
that  these  AI  databases  are  not  merely  big  files  of  uniform  content  but  are 


34 


C2  Data  Structures  35 

collections  of  facts,  inferences,  and  procedures  that  correspond  to  the  kinds  of 
things  people  know  (see  Article  III.A,  in  Vol.  i).  The  ideal,  from  the  program- 
mer's point  of  view,  would  be  a  system  that  can  retrieve  data  according  to 
any  specification  that  might  be  constructed  by  the  program.  However,  the 
less  that  is  known  at  the  time  the  knowledge  is  encoded  and  stored  about 
how  it  is  going  to  be  eventually  used,  the  harder  it  is  later  to  retrieve  appro- 
priate facts — computational  limits  on  retrieval  are  real  constraints  in  AI  pro- 
gramming. Ideally,  again,  the  programmer  would  like  the  language  system 
to  perform  certain  updating  and  bookkeeping  tasks,  even  to  the  extent  of 
automatically  detecting  inconsistencies  in  the  knowledge  base. 

The  languages  covered  here  all  have  a  set  of  database  features  that  are 
of  considerable  utility  and  are  reasonably  efficient  for  some  kinds  of  retrieval. 
A  programmer  designing,  say,  a  semantic-network  knowledge  base  (which 
none  of  the  languages  offers),  would  have  to  construct  the  semantic-net  primi- 
tives from  whatever  database  primitives  the  AI  programming  language  does 
provide. 

The  selection  of  a  good  set  of  database  primitives  is  crucial.  There  is 
still  much  debate  on  the  relative  utility  of  alternative  schemes.  One  common 
scheme  uses  multiple  indices:  Incoming  data  are  indexed  by  several  of  their 
attributes.  Data  about  books,  for  instance,  might  be  indexed  by  author, 
title,  and  subject,  and  the  retrieval  process  would  then  be  simple  and  fast: 
An  attribute  and  its  value  are  specified  (e.g.,  AUTHOR-VONNEGUT),  and  the 
system  looks  in  the  appropriate  index,  finds  the  entry  (if  any)  for  that  value, 
and  retrieves  all  items  listed  for  that  entry.  McDermott  (1975)  argues  that 
multiple  indexing  can  be  implemented  efficiently  even  when  the  database  is 
split  into  contexts  (see  below). 

A  more  advanced  scheme,  introduced  by  Carl  Hewitt  in  the  PLANNER 
language,  retrieves  data  according  to  a  pattern,  a  sort  of  structural  sketch  of 
an  item  with  some  pieces  left  undefined.  The  system  retrieves  all  items  that 
fit  the  general  pattern.  Implementation  must  be  done  carefully,  however.  The 
simpleminded  approach  of  scanning  the  entire  database  and  testing  each  item 
against  the  pattern — the  British  Museum  algorithm — is  out  of  the  question 
for  large  databases. 

Contexts 

Beyond  pattern-directed  retrieval,  one  can  speak  of  semantically  directed 
retrieval  in  which  items  are  somehow  located  by  their  meaning,  rather  than  by 
their  explicit  structure.  One  can  also  raise  legitimate  objections  to  the  whole 
idea  that  databases  should  consist  of  a  set  of  separate  items.  We  will  leave 
these  issues  aside — no  AI  programming  language  has  attained  such  a  level  of 
sophistication.  There  is,  however,  one  quite  standard  technique  that  starts  to 
move  away  from  the  crude  notion  of  a  set  of  items.  This  is  the  division  of  a 
database  into  contexts. 


36 


Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research 


VI 


The  basic  idea  of  this  technique  is  to  replace  the  global  database  with  a 
tree  of  distinct  databases  called  contexts  (see  Fig.  C2-1).  The  contexts  are 
arranged  in  a  tree  because  each  represents  a  distinct  state  of  the  world  (or 
set  of  assumptions  about  its  state):  As  the  world  changes,  a  context  naturally 
gives  rise  to  "descendant"  contexts,  which  differ  slightly  from  each  other  and 
from  their  common  parent.  Conceptually,  each  context  is  a  full  database  in 
its  own  right.  In  reality,  most  of  the  information  in  a  given  context  will  be  the 
same  as  in  the  (parent)  context  just  above  it,  so  that,  to  save  space,  only  the 
differences  are  actually  stored.  The  root  of  the  tree,  of  course,  must  actually 
be  a  full  database. 

Contexts  have  been  found  especially  useful  in  hypothetical  reasoning  sys- 
tems. In  robot  planning,  for  example,  the  robot  can  simulate  alternative 
sequences  of  actions,  creating  contexts  to  represent  the  different  states  of  the 
world  that  result.  If  the  consequences  of  an  action  are  undesirable,  the  robot 
planner  can  delete  the  context  and  try  something  else.  (See  Article  VI. D  for 
further  discussion.) 

A  process  at  any  given  time  uses  one  specific  context  as  its  database — the 
current  context.  Referring  to  Figure  C2-1,  assume  that  the  current  context 
is  A  and  that  no  other  contexts  exist  yet.  The  following  context-manipulation 
primitives  may  offer  a  clearer  idea  of  what  context  mechanisms  look  like. 

1.  PUSH.  This  creates  a  new  context  as  a  descendant  of  the  current  context 
and  enters  it.  Initially  the  contents  of  the  new  context  are  identical  to  its 
parent.   If  we  PUSH  from  context  A,  context  B  is  created  and  becomes 


Context 
A 


Context 
B 


Context 

E 


Context 
C 


Context 
D 


Figure  C2-1.     A  tree  of  contexts. 


C2  Data  Structures  37 

the  current  context.   And  if  we  PUSH  again,  C  is  created  and  becomes 
the  current  context. 

2.  SPROUT  (cxt).  This  is  like  PUSH,  except  that  the  new  context  is  a 
descendant  of  the  designated  (cxt)  and  is  not  automatically  entered. 
SPROUT  A  creates  E,  and  SPROUT  B  creates  D.    We  are  still  in  C. 

3.  POP.  This  is  the  inverse  of  PUSH.  It  moves  up  the  context  tree  to  the 
parent  of  the  current  context.  POP  may  be  destructive;  that  is,  the 
current  context  may  be  deleted.  POP  puts  us  back  in  B. 

4.  SWITCH  (cxt).  This  leaves  the  current  context  and  enters  the  designated 
context  (cxt).  SWITCH  E  makes  E  be  the  current  context,  that  is,  puts 
us  in  E. 

5.  DELETE  (cxt).  This  deletes  the  context  (cxt)  and  all  its  descendants. 
DELETE  B  deletes  B,  C,  and  D. 


LISP 

In  looking  now  at  the  data-structure  features  of  the  individual  languages, 
we  see  that  basic  LISP  has  little  in  the  way  of  sophisticated  data  facilities, 
but  it  provides  a  flexible  base  on  which  they  may  be  built.  As  described  in 
Article  VLB,  the  original  LISP  had  only  one  data  type,  namely,  list  structure 
built  from  CONS  cells  and  atoms.  This  makes  for  a  simple  and  elegant  lan- 
guage, but  at  considerable  cost  in  efficiency  and  readability.  A  list-structure 
representation  of  arrays,  for  instance,  is  highly  inefficient,  and  the  access  of 
its  elements  by  a  chain  of  CAR  and  CDR  list-selector  functions  is  somewhat 
opaque  to  the  reader  of  a  program.  To  supplement  lists,  later  versions  of  LISP 
have  tended  to  add  more  data  types.  Integer,  real,  string,  array,  and  record 
types  are  more  or  less  standard.  Many  versions  also  allow  the  user  to  define 
new  data  types.  Finally,  LISP  was  the  first  computer-programming  language 
to  represent  procedures  as  data  in  a  practical  way  (see  Article  VI. A). 

LISP  provides  a  database  facility  of  a  crude  sort  through  the  property 
list.  Every  atom  has  attached  to  it  a  list  of  property- value  pairs;  for  instance, 
the  property  list  of  atom  K2  might  include  the  property  RANGE  paired  with 
the  value  HIMALAYAS.  The  main  deficiency  of  property  lists  as  a  database 
mechanism  is  that  they  are  indexed  only  one  way;  given  atom  K2,  we  can 
retrieve  all  its  property- value  pairs  (or  its  value  for  any  given  property),  but  we 
cannot  efficiently  retrieve  all  atoms  having  the  RANGE  property  HIMALAYAS. 

Pattern-matching  data- retrieval  and  context  mechanisms  are  not  provided 
in  basic  LISP,  though,  as  we  shall  see,  they  are  relatively  easy  to  include  in 
languages  built  on  top  of  LISP.  The  recursive  structure  of  LISP  is  especially 
well  suited  to  implementing  pattern  matchers. 


38  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

PLANNER 

PLANNER  was  the  first  language  to  implement  a  general-format  associa- 
tive database.  The  particulars  of  PLANNER'S  database  stem  from  its 
theorem-proving  semantics,  in  which  having  a  theorem  that  can  prove  a  fact  is 
equivalent  to  having  the  fact  explicitly  stored.  The  global  associative  database 
can  store  two  semantically  different  classes  of  data  items.  The  first  class  is 
assertions,  which  are  LISP  lists.  Their  elements  may  be  of  any  MACLISP 
type  (because  PLANNER  is  implemented  in  MACLISP).  All  assertions  in 
the  database  are  assumed  to  be  true  for  purposes  of  PLANNER'S  automatic- 
deduction  control  structure.  But  beyond  that,  assertions  are  treated  merely 
as  lists  with  no  inherent  semantics.  Thus,  either  (RED  MARS)  or  (MARS  RED) , 
or  even  (MARS  IS  RED) ,  could  have  the  same  meaning,  if  the  PLANNER  pro- 
gram is  written  so  as  to  manipulate  them  appropriately.  Some  examples  of 
assertions  are  the  following: 

(COLOR  GRASS  GREEN) 

(HOT  SOUP) 

(LOCATION  PUMP-BASE  (10  4  50)). 

The  second  class  of  data  items  is  procedural  data  in  the  form  of  theorems, 
which  typically  state  when  they  can  be  invoked  and  what  their  effects  will 
be.  (PLANNER  theorems  are  explained  further  in  Articles  VI. C3  and  VI.C4.) 
Assertions  are  explicitly  added  to  the  database  by  an  ASSERT  operation  and 
deleted  by  ERASE.  They  may  also  be  added  implicitly:  Whenever  an  assertion 
is  added  to  or  deleted  from  the  database,  it  may  trigger  certain  PLANNER 
theorems  to  perform  updating  operations  or  consistency  checks.  More  will  be 
said  about  these  "antecedent  theorems,"  or  demons,  in  Article  VI.C3.  Theo- 
rems can  also  be  added  and  deleted  in  the  database,  but  this  is  seldom  actually 
done  by  a  PLANNER  program. 

CONNIVER 

It  is  sometimes  helpful  to  view  CONNIVER  as  a  restructured  and  extended 
PLANNER  (both  are  built  on  MACLISP).  All  the  PLANNER  data  types  are 
carried  over  to  CONNIVER,  with  three  important  additions: 

1.  possibility  lists, 

2.  tags,  and 

3.  context  tags. 

Possibility  lists  and  tags  are  discussed  in  Article  VI.C3.    Possibility  lists  are 
used  during  fetch  operations  on  the  database,  and  tags  are  used  for  jumping 


C2  Data  Structures  39 

from  one  process  to  another  in  CONNIVER's  generalized  control  structure. 
Context  tags  designate  contexts,  which  we  discuss  shortly. 

The  database  facilities  of  CONNIVER  are  virtually  identical  to  those  of 
PLANNER.  Again,  the  database  contains  assertions  and  theorems  (called 
methods  in  CONNIYER)  that  are  all  assumed  to  be  true  and  that  are  accessed 
by  pattern  matching.  The  only  important  difference  between  the  PLANNER 
and  CONNIVER  databases  is  that  CONNIVER's  database  is  organized  into 
contexts. 

The  global  variable  CONTEXT  holds  the  context  tag  of  the  current  context. 
By  storing  tags  for  other  contexts  and  then  reassigning  CONTEXT  to  one 
of  them,  the  program  switches  its  context.  Context  tags  are  generated  by 
standard  functions  like  the  following: 

(PUSH-CONTEXT  (context  tag))      sets  up  a  new  context  as  a  direct  descendant 

of  (context  tag)  and  returns  a  context  tag 
representing  it. 

(POP-CONTEXT  (context  tag))         returns  a  context  tag  representing  the  direct 

ancestor  of  (context  tag). 

CONNIVER  has  the  most  fully  developed  context  mechanism  of  the  lan- 
guages discussed  here.  Some  context  mechanisms  were  implicitly  present  in 
PLANNER  but  were  tied  to  the  backtracking  control  structure  and  were  inac- 
cessible to  the  programmer.  CONNIVER  made  them  explicit  and  also  per- 
mitted general  switching  from  any  node  on  the  context  tree  to  any  other, 
which  is  more  general  than  the  strict  hierarchical  movement  done  during 
PLANNER  deductions.  In  terms  of  search  methods  described  in  Chapter  II  (in 
Vol.  i),  CONNIVER  programs  can  execute  a  breadth-first  or  best-first  search 
(or  any  other  kind),  whereas  PLANNER  programs  are  constrained  to  a  depth- 
first  search. 

QLISP 

QLISP  has  a  wide  range  of  data  types.  All  the  data  types  of  INTERLISP 
are  available  in  QLISP:  integers,  reals,  strings,  lists,  pointers,  arrays  of  any  of 
the  previous  types,  and  records  with  fields  of  any  of  the  previous  types.  And 
the  user  can  define  new  data  types. 

The  unique  data  types  that  QLISP  provides  are  TUPLE,  VECTOR,  BAG, 
and  CLASS.  The  names  are  a  bit  confusing.  VECTORS  correspond  to  what  we 
called  tuples  in  the  introduction  to  this  chapter — lists  of  fixed  length.  QLISP 
TUPLES  are  just  like  VECTORS  except  that  their  first  component  is  a  function. 
A  CLASS  is  a  set,  that  is,  an  unordered  collection  of  distinct  elements.  A  BAG 
is  like  a  set  except  that  it  may  contain  more  than  one  copy  of  an  element. 
For  two  QLISP  objects  to  be  equal,  they  must  be  of  the  same  data  type  and 


40  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

have  the  same  components.  In  the  case  of  CLASS  and  BAG,  the  order  of  the 
components  does  not  matter.  Here  are  some  examples: 

(TUPLE  FA)  7^  (VECTOR  F  A) 

(VECTOR  ABC)  ^  (VECTOR  B  A  C) 

(CLASS  B  C  A)  =  (CLASS  A  B  C  A) 

(BAG  A  A  B  C)  =  (BAG  C  A  B  A)  ^  (BAG  ABC) 

(BAG  C  A)  7^  (CLASS  C  A) 

(BAG  B    (CLASS  C  A  B  C)    A  A)    =  (BAG  B  A    (CLASS  C  A  B)    A) 

Every  datum  stored  in  the  database  is  first  transformed  to  a  canonical 
form,  such  that  any  two  data  that  are  theoretically  the  same,  for  example, 
(BAG  B  A  A  C)  and  (BAG  C  A  B  A) ,  will  map  onto  the  same  canonical  represen- 
tation, in  this  case,  (BAG  A  A  B  C).  Pattern  matching  is  greatly  simplified 
by  this.  In  theorem  proving,  for  example,  a  BAG  is  the  natural  representation 
for  the  operands  of  functions  such  as  PLUS,  where  repetition  is  important  but 
order  is  not.  QLISP  easily  can  prove  that  (PLUS  (BAG  A  B  C  D))  is  equal  to 
(PLUS  (BAG  C  D  B  A))  by  canonicalizing  the  BAGs,  since  the  two  expressions 
then  become  identical. 

Canonical  representation  also  allows  QLISP  to  make  use  of  two  unique 
database  methods.  First,  the  entire  database  is  stored  as  a  discrimination 
net  (see  Article  XI. D,  in  Vol.  III).  Only  the  canonical  forms  are  put  in  the 
net,  making  it  feasible  to  search  the  database  in  a  uniform  top-down  manner. 
Retrieval  in  general,  and  especially  pattern  matching,  is  thereby  simplified. 
QLISP,  unfortunately,  stores  every  subexpression  of  an  item  as  a  separate  item 
in  the  discrimination  net  and  suffers  from  excessive  use  of  space. 

Second,  since  every  object  is  uniquely  represented,  a  property  list  just 
like  that  attached  to  atoms  in  LISP  can  be  attached  to  every  object  in  the 
database.  In  LISP,  only  atoms  are  uniquely  represented  and  only  atoms  can 
have  a  property  list.  Here  is  a  QLISP  property  statement: 

(QPUT    (TUPLE  PH0NE-NUMBER-0F  MIKE)    LENGTH  7)  . 

This  sample  statement  adds  a  TUPLE  representing  Mike's  telephone  number  to 
the  database,  if  it  is  not  already  there,  and  says  that  the  LENGTH  property  of 
the  number  has  the  value  7.  Object  properties  provide  an  elegant  solution  to 
the  problem,  from  which  PLANNER  and  CONNXVER  suffer,  of  being  unable 
to  distinguish  the  mere  presence  of  a  statement  in  the  database  from  its  truth. 
In  QLISP,  truth  or  falsity  is  indicated  by  setting  the  MODELVALUE  property 
of  a  statement  to  be  T  or  NIL.  Thus,  to  claim  it  is  true  that  grass  is  green, 
one  executes 

(QPUT  (VECTOR  COLOR  GRASS  GREEN)  MODELVALUE  T) . 

For  automatic  inference  and  updating  of  the  database,  IF-ADDED  and 
IF-REMOVED  demons  similar  to  those  of  PLANNER  and  CONNrVER  are  avail- 
able in  QLISP.    Context  mechanisms  for  QLISP  were  inherited  from  QA4, 


C2  Data  Structures  41 

an  ancestor  of  QLISP,  where  they  were  developed  independently  of  those  of 
CONNIVER. 

SAIL 

SAIL  has  three  categories  of  data  types.  First,  there  are  the  types  inher- 
ited from  ALGOL — integers,  reals,  Booleans,  strings,  and  arrays.  Second, 
the  user  can  define  record  types,  in  which  the  components  of  a  record  are 
specifiable  as  any  of  the  above  types  or  as  some  record  type.  Records  are 
especially  important  in  AI  applications  in  SAIL  because  they  can  serve  as 
buUding  blocks  for  list  structures.  The  CONS  cell  of  LISP  is  essentially  a  record 
with  two  components  (CAR  and  CDR),  whereas  SAIL  records  can  have  any 
number  of  components.  More  general  list  structures  can  be  built.  However, 
the  LISP  approach  has  the  advantage  that  standard  functions  are  available  for 
searching  lists,  deleting  from  lists,  appending  lists,  and  so  forth;  in  SAIL,  these 
must  be  defined  by  the  user.  The  third  data  category  is  the  most  interesting, 
namely,  the  items  of  SAIL's  associative-database  mechanism. 

Items  were  the  major  feature  of  the  earlier  LEAP  language,  which  was 
incorporated  into  SAIL  (Feldman  et  al.,  1972).  The  motivation  for  LEAP  was 
to  implement  an  efficient  software  scheme  for  associative  processing,  or  the 
accessing  of  data  by  partial  specification  of  its  content  rather  than  by  the 
address  of  the  storage  location  it  happens  to  reside  in.  An  item  is  either  a 
primitive  identifier  (atom)  or  a  triple  of  items.  Triples  are  formed  by  the 
association  of  three  items: 

Attribute  (g)  Object  =  Value . 
Here  are  examples  of  associative  triples: 


COLOR     (g) 

MARS 

==  RED 

CLASS     (g) 

RED 

==  COLOR 

SATELLITE  (g) 

MARS 

==  PHOBOS 

SATELLITE  (g) 

MARS 

=  DEIMOS 

Notice  that  items  are  not  restricted  to  any  one  position  in  associations,  nor 
does  the  value  have  to  be  unique.  In  fact,  the  labels  "Attribute,"  "Object," 
and  "Value"  are  mere  conveniences  with  no  special  significance.  Associations 
can  themselves  be  items: 

DISCOVERER  (g)    [COLOR  (g)  MARS  =  RED]    =  ANONYMOUS. 

Associations  are  created  and  removed  from  the  global  database  by  the  state- 
ments: 

MAKE      (itemi)  (g)  (iteni2>   =   (items) 
ERASE     (itemi)  (g  (item2)   =   (item3) 


42  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

Associations  in  the  SAIL  database  are  triply  indexed  and  can  be  retrieved 
quite  efficiently.  (Retrieval  statements  are  explained  in  Article  VI.C4.)  There 
are  no  facilities  for  automatic  updating  or  consistency  checking  for  the  SAIL 
database. 


POP-2 

POP-2  has  a  quite  rich  collection  of  data  types.  Many  of  them  are 
standard  special  cases  of  more  general  types,  as  indicated  below.  For  example, 
the  POP-2  data  type  STRIP  is  a  sequence  of  elements  of  any  type,  and  the 
data  type  STRING  is  a  STRIP  of  CHARACTERS.  Specializations  of  the  RECORD 
data  type  include  POINTER,  ATOM,  and  ORDERED  PAIR  (like  the  LISP  CONS 
cell).  And  the  POP-2  ARRAY  data  type  is  a  specialization  of  the  FUNCTION 
data  type  (conceptually  an  array,  as  a  function  from  the  index  to  the  element). 
Data  types  are  classified  as  simple  and  composite.  Integers,  Booleans,  reals, 
pointers,  and  atoms  are  simple;  the  rest  are  composite.  User-defined  data 
types  are  allowed. 

POP-2  has  the  helpful  property  (for  clarity  and  ease  of  programming)  of 
treating  all  data  types  in  a  uniform  way.  Data  of  any  type  can  be — 

1.  used  as  the  actual  parameters  of  functions, 

2.  returned  as  the  results  of  functions, 

3.  assigned  to  variables  of  their  type,  or 

4.  tested  for  equality. 

Components  of  composite  data  types  are  always  accessed  by  four  kinds  of 
functions,  illustrated  below  for  the  type  LIST.  In  the  case  of  user-defined  types, 
the  user  must  supply  the  four  kinds  of  functions.  Note  that  the  destructor 
function  shown  here  produces  two  outputs.  In  general,  POP-2  functions  can 
produce  multiple  outputs.  Also  note  that  the  selector  and  the  updater  have 
the  same  name. 

Kind  of  function  For  lists 

constructor  cons(x,    (y  z))    =    (x  y  z) 

destructor  dest(    (x  y  z)    )    =  x,    (y  z) 

selector  hd(    (x  y  z)    )    =  x,      tl  (    (x  y  z)    )    =    (y  z) 

updater  hd(MY-LIST)    <-  x,      tl(MY-LIST)    <-    (y  x) 

Now  MY-LIST  =    (x  y  x) . 

Associative  database  and  context  facilities  are  not  part  of  the  basic  POP-2 
language,  but  some  facilities  are  available  in  POP-2  libraries. 


C2  Data  Structures  43 

FUZZY 

Much  like  PLANNER,  the  programming  language  FUZZY  maintains  a 
database  of  assertions.  However,  FUZZY  assertions  include  a  Z-value  indicat- 
ing the  degree  of  certainty,  for  example,  ((CHANCE  OF  RAIN)  .  0.30).  FUZZY 
maintains  an  associative  network  of  assertions  quite  similar  to  that  of  PLAN- 
NER and  CONNIVER.  Any  arbitrary  LISP  list  structure  may  be  entered  into 
this  net.  In  addition,  an  assertion  may  have  a  Z-value  associated  with  it, 
if  desired.  The  Z-value  of  the  assertions  can  be  used  to  control  success  and 
failure  of  retrieval  or  subsequent  actions. 

FUZZY  has  a  context  mechanism  that  activates  and  deactivates  associative 
nets  of  assertions.  It  is  also  possible  to  save  the  state  of  the  entire  system 
in  order  to  allow  for  later  restoration.  Functions  are  available  to  compute 
differences  between  states  and  to  add  differences  to  a  state.  State  changes  can 
be  set,  if  desired,  so  that  they  cannot  be  undone  by  a  subsequent  restoration. 
This  feature  is  useful  to  control  backtracking.  Several  FUZZY  primitives  exist 
in  backtrackable  and  in  finalizing  versions  to  give  the  programmer  easy  control 
over  the  global  control  mechanisms. 

Summary 

Data  types.  The  languages  vary  considerably  in  the  number  and  kinds 
of  data  types  they  offer.  Basic  LISP  is  at  one  extreme:  It  began  with  exactly 
one  data  type,  with  a  few  supplementary  ones  added  later.  Advantages  of 
a  sparse  set  of  data  types  accrue  mostly  to  the  writers  of  LISP  compilers 
and  interpreters,  whose  job  is  simplified  because  there  are  fewer  operations 
and  less  need  for  type  conversion.  Also,  the  relatively  small  compilers  and 
interpreters  that  are  produced  help  conserve  available  core  space.  From  the 
user's  point  of  view,  however,  there  is  little  to  recommend  such  a  small  set  of 
data  types,  except  that  it  (almost)  removes  the  need  for  type  declarations. 

Later  versions  of  LISP,  such  as  INTERLISP  and  MACLISP,  and  to  an  even 
greater  extent  the  languages  QLISP  and  POP-2,  have  provided  rich  sets  of 
data  types  and  the  access  functions  that  go  with  them.  Programming  is 
easier  because  the  data  structures  can  more  closely  mirror  the  programmer's 
ideas,  and  type  checking  becomes  available.  Efficiency  is  improved  because 
the  standard  data  types  can  be  implemented  closer  to  the  machine  level  than 
equivalent  structures  built  of  more  primitive  units.  For  example,  a  SAIL  or 
POP-2  record  uses  fixed-offset  fields  and  avoids  the  overhead  of  the  pointers 
needed  in  an  equivalent  LISP  list  structure. 

A  related  issue  is  whether  to  allow  user-defined  data  types.  The  advan- 
tages are  similar  to  those  of  having  many  data  types,  but  when  user-defined 
data  types  have  been  allowed,  as  in  POP-2,  they  have  not  found  great  utility. 
Probably  the  main  reason  is  simply  the  extra  effort  required  from  the  user 


44  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

(who  has  to  define  all  the  primitive  operations  on  each  new  data  type).  User- 
definable  data  types  also  result  in  "unique"  programs  that  other  people  may 
have  difficulty  understanding. 

Large  database  facilities.  Database  facilities  were  present  in  a  crude 
form  in  the  LISP  property-list  feature.  The  next  level  of  complexity  is  rep- 
resented by  the  multiple-index  scheme  of  SAIL  associations.  Next  above  the 
use  of  fixed-form  associations  is  the  structural  pattern-match  as  a  general 
retrieval  mechanism,  found  in  PLANNER,  CONNIYER,  QLISP,  and  FUZZY. 
Appropriate  retrieval  is  somewhat  hampered  in  PLANNER  and  CONNIVER, 
however,  because  they  cannot  attach  properties  to  assertions  as  QLISP  can. 
PLANNER  also  keeps  the  possibilities  lists  hidden  from  the  programmer,  who 
always  has  to  operate  at  the  goal  level  even  though  it  may  be  inefficient  to 
do  so. 

Context  mechanisms.  Context  mechanisms  may  also  be  arranged  in 
a  loose  ordering  of  complexity,  starting  with  the  scoping  rules  that  virtually 
all  languages  have.  These  provide  a  new  context  whenever  a  new  function  or 
block  is  entered  and  restoration  of  the  previous  context  upon  exit.  This  basic 
level  of  context  manipulation  is  extremely  useful  in  programming  practice. 
Next  comes  the  ability  of  a  program  to  PUSH  and  POP  contexts  on  demand, 
whenever  they  are  needed,  rather  than  in  rigid  correspondence  to  the  structure 
of  the  program.  In  both  these  forms,  the  contexts  existing  at  any  given  time 
are  simply  those  in  the  direct  line  from  the  global  context  down  to  the  current 
context.  CONNIVER  is  more  advanced  and  allows  a  whole  tree  of  contexts 
to  exist,  with  freedom  for  the  program  to  SPROUT  new  contexts  below  any 
existing  context  and  to  jump  around  arbitrarily  between  contexts. 

To  sum  up  very  briefly,  LISP  introduced  a  simple  and  flexible  data  type 
and  a  way  to  represent  functions  as  data.  PLANNER  introduced  the  general 
associative  database,  and  CONNIVER  improved  it  by  the  addition  of  contexts. 
QLISP  and  FUZZY  increased  the  power  of  the  database  by  defining  special 
data  types  and  putting  everything  into  a  discrimination  net.  SAIL  went 
in  another  direction,  developing  an  efficient  multiple-index  scheme.  Finally, 
POP-2  showed  how  a  wide  range  of  data  types  can  all  be  treated  in  a  clear 
and  uniform  way. 


C3.     Control  Structures 


THE  MOST  IMPORTANT  of  the  AI  control  structures  we  discuss  in  this  article 
is  coroutining.  The  central  idea  here  is  to  relax  the  strict  control  hierarchy 
found  in  most  languages  (including  LISP),  in  which  every  procedure  runs  for 
a  while,  then  returns  control  to  the  procedure  that  called  it,  and  vanishes. 
Coroutines  are  procedures  that  can  pass  control  to  any  other  coroutine  and, 
furthermore,  can  suspend  themselves  and  continue  later.  To  make  these 
concepts  more  precise,  we  need  some  new  terminology. 

First  of  all,  it  is  loose  terminology  to  talk  about  procedures  or  coroutines 
suspending  or  vanishing;  a  procedure  is  a  piece  of  code.  To  draw  the  dis- 
tinction, an  instantiation  of  a  procedure,  a  copy  of  the  code  that  is  actually 
running,  will  be  called  a  process.  For  a  process  to  suspend,  its  current  state 
must  be  saved — that  is,  the  current  values  of  its  variables  and  the  point  at 
which  to  resume  execution.  There  is  initially  only  one  process,  and  it  can 
create  new  processes.  Once  created,  a  process  can  be  in  one  of  three  states: 
running,  suspended,  or  terminated.  If  control  is  transferred  to  the  process 
when  it  is  created,  it  is  running;  otherwise,  it  is  suspended.  A  running  process 
can  resume  or  activate  some  other  process,  that  is,  pass  control  to  the  other 
process,  causing  itself  to  suspend.  While  a  process  is  suspended,  its  state  is 
preserved  but  nothing  happens.  A  running  process  can  also  terminate  as  it 
passes  control  to  another  process. 

Bobrow  and  Wegbreit  (1973)  provide  a  formal,  clear  model  for  general 
coroutining  in  terms  of  stack  frames,  a  construct  that  has  the  advantage  of 
being  efficiently  implementable  in  current  machine  architectures.  Their  model 
unified  the  various  types  of  procedural  interconnections  seen  in  previous  AI 
languages  (e.g.,  recursion,  coroutines,  generators,  FUNARGs,  FUNVALs).  Each 
process  is  represented  by  one  stack  frame,  which  contains  the  process  state 
and  links  indicating  where  control  was  passed  from  and  where  the  values  of 
free  variables  are  to  be  obtained. 

The  generator  is  a  common  specialization  of  the  coroutine.  Generators 
are  used  when  a  potentially  large  set  of  results  may  be  produced  by  a  function 
(e.g.,  one  that  looks  for  matches  in  a  database)  but  only  a  few  of  these  are 
needed  at  a  time.  A  generator  is  a  coroutine  that  runs  until  it  produces 
one  item  and  then  suspends  itself.  When  a  process  needs  another  piece  of 
information,  it  resumes  the  generator.  A  generator  always  returns  control  to 
the  routine  that  activated  it.  This  continues  until  there  are  no  more  items  to 
produce,  and  the  generator  terminates. 

In  a  coroutining  regime,  only  one  process  is  running  at  any  given  time. 
There  can  be  a  considerable  amount  of  communication  and  cooperation 
between  processes,  but  it  is  rather  awkward,  since  process  A  must  suspend 
itself  in  order  to  pass  information  to  process  B.    In  a  multiprocessing  regime, 

45 


46  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

many  processes  can  run  at  once  and  freely  pass  messages  back  and  forth. 
SAIL  is  the  only  language  covered  here  that  allows  for  multiprocessing,  and 
its  facilities  are  primitive.  With  the  declining  cost  of  computation,  however, 
there  is  increasing  interest  in  models  for  parallel  communicating  processes  (see 
Hewitt,  1977;  Kornfeld,  1979;  Kornfeld  and  Hewitt,  1981;  Smith  and  Davis, 
1981). 

Coroutining  and  multiprocessing  only  provide  more  flexibility  in  the  flow 
of  control,  without  alleviating  the  problem  of  determining  where  control  is 
to  flow.  The  most  common  programming-language  facility  for  directing  the 
flow  of  control  is  the  conditional  statement  (e.g.,  an  IF  or  CASE  statement), 
which  chooses  one  of  a  few  predetermined  directions.  Some  AI  programming 
languages  introduce  the  much  more  powerful  method  of  pattern- directed  invo- 
cation, described  in  Article  VI. C4. 

Another  important  control  concept  is  the  demon.  Implementations  differ, 
but,  in  concept,  a  demon  is  a  kind  of  suspended  process  that  "waits"  for  a 
certain  kind  of  event  to  occur  (e.g.,  a  certain  kind  of  update  operation  on  a 
database).  When  such  an  event  occurs,  the  demon  is  activated  automatically, 
performs  its  job,  and  either  terminates  or  suspends  in  wait  for  the  next  event. 
Typically,  demons  are  used  to  make  inferences  as  new  information  comes 
in,  to  perform  bookkeeping  tasks  of  some  kind,  or  to  recognize  important 
occurrences. 

LISP 

Basic  LISP  lacks  any  coroutining  or  multiprocessing  facilities.  The  LISP 
control  structure  is  suited  to  AI  programming  mainly  by  its  emphasis  on 
recursion  (see  Article  VI. B).  Recursion  allied  with  LISP's  dynamic  scoping 
rule  allows  functions  to  be  used  by  other  functions  in  a  context-free  manner: 
A  function's  behavior  depends  only  on  its  arguments  and  the  values  that  its 
free  variables  have  when  it  is  called;  the  context  in  which  the  function  was 
originally  defined  is  not  significant.  Furthermore,  any  function  is  allowed  to 
call  any  other  function.  This  freedom  makes  it  easier  in  many  cases  to  put 
together  separate  modules  to  form  an  AI  system. 

The  FUNARG  mechanism  of  LISP  permits  functions  to  be  used  in  a  context- 
dependent  or  history-dependent  way  when  desired.  A  FUNARG  is  a  call  to  a 
LISP  function  together  with  an  environment,  or  context  (see  Article  VI.C2), 
for  the  variables  used  by  the  function.  For  example,  FUNARGs  can  be  used  to 
implement  generators:  Suppose  we  tried  to  write  a  generator  as  an  ordinary 
LISP  function.  We  would  define  a  function  that  generates  just  one  item  each 
time  it  is  called  and  changes  the  state  of  the  generation  process  by  updating 
a  free  variable.  Here  is  such  a  generator  for  squares  of  numbers: 

NextSquare:   (LAMBDA  NIL 
(PROG  NIL 

(SETQ  N  (ADD1  N) ) 
(RETURN  (TIMES  N  N))))  . 


C3  Control  Structures  47 

NEXTSQUARE  uses  the  free  variable  N  to  hold  the  state  of  the  generation.  If 
initially  N  =  3  and  we  call  NEXTSQUARE  repeatedly,  we  will  get  the  sequence 
16,  25,  36,  ... 

However,  NEXTSQUARE  is  not  really  a  generator.  It  is  not  an  independent 
process,  because  if  any  function  happens  to  use  a  variable  called  N  locally  and 
calls  NEXTSQUARE,  then  NEXTSQUARE  will  use  the  local  value  of  N  and  the 
sequence  will  be  disrupted.  A  true  generator  results  when  we  construct  a 
FUNARG,  say,  GENSQUARE,  which  consists  of  the  function  NEXTSQUARE  and 
a  pointer  to  an  environment  (in  which  N  has  some  initial  value,  say,  3).  If 
we  repeatedly  evaluate  (GENSQUARE),  we  get  16,  25,  36,  ...  as  before,  only 
GENSQUARE  always  uses  that  N  which  is  in  its  specified  environment  and 
so  is  unaffected  by  local  versions  of  N.  In  general,  FUNARGs  act  much  like 
coroutines;  they  "activate"  when  their  function  is  called  and  "suspend"  when 
it  exits.  Unlike  general  coroutines,  FUNARGs  always  return  control  to  the 
function  that  called  them. 

PLANNER 

While  CONNIVER  has  a  control  structure  very  much  like  that  of  LISP, 
with  the  addition  of  full  coroutining  facilities,  PLANNER  extends  the  LISP 
control  structure  in  a  completely  different  direction.  PLANNER  is  somewhat 
like  a  backtracking  version  of  LISP — functions  call  each  other  recursively  as  in 
LISP,  but  when  a  function  fails  (returns  NIL),  it  is  automatically  called  again 
using  the  next  possible  value  of  the  argument.  This  continues  until  either  the 
function  succeeds  or  all  arguments  have  failed. 

The  control  structure  of  PLANNER  is  very  interesting.  The  important 
point  to  keep  in  mind  is  that  PLANNER  is  always  goal  directed.  Functions  are 
invoked  because  they  might  possibly  cause  a  goal  to  be  satisfied,  not  because 
some  other  function  called  them.  PLANNER  functions  simply  do  not  call  each 
other;  they  just  state  a  goal  and  the  system  chooses  functions  to  apply  toward 
that  goal. 

A  rather  strong  analogy  may  be  drawn  to  the  control  structure  of  GPS 
(Article  II.D2,  in  Vol.  i).  Both  systems  completely  separate  domain-dependent 
information  from  the  control  structure  and  employ  a  uniform  depth-first 
search  to  solve  problems.  In  both  systems,  the  problem  is  represented  by 
a  goal  to  be  reached  or  established.  The  starting  point  is  different,  however; 
GPS  is  given  a  single  initial  object  (which  may  be  thought  of  as  the  initial  state 
of  the  world)  that  it  then  tries  to  transform  into  the  goal  object.  PLANNER 
is  given  a  whole  database  of  facts  and  tries  to  prove  that  the  goal  follows  from 
them. 

Thus,  although  GPS's  paradigm  is  actions  on  the  world  and  PLANNER'S 
is  theorem  proving,  the  actual  methods  they  use  are  quite  similar: 

1.    Each  first  will  check  to  see  if  the  goal  is  equal  to  the  initial  state  (or 
some  fact  in  the  database).   If  not,  GPS  looks  for  an  operator  that  will 


48  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

reduce  the  difference  between  the  goal  state  and  the  initial  state,  and 
PLANNER  looks  for  a  theorem  that  can  prove  the  goal  from  the  database. 

2.  Each  then  sets  up  subgoals.  For  GPS,  the  subgoals  are  (a)  to  transform 
the  initial  state  into  a  state  to  which  the  chosen  operator  can  be  applied 
and  (b)  to  transform  the  result  of  the  operator  into  the  goal.  The  whole 
GPS  method  is  applied  recursively  to  these  two  subgoals.  PLANNER 
theorems  can  set  up  any  number  of  subgoals,  namely,  whatever  facts 
must  be  established  before  the  theorem  will  imply  the  goal.  Again,  the 
whole  PLANNER  method  is  applied  recursively  to  each  subgoal. 

3.  If  at  any  point  a  subgoal  fails,  both  GPS  and  PLANNER  will  backtrack 
and  try  to  apply  a  different  operator  or  theorem. 

4.  The  net  result  is  a  depth-first  search  of  an  AND/OR  tree  (OR  nodes 
wherever  there  is  a  choice  of  operators  or  theorems,  AND  nodes  for  the 
subgoals  induced  by  each  operator  or  theorem). 

In  addition  to  the  goal-directed  or  consequent  theorems,  PLANNER  pro- 
grams can  have  antecedent  theorems,  which  are  a  type  of  demon  that  triggers 
when  facts  are  added  to  the  database  or  deleted  from  it.  (GPS  has  nothing 
analogous.)  Demons  can  modify  the  database  in  arbitrary  ways,  generally 
filling  out  implications  of  a  new  fact  or  doing  some  kind  of  bookkeeping. 
Deductions  that  would  have  to  be  made  anew  each  time  a  goal  called  for 
them  can  be  done  just  once  by  an  antecedent  theorem,  as  in  the  following 
example. 

Suppose  a  common  goal  is  to  establish  that  so-and-so  is  mortal.  A  conse- 
quent theorem  for  this  would  read 

(CONSE  (MORTAL  ?X)  (GOAL  (HUMAN  <-X)))  . 

In  other  words,  this  theorem  will  establish  that  something  is  mortal  if  the 
subgoal  of  proving  that  it  is  human  is  satisfied.  Alternately,  write  the  ante- 
cedent theorem 

(ANTE  (HUMAN  ?X)  (ASSERT  (MORTAL  <-X) ) )  , 

which  watches  for  any  assertions  of  the  form  (HUMAN . . . )  to  be  added  to  the 
database  and  then  causes  (MORTAL . . . )  also  to  be  added. 

Here  is  a  more  extensive  example  of  PLANNER  in  action.  Suppose  we 
have  a  consequent  theorem  giving  one  set  of  conditions  under  which  an  object 
can  be  deduced  to  be  broken, 

(CONSE  (BROKEN   ?X) 

(GOAL    (FRAGILE  <-X)) 
(GOAL    (HEAVY  ?Y)) 
(GOAL    (ON  <-Y  <-X)))  , 

and  a  database  containing  the  following  assertions,  among  others, 


C3 


Control  Structures 


49 


(HEAVY  Jumbo) 
(FRAGILE  Violin) 
(ON  Jumbo  Teacup) 
(FRAGILE  Teacup)  . 

Now  let's  see  what  happens  when  the  following  PLANNER  program  is  exe- 
cuted: 

(GOAL    (BROKEN  ?V))  . 

It  will  first  scan  the  database  looking  for  broken  things  and  then  use  conse- 
quent theorems  to  deduce  that  other  things  are  also  broken.  The  backtracking 
search  produces  the  tree  shown  in  Figure  C3-1. 


(BROKEN  ?V) 


Match  to  Conse  Theorem,  v  =  x 


No  Match 


(FRAGILE  — X) 
(HEAVY  ?Y) 
(ON  —  X  — Y) 


X  =  Violin 


X  =  Teacup 


(HEAVY  ?Y) 
(ON  — Y  Violin) 


Y  =  Jumbo 


(ON  Jumbo  Violin) 


No  Match 


No  Match 


(HEAVY  ?Y) 

(ON  ^Y  Teacup) 

\  Y  = 

=  Jumbo 

(ON  Jumbo  Teacup) 

Match 

Succeed 

Figure  C3-1.     A  PLANNER  execution  tree. 


50  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

PLANNER  does  pure  depth-first  search  (see  Chap.  II,  in  Vol.  i).  In  the 
tree  shown  in  Figure  C3-1,  search  proceeds  top  to  bottom  and  left  to  right. 
Initially,  the  goal  is  to  match  or  prove  (BROKEN  ?V) .  This  fails  to  match  any 
assertion  in  the  database,  but  it  does  match  the  consequent  theorem  that  is 
illustrated.  That  theorem  sets  up  three  subgoals  (FRAGILE,  HEAVY,  and  ON). 
These  are  processed  in  the  same  way,  first  matching  (FRAGILE  <-X)  against 
the  database  entry  (FRAGILE  Violin)  and,  when  that  choice  eventually  fails, 
backtracking  to  match  that  clause  against  the  other  database  fact,  (FRAGILE 
Teacup) .  When  all  three  clauses  eventually  get  matched,  control  returns  to 
the  original  goal  and  the  pattern  ?V  is  bound  to  the  value  of  X,  namely,  Teacup. 
The  goal  (BROKEN  ?V)  has  been  satisfied  by  the  deduced  fact  (BROKEN  Teacup) . 

PLANNER  control  structure  is  actually  not  quite  so  rigid  as  pictured  here. 
There  is  a  command  that  finalizes  a  certain  portion  of  the  control  tree,  so  that 
actions  are  not  undone  during  backtracking.  Also,  there  is  a  mechanism  to 
fall  back  to  an  arbitrary  fail  point  (as  opposed  to  the  closest  one).  However, 
the  fundamental  control  structure  is  rigid  depth-first  search. 

CONNIVER 

PLANNER  control  structure  was  characterized  by  the  use  of  three  different 
kinds  of  theorems  and  automatic  backtracking.  CONNIVER  has  exactly  the 
same  three  theorems,  only  it  calls  them  methods — the  IF-NEEDED,  IF-ADDED, 
and  IF-REMOVED  methods.  Instead  of  automatic  backtracking,  the  language 
provides  a  set  of  primitive  control  elements  out  of  which  a  programmer  can 
construct  alternative  control  regimes,  including,  if  desired,  a  PLANNER-like 
backtracking  scheme. 

For  example,  rewriting  the  PLANNER  consequent  theorem  from  the  exam- 
ple above  as  a  CONNIVER  IF-NEEDED  method  (see  Article  VLB  for  help  with 
the  LISP  code),  we  get  the  following: 

(IF-NEEDED  (BROKEN  ?X) 

(PROG  (Fragiles  Y  Heavies  Copy-Heavies) 

(CSETQ  Fragiles  (FETCH  '(FRAGILE  ?X))) 
(CSETQ  Heavies  (FETCH  ■ (HEAVY  ?Y) ) ) 

0UTERL00P : 

(TRY-NEXT  Fragiles  ' (ADIEU) ) 
(CSETQ  Copy-Heavies  Heavies) 

INNERL00P : 

(TRY-NEXT  Copy-Heavies  '(GO  '0UTERL00P)) 

(IF  (FETCH  '(ON  <-Y  <-X))  THEN  (NOTE  '(BROKEN  <-X))) 

(GO  'INNERL00P)       ))  . 

A   problem   with    the   PLANNER-language   solution   was   its   repetition   of 
the  search  for  heavy  objects  each  time  a  new  fragile  object  was  being  tested. 


C3  Control  Structures  51 

This  was  forced,  because  the  automatic  backtracking  mechanism  assumes  that 
later  choices  are  dependent  on  earlier  ones,  even  when,  as  in  this  case,  they 
are  independent.  In  CONNIVER,  the  list  of  heavy  objects  can  be  fetched  once 
and  used  again.  Accordingly,  the  first  section  of  the  program  finds  all  fragile 
objects  and  all  heavy  objects. 

In  the  second  section  of  the  CONNIVER  program,  the  generator  statement 
(TRY-NEXT  Fragiles  '(ADIEU))  grabs  the  next  fragile  object  in  the  list  and 
binds  X  to  it.  The  (ADIEU)  is  executed  when  there  are  no  more  fragile  objects; 
it  causes  the  method  to  terminate. 

In  the  third  section,  the  inner  loop  scans  through  all  heavy  objects  in  the 
same  fashion,  and  each  pair  of  a  fragile  X  and  a  heavy  Y  is  tested  to  see  whether 
Y  is  ON  X,  and  if  so,  the  method  NOTEs  this  and  moves  on.  Noting  an  item 
involves  adding  it  to  a  "possibilities  list."  That  possibilities  list  becomes  the 
result  of  the  IF-NEEDED  method,  after  (ADIEU)  is  executed.  Thus,  the  effect 
of  the  method  is  to  return  a  list  of  all  deducible  instances  of  (BROKEN  ?V), 
which  will  be  just  ((BROKEN  Teacup)),  assuming  the  same  database  as  in  the 
PLANNER  version  of  the  example. 

Unlike  PLANNER,  CONNIVER's  possibilities  lists  are  a  separate  data  type 
and  may  be  manipulated  by  a  user  program.  In  many  respects,  CONNIVER 
is  like  a  PLANNER  program  in  which  implicit  control  and  data  structures 
are  made  explicit  and  put  under  the  control  of  the  programmer.  Greater 
flexibility  results,  at  the  cost  of  longer  and  less  organized  programs. 

CONNIVER  allows  general  coroutining.  As  one  application,  a  program 
can  be  written  to  do  breadth-first  or  best-first  search;  PLANNER,  you  will 
recall,  always  does  depth-first  search  (see  Chap.  II,  in  Vol.  i).  Another  use 
of  coroutining  is  the  implementation  of  generators.  The  broken-object  finder 
above  can  be  turned  into  a  generator  simply  by  adding  (AU-REVOIR)  after 
(NOTE  ■  (BROKEN  <-X) ) .  AU-REVOIR  is  the  CONNIVER  function  that  suspends 
the  current  process  and  resumes  whichever  process  called  it.  Now  each  time 
the  method  is  called,  it  finds  one  broken  item,  produces  it,  and  then  suspends. 
The  advantage  of  this  technique  is  that  the  calling  process  can  ask  for  broken 
items  only  as  it  needs  them,  and  the  generator  may  not  have  to  find  them  all. 


QLISP 

The  GOAL  statement  in  QLISP  works  like  the  one  in  PLANNER,  first 
searching  the  database  to  try  to  match  the  pattern  there  and  then  invoking 
consequent  theorems  (IF-NEEDED  methods)  to  try  to  derive  it.  Automatic 
backtracking  takes  place  whenever  one  of  the  theorems  fails.  The  main 
difference  is  that  in  QLISP  the  consequent  theorems  to  be  tried  must  be  listed 
explicitly  in  the  GOAL  statement  itself.  For  instance: 

(GOAL  (MORTAL  Socrates)  APPLY  Grim  Reapers)  . 


52  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

Grim  Reapers  would  be  the  class  of  theorems,  which  might  include  theorems 
similar  to  the  PLANNER  consequent  theorem  we  saw  before  to  establish 
Socrates'  mortality:  (CONSE  (MORTAL  ?X)  (GOAL  (HUMAN  +X))).  It  is  called  an 
APPLY  team.  (In  PLANNER,  the  APPLY  team  for  every  goal  is  the  set  of  all 
known  theorems.)  Database  operations  may  also  have  APPLY  teams,  which 
take  the  place  of  the  IF-ADDED  and  IF-ERASED  demons  of  PLANNER  and 
CONNIVER. 

SAIL 

The  most  interesting  feature  of  SAIL's  control  structure  is  its  multi- 
processing capability,  something  none  of  the  other  languages  covered  here 
has.  The  designers  of  SAIL  wanted  to  allow  parallel  exploration  and  coopera- 
tion by  problem-solving  processes  (Feldman  et  al.,  1972).  There  was  also  the 
need,  imposed  by  address-space  limitations,  to  split  large  hand-eye  systems 
in  robotics  into  multiple  communicating  processes. 

Multiprocessing  is  implemented  within  the  ALGOL-like  block  structure  of 
SAIL.  Any  process  (an  invocation  of  a  SAIL  procedure)  can  SPROUT  another 
process.  The  standard  ALGOL  scope  rules  are  followed  just  as  if  the  new 
process  were  started  by  a  procedure  call;  thus,  related  processes  are  automati- 
cally able  to  share  a  common  database.  The  JOIN  primitive  suspends  a  process 
until  other  processes  (named  in  the  JOIN  statement)  have  terminated,  at  which 
point  the  first  process  resumes  execution.  JOIN  is  used  as  a  synchronization 
primitive,  as  shown  in  the  following  example: 

SPROUT (PI,    GRABCHAND1.    HAMMER)); 
SPROUT (P2,    GRAB(HAND2,    NAIL)); 

JOIN (PI,    P2); 

POUND (HAMMER,    NAIL); 


The  variables  Pi  and  P2  hold  the  (unique)  names  assigned  to  the  new  processes. 
The  names  are  used  to  identify  processes  in  later  commands. 

Interprocess  communication  is  handled  by  a  "mail"  system  implemented 
as  a  message-queuing  system.  The  mail  is  delivered  (whenever  possible)  by  the 
process  scheduler.  Processes  can  simply  check  for  messages  as  they  go  along 
or  they  can  place  themselves  in  a  queue  while  waiting  for  an  appropriate 
message.  Using  the  first  method,  the  robot's  grab-hammer  process  could 
inform  the  grab-nail  process  about  the  movements  of  the  arm  and  hammer, 
so  the  grab-nail  process  could  avoid  a  collision  with  the  other  arm. 

Demons  can  be  implemented  by  means  of  the  second  message-passing 
scheme.  To  set  up  a  demon,  a  process  is  created  that  immediately  places  itself 
in  a  queue  waiting  for  a  certain  kind  of  message  that  is  sent  out  whenever  a 


C3  Control  Structures  53 

database  update  is  done.  Demons  that  are  waiting  for  such  a  message  will  be 
activated,  simulating  a  direct  activation  of  demons  by  the  database  update. 

Coroutining  is  a  special  case  of  multiprocessing,  in  which  only  one  process 
is  active  at  any  time.  The  coroutining  primitives  CREATE,  TERMINATE, 
ACTIVATE,  and  SUSPEND  can  all  be  implemented  using  SAIL's  message- passing 
mechanism. 

POP-2 

The  POP-2  control  structure  is  much  like  that  of  LISP.  The  basic  language 
is  very  simple,  partly  in  the  interests  of  fast  compilation,  and  contains  none 
of  the  specialized  AI  control  structures  found  in  PLANNER,  CONNIYER, 
and  QLISP.  Some  of  these  features,  including  coroutines  and  multiprocessing 
primitives,  are  available  in  POP-2  libraries.  The  POPLER  library  (Davies 
et  al.,  1973)  implemented  the  spaghetti  stack,  backtracking,  database  demons, 
and  pattern  matching  in  the  manner  of  PLANNER. 

The  basic  POP-2  language  does  provide  for  the  use  of  generators  to 
construct  dynamic  lists.  The  programmer  defines  a  function  of  no  arguments, 
say,  F,  and  applies  the  POP-2  function  FNTOLIST  to  F.  The  result  is  the  list 
LF  of  values  that  F  produces  on  successive  calls.  Of  course,  F  has  to  read 
and  change  a  free  variable,  representing  the  state  of  the  generation,  or  else 
every  element  of  LF  would  be  the  same.  Now  comes  the  interesting  part.  The 
program  can  operate  on  LF  just  as  on  ordinary  (static)  lists.  But,  in  fact,  LF 
is  not  all  there;  it  starts  empty  and  new  elements  are  added  onto  the  back  of 
it  only  as  needed.  This  means  that  LF  can  be  conceptually  very  large  or  even 
infinite,  and  it  does  not  matter  so  long  as  only  the  initial  part  of  it  is  used. 

Dynamic  lists  allow  the  programmer  to  abstract  away  from  the  details 
of  how  a  list  is  produced,  whether  it  is  computed  once  and  for  all  or  is 
extended  when  needed.  Similarly,  the  memo  function  allows  abstraction  from 
the  details  of  how  a  function  is  computed.  Memo  functions  are  provided  by 
one  of  the  POP-2  libraries.  The  name  comes  from  the  notion  that  a  function, 
if  it  is  called  several  times  with  the  same  argument,  would  do  better  to  "make 
a  memo  of  it"  (the  answer)  and  store  it  in  a  lookup  table. 

FUZZY 

FUZZY  procedures  have  a  more  general  global-control  mechanism  than 
PLANNER  theorems  have.  The  procedure  demons  are  given  control  not 
only  upon  failure  of  an  expression  (as  in  MICRO-PLANNER)  but  also  after 
successful  termination  of  a  top-level  expression.  This  makes  it  possible  to 
evaluate  globally  the  results  returned  by  the  expressions  of  a  procedure. 
With  each  procedure  a  variable  is  associated  that  maintains  an  "accumulated 
Z-value"  for  the  demon's  calculations.  The  procedure  demon  is  called  a 
last  time  when  the  procedure  is  exited  in  order  to  make  any  necessary  final 
computations  (e.g.,  concluding  statistics). 


54  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

There  are  several  levels  at  which  information  is  accessed  in  a  knowledge 
base: 

1.  Explicitly  available  information  is  requested. 

2.  An  explicit  procedure  is  invoked  to  retrieve  the  desired  information. 

3.  A  goal  is  specified  and  the  system  is  left  to  decide  how  to  achieve  it. 

All  three  methods  are  possible  in  FUZZY: 

1.  The  FETCH  statement  retrieves  assertions  that  are  explicitly  stored  in 
the  associative  net  by  pattern  matching. 

2.  FUZZY  procedures  can  be  called  by  name. 

3.  If  FUZZY  procedures  have  been  stored  in  the  associative  net,  they  can 
be  invoked  by  pattern  matching  through  the  DEDUCE  statement.  This 
relieves  the  programmer  of  keeping  track  of  which  particular  procedures 
may  be  used  to  achieve  a  certain  task  and  allows  the  easy  addition  of 
new  procedures  to  the  associative  net  that  can  be  utilized  automatically 
by  existing  programs  without  change. 

4.  The  GOAL  statement  combines  the  FETCH  and  DEDUCE  statements. 
It  first  checks  whether  the  desired  information  is  explicitly  available  in 
the  net  of  assertions.  If  it  fails,  it  then  attempts  to  deduce  the  goal  by 
invoking  DEDUCE  procedures  that  match  the  specified  pattern. 

In  addition,  FUZZY  supports  ASSERT  and  ERASE  procedures,  which  are 
invoked  automatically  when  assertions  of  corresponding  patterns  are  added 
and  removed,  respectively,  from  the  associative  net. 

The  following  program  illustrates  how  FUZZY  may  deal  with  both  vague 
and  incomplete  information.  The  vagueness  is  expressed  here  by  Z- values 
associated  with  assertions.  Incomplete  information  in  this  example  is  mani- 
fested by  the  absence  of  useful  assertions.  This  "missing  information"  does 
not  force  the  procedure  into  failure,  but  rather  lowers  the  confidence  in  the 
result  obtained  by  the  procedure: 

===  NET  === 

((CHANCE  OF  RAIN)  .0.8) 
((DRYNESS  DESIRED)  .0.7) 
((BLUE  SKY)  .0.4) 

===  DEDUCE  === 

(PROC  NAME:  UMBRELLA  DEMON:  CONFIDENCE  (RAIN  PROTECTION) 
(BIND  ?SK  (FETCH  ((*0R  CLEAR  BLUE)  SKY))) 
(BIND  ?BU  (FETCH  (BURDENSOME  UMBRELLA))) 
(BIND  ?DD  (FETCH  (?  DESIRED))) 
(IF  (ZAND  THRESH:  0.9  (ZNOT  !SK)  !DD  !BU) 
THEN :  (SUCCEED  @ " STAY  HOME ! " ) 
ELSE:  T) 

(BIND  ?CR  (FETCH  (CHANCE  ??))) 


C3  Control  Structures  55 

(IF  (MINUSP  (DIFFERENCE  (PLUS  (ZVAL  !CR)  (ZVAL  !DD)) 

(PLUS  (ZVAL  !SK)  (ZVAL  !BU)))) 
THEN:  (SUCCEED  ©"DON'T  TAKE  UMBRELLA"  ZACCUM) 
ELSE:  (SUCCEED  @"TAKE  UMBRELLA"  ZACCUM))) 


(DEFPROP  CONFIDENCE 
(LAMBDA  (RESULT  THRESHOLD  C-LEVEL) 
(COND  [(EQ  RESULT  FAIL)  (COND  [(*GREAT  C-LEVEL  0.25) 

(DIFFERENCE  C-LEVEL  0.25)] 
[T  (FAIL)])] 
[(EQ  RESULT  DONE)  C-LEVEL] 
[(♦LESS  (ZVAL  RESULT)  THRESHOLD)  (FAIL)] 
[T  C-LEVEL])) 
EXPR) 

(;    RESULT    =  result  of  last  top-level  expression 

THRESHOLD  =  criterion  for  forcing  procedure  to  fail 
C-LEVEL   =  current  confidence  level) 

The  program  listing  includes  the  associative  net,  containing  some  declara- 
tive knowledge  about  a  potential  umbrella  carrier  and  his  situation.  Next  is 
the  procedural  associative  net  containing  a  DEDUCE  procedure  to  give  advice 
whether  or  not  to  carry  an  umbrella  in  a  given  situation.  Finally,  there 
is  a  LISP  procedure  that  is  used  by  the  DEDUCE  procedure  UMBRELLA  as 
a  procedure  demon.  The  procedure  UMBRELLA  uses  assertions  and  their 
modifiers  to  calculate  the  projected  payoff  for  carrying  an  umbrella.  The 
demon  CONFIDENCE  watches  this  calculation  and  determines  a  confidence 
measure  for  the  result  obtained  by  UMBRELLA.  This  is  done  as  follows. 
UMBRELLA  looks  for  four  types  of  assertions  in  the  associative  net: 

1.  information  about  the  blueness  or  the  clearness  of  the  sky, 

2.  information  about  the  burden  of  carrying  an  umbrella, 

3.  information  about  a  desired  goal  that  can  be  satisfied  with  an  umbrella, 
and 

4.  information  about  the  chance  that  an  event  would  occur  that  would 
make  an  umbrella  desirable. 

The  most  reliable  advice  can  be  given  by  UMBRELLA  if  all  four  pieces  of 
information  can  be  found.  If  a  piece  of  information  cannot  be  found  (i.e.,  if  the 
corresponding  FETCH  returns  FAIL),  the  demon  reduces  the  confidence  level 
ZACCUM,  which  is  returned  as  the  Z-value  of  UMBRELLA.  Observe  that  the 
Z-value  can  be  used  in  a  single  program  to  do  different  kinds  of  qualifications. 

Summary 

In  the  chronological  sequence  PLANNER,  CONNIVER,  QLISP,  we  observe 
an  increase  in  the  variety  of  control  structures  and  in  the  programmer's  access 


56  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

to  them.  This  development  seems  to  address  two  major  needs:  to  concisely 
express  powerful  control  techniques  and  to  make  complicated  programs  as 
efficient  as  possible.  PLANNER  took  a  giant  step  in  the  direction  of  increased 
power  by  shifting  the  entire  domain  of  discourse  in  which  programs  are  written 
from  the  imperative  level  (do  this,  then  do  that,  etc.)  to  the  level  of  goals.  The 
programmer  formulates  problems  in  terms  of  goals  that  are  to  be  established, 
writing  "theorems"  that  reduce  a  goal  to  subgoals,  and  sets  the  automatic- 
deduction  mechanism  going.  This  approach  suffers  from  the  inefficiency  of 
its  central  method,  automatic  backtracking,  and  the  inability  of  the  user 
to  remedy  this  by  expressing  himself  at  the  imperative  level  on  occasion. 
Automatic  backtracking  in  PLANNER  is  convenient  if  the  user  has  absolutely 
no  good  idea  of  how  to  guide  the  program. 

CONNIVER  was  developed  largely  in  response  to  these  problems.  Sussman 
and  McDermott  (1972)  argue  the  following  points  against  PLANNER  and  for 
CONNIVER: 

1.  Programs  that  use  automatic  backtracking  often  result  in  the  worst 
algorithms  for  solving  a  problem. 

2.  The  most  common  use  of  backtracking  can  almost  always  be  replaced 
by  a  purely  recursive  structure  that  is  not  only  more  efficient  but  also 
clearer,  both  syntactically  and  semantically. 

3.  Superficial  analysis  of  problems  and  poor  programming  practice  are 
encouraged  by  the  ubiquity  of  automatic  backtracking  and  by  the  illu- 
sion of  power  that  a  function  like  GOAL  gives  the  user  merely  by  brute- 
force  use  of  invisible  failure-driven  loops. 

4.  The  attempt  to  fix  these  defects  by  the  introduction  of  failure  messages 
is  unnatural  and  ineffective. 

CONNIVER  retreats  to  the  imperative  style  of  programming  with  some 
automatic-deduction  primitives  kept  on,  namely,  the  three  kinds  of  theorems 
or  methods.  In  addition,  it  gives  the  user  the  flexibility  implied  by  coroutines, 
which  permit  techniques  like  breadth-first  or  depth-first  search  to  be  expressed 
conveniently. 

QLISP  reintroduces  automatic  backtracking,  but  as  optional  and  under 
restrictions  (that  the  consequent  theorems  to  try  must  be  named  as  a  team). 
Over  all,  it  includes  practically  every  control  structure  found  in  PLANNER  or 
CONNIVER. 

All  three  of  these  LISP-based  languages  rely  heavily  on  pattern  matching 
to  guide  the  flow  of  control.  The  basic  technique  is  pattern-directed  invoca- 
tion, in  which  the  function  to  execute  next  is  chosen  by  its  match  to  a  pattern 
in  the  database.  A  problem  here  is  that,  in  current  schemes,  there  is  little 
information  passed  between  the  alternative  functions  that  match  in  a  given 
situation.  It  seems  plausible  that  cooperation  and  sharing  of  information 
between  the  different  functions  attempting  a  goal  might  be  better.    This  is 


C3  Control  Structures  57 

part  of  the  idea  behind  SAIL's  message-passing,  multiprocessing  primitives 
(see  also  Article  V.Cl,  in  Vol.  i). 

Davis  (1976)  discusses  and  compares  several  control  schemes  in  the  context 
of  his  own  program,  TEIRESIAS,  which  uses  strategy  rules  to  decide  how  to 
sequence  the  application  of  other  rules  (Article  VII. B).  One  major  dimension 
along  which  control  schemes  vary  is  the  degree  of  data-drivenness.  In  the  usual 
calling-hierarchy  scheme,  conditional  statements  (and  loop  tests)  interrogate 
a  single  data  value  and  select  from  a  few  predetermined  paths  depending 
on  the  value.  In  the  most  complex  control  scheme,  the  decision  about  what 
to  do  next  would  be  "reasoned  about"  with  the  full  power  of  the  problem 
solver,  considering  all  of  the  data  available.  The  control  activities  offered  in 
AI  programming  languages  explore  the  possibilities  between  these  extremes. 

References 

The  book  Pattern-Directed  Inference  Systems  by  Waterman  and  Hayes- 
Roth  (1978)  is  a  good  place  to  begin. 


C4.     Pattern  Matching 


PATTERN-MATCHING  FACILITIES  are  supplied  in  AI  programming  lan- 
guages for  two  major  tasks:  finding  entries  in  a  database  and  choosing  which 
procedure  to  execute  next.  Pattern  matching  can  be  viewed  as  a  form  of 
content  addressing:  In  most  computer  languages,  a  datum  has  to  be  accessed 
by  its  name,  for  example,  the  name  of  a  variable.  The  general  idea  of  content 
addressing  is  to  eliminate  this  need  for  arbitrary  names  of  things  and  to  access 
an  item  of  data  by  specifying  its  form  (or  meaning)  instead.  A  pattern,  such 
as  ((FATHER-OF  ?X)  ?Y) ,  is  used  as  a  kind  of  sketch  of  the  datum  being  sought 
in  the  database  and  "matches"  against  stored  items  like  ((FATHER-OF  MARY) 
(FLIES  KITES) ) .  Thus,  the  name  or  address  of  the  stored  information  need 
not  be  remembered.  This  is  known  as  pattern- directed  retrieval,  or  retrieval 
by  pattern  match. 

Similarly,  patterns  can  be  used  to  make  less  rigid  control  regimes  possible 
by  eliminating  the  need  to  call  specific  procedures  by  name.  In  pattern- directed 
invocation,  described  in  Article  VI. C3,  the  tests-and-branches  form  of  program 
control  is  replaced  by  associating  each  procedure  with  a  pattern  and  then,  at 
decision  points,  matching  them  all  against  the  current  situation  or  goal  to 
determine  which  to  execute  next. 

These  techniques  can  relieve  the  AI  programmer  of  a  great  burden:  Modu- 
larization of  programs  is  much  easier  to  accomplish  because  the  programmer 
does  not  have  to  specify  which  calls  what,  or  what  access  path  is  taken  to  get 
to  an  item  in  the  database.  Of  course,  a  price  must  be  paid — the  overhead  of 
running  the  pattern  matcher. 

Typically,  a  pattern  is  a  structure  with  variables  embedded  in  it,  and  it 
matches  another  structure  if  it  could  be  made  identical  to  that  structure  by 
replacing  its  variables  with  some  values.  Occurrences  of  the  same  variable 
must  be  replaced  by  the  same  value.  For  example,  (A  ?X  C  <-X)  will  match 
(A  B  C  B)  but  not  (A  B  C  D) ,  because  once  the  variable  ?X  has  been  bound  to 
B  in  the  match,  it  cannot  then  be  bound  to  D.  The  power  (and  overhead)  of 
a  pattern-matching  facility  is  partly  related  to  the  types  of  pattern  variables 
that  can  be  handled.  Here  are  some  common  pattern- variable  types,  expressed 
in  terms  of  matching  patterns  in  lists: 

1.  An  "open"  variable  (?X)  matches  to  any  element  of  a  list,  and  binds  X 
to  that  element. 

2.  A   "closed"   variable    («-X)    must  have  already  been  bound,   as  in  the 
example  above,  and  matches  only  the  value  already  bound  to  X. 

3.  A   "restricted"   variable  may  have  arbitrary  restrictions  placed  on  it. 
These  restrictions  are  procedurally  attached  to  the  variable  in  some  way, 


58 


C4  Pattern  Matching  59 

for  example,  as  a  predicate  (Boolean  function)  that  must  be  TRUE  in 
order  for  the  variable  to  match. 

4.  Segment  variables  match  to  a  sublist  of  any  length,  rather  than  to  an 
element.  Open  and  closed  segment  variables  are  denoted  ??X  and  «-«-X, 
respectively. 

To  avoid  confusion,  the  different  kinds  of  pattern  variables  will  always  be 
written  ?X,  «-X,  and  so  on,  ignoring  the  varying  notations  of  the  different  AI 
programming  languages. 

Some  examples  may  clarify  these  ideas.   Suppose  we  want  to  match  the 
form 


i 

CA  B    (C  A) 

B) 

against  the  following  patterns: 

Pattern 

Match 

Bindings 

?X 

yes 

X 

= 

(A  B    (C  A)    B) 

(?X  <-X   (C  A)   B) 

no 

(?X  B    (C  <-X)    B) 

yes 

X 

= 

A 

(?X  ?Y    (C  A)    B) 

yes 

X 

= 

A,    Y  =  B 

(?X  ?X    (C  A)    B) 

illegal  pattern 

(A  B  ?Z  B) 

yes 

Z 

= 

(C  A) 

(??X) 

yes 

X 

= 

(A  B    (C  A)    B) 

(??X    (<-<-X)    B) 

no 

(??X    («-«-Y)    B) 

yes 

X 

= 

(A  B) ,    Y  =    (C  A) 

(A  ??Z) 

yes 

Z 

= 

(B    (C  A)    B) 

(B  ??Z) 

no 

Typically,  patterns  are  matched  against  forms  that  contain  no  variables.  Some 
systems,  notably  QLISP,  allow  for  patterns  to  be  matched  against  patterns. 

LISP 

As  was  the  case  in  control-structure  facilities,  basic  LISP  has  no  pattern- 
matching  constructs.  But,  again,  LISP  does  lend  itself  to  implementing  such 
mechanisms,  and  it  is  appropriate  to  say  a  little  about  this. 

Patterns  typically  take  the  form  of  nested  structures,  standing  for  a 
mathematical  formula,  an  assertion,  or  some  kind  of  structured  object,  for 
instance.  These  can  all  be  uniformly  represented  in  list  structure  in  LISP, 
as  described  in  Article  VI. B.  Uniformity  is  a  big  advantage  in  that  it  allows 
the  same  pattern-matching  algorithm  to  be  used  for  these  different  kinds 
of  objects.  Pattern  matching  on  nested  structures  is  inherently  a  recursive 
process,  since  the  same  matching  engine  is  applied  to  each  nested  level;  thus, 
the  central  role  of  recursion  in  LISP  is  also  helpful. 


60  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

PLANNER 

The  big  innovation  in  PLANNER  was  simply  its  more  extensive  use  of 
pattern  matching  compared  to  previous  programming  languages.  Access  to 
the  PLANNER  database  is  exclusively  by  pattern-directed  retrieval.  Thus,  the 
goal  pattern 

(?X  SOCRATES) 

will  match  to  a  database  assertion 

(MORTAL  SOCRATES) 

and  X  will  be  bound  to  MORTAL. 

As  another  application  of  pattern  matching,  PLANNER  functions 
(i.e.,  theorems)  are  always  called  through  pattern-directed  invocation.  Conse- 
quent theorems  have  an  attached  pattern  that  is  matched  to  the  current  goal 
and,  if  the  match  succeeds,  the  theorem  is  invoked.  For  example, 

(CONSE    (MORTAL  ?Y)    (GOAL    (HUMAN  <-Y)))  . 

With  this  consequent  theorem,  the  goal  (?X  SOCRATES) ,  meaning  roughly  Tell 
me  something  about  Socrates,  will  match  to  the  theorem's  pattern  (MORTAL  ?Y) , 
meaning  /  can  tell  you  when  things  are  mortal,  with  the  upshot  that  the  theo- 
rem establishes  a  subgoal  (HUMAN  SOCRATES).  If  it  succeeds  in  proving  this 
goal,  it  returns  (MORTAL  SOCRATES) . 

Similarly,  antecedent  and  erasing  theorems  (Article  VI. C3)  have  attached 
patterns,  but  these  are  matched  against  assertions  that  are  being  added  to 
or  deleted  from  the  database,  rather  than  against  goals.  The  same  pattern- 
matching  method  is  used  in  all  cases. 

There  is  nothing  particularly  interesting  about  the  implementation  of 
PLANNER'S  pattern  matcher.  The  implementors  of  MICRO-PLANNER  delib- 
erately chose  the  simplest  scheme  that  would  be  adequate  for  their  needs.  The 
matching  is  only  one  level  deep — (?X  (?Y  Plato) )  is  not  a  valid  PLANNER  pat- 
tern. (Full  PLANNER,  as  opposed  to  the  actually  implemented  sublanguage 
MICRO-PLANNER,  specified  general  tree  matching,  which  is  the  same  as 
multilevel  list  matching.)  For  an  extensive  example  of  how  PLANNER'S 
pattern-matching  facility  is  used,  see  Article  IV.F4  (in  Vol.  i)  on  SHRDLU. 

CONNIVER 

CONNIVER  uses  pattern  matching  for  the  same  purposes  PLANNER 
does,  but  it  allows  functions  to  be  invoked  directly  (imperatively)  as  well  as 
through  pattern-directed  invocation.  The  pattern  matcher  is  more  powerful 
than  that  of  PLANNER.  For  one  thing,  it  handles  multilevel  patterns  like 
(?X   (?Y  Plato)),  which  matches   (MORTAL    (TEACHER-OF  Plato)).    There  is  no 


C4  Pattern  Matching  61 

restriction  on  the  level  of  nesting.  Second,  while  PLANNER  and  CONNIVER 
patterns  are  LISP  list  structures,  CONNIVER,  in  fact,  allows  patterns  to  take 
the  more  general  form  of  s-expressions  (see  Article  VLB).  For  example,  the  pat- 
tern (PLUS  0  .  ?X)  will  match  to  (PLUS  0  12  3  4),  binding  X  to  the  list  tail, 
(12  3  4). 

CONNIVER's  pattern  matcher  can  be  applied  independently  to  analyze 
the  structure  of  data  using  the  MATCH  statement.  For  example,  the  function 
call 

(MATCH  ((FATHER-OF  ?WH0)  .  ?WHAT)  ((FATHER-OF  FRED)  WHISTLES  DIXIE)) , 

which  contains  the  pattern  and  the  data  to  which  it  is  to  be  matched,  binds 
?WH0  to  FRED  and  ?WHAT  to  (WHISTLES  DIXIE) . 

So  far,  all  the  patterns  we  have  shown  contain  just  two  kinds  of  objects: 
variables  that  must  match  something  and  constants  like  FATHER-OF  and  PLUS. 
CONNIVER  adds  flexibility  by  allowing  variables  that  are  assigned  some  con- 
stant value  before  the  match  is  done;  the  effect  is  as  if  the  variable  were 
replaced  by  its  value  before  the  match  begins. 

QLISP 

QLISP  has  by  far  the  most  powerful  pattern-matching  facility  of  the 
languages  covered  here.  There  are  three  contributing  factors: 

1.  The  special  QLISP  data  types,  BAG,  CLASS,  TUPLE,  and  VECTOR,  used 
in  patterns  and  data; 

2.  Segment  variables; 

3.  A  powerful  unification  algorithm. 

Recall,  from  one  of  the  examples  of  CONNIVER's  pattern  matching,  that  the 
pattern  (PLUS  0  .  ?X)  will  match  to  the  form  (PLUS  0  12  3  4),  binding  X 
to  the  list  tail  (1  2  3  4) .  Unfortunately,  no  such  pattern  will  also  match  to 
(PLUS  1  0  2  3  4)  or  (PLUS  4  3  2  10),  even  though  that  might  be  convenient. 
LISP  list  structure  forces  a  spurious  ordering  of  the  arguments.  In  QLISP,  one 
can  rewrite  the  pattern  as 

(PLUS    (BAG  0  ??X))  , 

where  ??X  is  a  segment  variable.  A  segment  variable  matches  to  any  number  of 
items,  rather  than  a  single  one.  Furthermore,  the  order  of  the  items  following 
BAG  is  irrelevant  (see  Article  VI. C2).  Hence,  this  pattern  will  match  to  any  of 
the  following  objects: 

(PLUS  (BAG  0  12  3  4))  X  =  (BAG   1234) 

(PLUS  (BAG  10  2  3  4))  X  =  (BAG   1234) 

(PLUS  (BAG  4  3  2  10))  X  =  (BAG  4321) 

(PLUS  (BAG  0))  X  =  (BAG)  . 


62  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

The  so-called  QLAMBDA  functions  in  QLISP  have  a  pattern  instead  of 
an  argument  list,  much  like  consequent  theorems  in  PLANNER.  The  QLISP 
programmer  can  exploit  the  power  of  QLISP  pattern  matching  to  express 
computations  very  concisely,  as  in  these  examples: 

PlusZero:      (QLAMBDA    (PLUS    (BAG  0  ??X))    (PLUS    (BAG  $$X))) 

PlusMinus:    (QLAMBDA    (PLUS    (BAG  ??X  ?Y    (MINUS  ?Y)))    (PLUS    (BAG  $$X))) 

BothSets :       (QLAMBDA 

(TUPLE    (CLASS  ?X  ??0THERS)    (CLASS  ?X  ??YETOTHERS))    $$X) . 

PLUSZERO,  if  its  pattern  matches,  has  found  a  zero  in  the  list  of  numbers  to 
be  added  and  will  return  the  PLUS  without  the  zero.  PLUSMINUS  finds  an 
expression  and  its  negative  in  the  arguments  and  cancels  them.  BOTHSETS 
finds  an  element  common  to  two  sets  (called  classes  in  QLISP)  and  returns 
that  element. 

PLANNER  and  CONNIVER  use  pattern  matching  only  in  the  contexts 
of  pattern-directed  retrieval  and  pattern-directed  invocation.  The  QLISP 
programmer  can  call  the  pattern  matcher  directly,  as  well  as  use  it  implicitly 
in  retrieval  and  invocation. 

In  most  pattern-matching  applications,  only  the  pattern  contains  vari- 
ables; it  is  matched  to  a  constant  object.  QLISP's  unification  algorithm  gen- 
eralizes this  to  a  "merge,"  or  unification,  of  two  patterns,  both  containing 
variables.  The  patterns  unify  if  there  is  some  substitution  of  values  for  vari- 
ables such  that  the  patterns  become  identical.  For  example,  the  pattern  (A  ?X) 
unifies  with  (?Y  B)  under  the  binding  X  =  B,  Y  =  A.  QLISP  uses  a  unification 
algorithm  extended  to  handle  its  special  data  types  and  segment  variables. 
Most  commonly,  one  of  the  patterns  contains  no  variables  and  unification 
reduces  it  to  a  standard  match,  but  in  some  tasks,  notably  theorem  proving 
(Chap.  XII,  in  Vol.  Ill),  it  is  necessary  to  match  against  objects,  like  mathe- 
matical formulas,  which  themselves  contain  variables.  (See  Kahn,  1981,  for  a 
more  complete  discussion  of  unification.) 

SAIL 

In  SAIL,  pattern  matching  is  used  only  in  database  retrieval.  The  major 
language  construct  for  retrieval  in  SAIL  is  the  FOREACH  statement.  Patterns 
are  composed  from  four  types  of  expressions: 

1.  Associative  triples  such  as  X  (g)  Y  =  GREEN  and  MOTHER  (g)  ADRIAN  =  Z; 

2.  Restricted  variables,  using  any  Boolean  function  as  the  predicate; 

3.  Expressions  of  the  form  X  £  A,  where  A  is  a  set; 

4.  Matching  procedures,  which  are  essentially  generators. 


C4  Pattern  Matching  63 

These  interact  in  a  manner  best  shown  by  example: 

FOREACH  X,    Y  SUCH  THAT  X  IN  AnimalSet  AND  Gregarious (X)    AND 

Desert (Y)    AND  Range  (g)  X  =  Y  DO  PRINT (X); 

The  conjunctive  conditions  in  the  FOREACH  statement  are  processed  left  to 
right.  In  this  example,  a  set-membership  pattern  is  leftmost,  so  the  system 
chooses  some  X  in  the  set  AnimalSet.  Then  X  is  tested  to  determine  whether  it 
satisfies  the  predicate  GREGARIOUS  (just  a  Boolean  function).  If  GREGARIOUS 
returns  FALSE,  another  X  in  AnimalSet  is  chosen,  but  if  it  returns  TRUE,  the 
process  continues:  The  matching  procedure  DESERT  generates  a  Y  and  the 
database  is  checked  to  determine  whether  Range  ®XeY.  (If  not,  another 
DESERT  is  generated  by  the  matching  procedure.)  X-Y  pairs  that  meet  all 
the  conditions  are  passed  on  to  the  action  part  of  the  FOREACH  statement 
(following  the  DO),  which  in  this  case  consists  merely  of  printing  X.  The  net 
effect  of  this  FOREACH,  then,  is  to  print  out  all  gregarious  animals  that  live 
in  a  desert. 

In  general,  a  FOREACH  statement  can  include  any  number  of  variables  and 
can  have  any  number  of  conjoined  conditions.  The  ordering  of  the  conditions  is 
critical  for  efficiency;  for  instance,  if  we  had  put  the  triple  Range  (g)  X  =  Y  first 
in  our  example,  the  FOREACH  statement  would  first  find  all  appropriate  triples 
in  the  associative  database  and  then  try  each  X-Y  pair  on  the  other  conditions. 
(A  matching  procedure,  when  its  variable  is  already  bound,  behaves  like  a 
Boolean  function.)  If  the  database  includes  a  large  amount  of  information 
concerning  the  ranges  of  animals,  this  would  be  highly  inefficient.  (Note 
that  consequent  theorems  in  PLANNER  have  a  similar  property,  namely,  that 
the  order  in  which  subgoals  are  listed  can  drastically  affect  the  number  of 
alternatives  examined.) 

POP-2 

The  basic  POP-2  programming  language  does  not  have  pattern  match- 
ing. As  with  POP-2 's  control-structure  features  (Article  VI.C3),  the  pattern- 
matching  facilities  are  provided  by  various  library  packages  that  implement 
facilities  similar  to  those  in  PLANNER,  CONNIVER,  and  SAIL. 

FUZZY 

As  in  PLANNER  and  CONNIVER,  a  FUZZY  variable  is  assigned  a  value 
through  pattern  matching.  For  example, 

(MATCH    (?X  ??Y)    ((A  B)    CD)) 


64  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

binds  the  FUZZY  variable  !X  to  (A  B)  and  !Y  to  (C  D).  A  greater  selection  of 
functions  than  in  PLANNER  and  CONNIVER  is  available  for  restricting  the 
structure  of  the  pattern  or  the  set  of  items  that  can  match  successfully;  for 
example, 

(*R  ?0BJECT  (FETCH  (RED  ! OBJECT))) 

will  only  match  an  object  that  is  known  to  be  red. 

Summary 

Once  again,  in  the  chronological  sequence  PLANNER,  CONNIVER,  QLISP, 
we  see  a  general  increase  in  sophistication  of  pattern  matching  and  the  range 
of  its  applications.  PLANNER  patterns  are  used  implicitly  to  fetch  assertions 
from  the  database  and  to  choose  a  function  (theorem)  to  invoke,  but  they 
are  limited  in  their  structure  and  cannot  be  used  explicitly  to  analyze  the 
structure  of  data  items.  QLISP  patterns  are,  by  comparison,  very  general, 
and  much  of  the  language's  power  depends  on  them.  They  serve  as  a  major 
method  for  analyzing  data,  not  just  in  the  sense  of  extracting  parts,  but  of 
performing  quite  complicated  tests  and  searches  as  well. 

Not  surprisingly,  pattern  matching  is  expensive.  In  almost  any  particular 
case,  the  pattern-match  algorithm  will  be  more  general  than  is  really  required, 
implying  that  replacing  it  with  ad  hoc  code  would  yield  a  speedup.  When  the 
pattern  contains  segment  variables  (as  in  QLISP),  the  slowdown  is  especially 
severe.  In  this  connection,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  QLISP  is  termed 
by  its  designers  (Sacerdoti  et  al.,  1976)  a  "language  for  the  interactive  devel- 
opment of  complex  systems"  with  the  explicit  intention  that  once  a  QLISP 
program  works,  the  user  can  convert  it  to  pure  INTERLISP.  This  can  even 
be  accomplished  in  stages  in  the  QLISP  environment,  because  QLISP  and 
INTERLISP  can  be  freely  mixed. 

Some  pattern-matching  capabilities  are  not  offered  in  any  AI  programming 
language.  For  one  thing,  all  current  languages  do  exact  structural  matches.  A 
very  desirable  feature  would  be  "best  match"  capability:  Instead  of  matching 
exactly  or  failing,  the  matcher  would  do  the  best  it  could  and  return  infor- 
mation on  the  points  it  could  not  find  a  match  on  (see  Bobrow  and  Winograd, 
1977,  for  speculations  along  this  line). 


C5.     Programming  Environment 


THE  PURPOSE  of  a  programming  environment  is  to  help  the  programmer  in 
all  phases  of  program  development,  from  initial  writing  of  the  code  through 
modification,  debugging,  assembling  of  modules,  and  documentation — not 
necessarily  in  that  order.  The  principal  limitation  is  feasibility.  As  will 
become  apparent,  designing  and  implementing  the  programming  environment 
can  easily  be  as  much  work  as  implementing  the  language  itself. 

Some  AI  programming  languages  have  given  rise  to  outstanding  environ- 
mental facilities.  In  part,  this  is  due  to  the  character  of  AI  researchers  them- 
selves, who  include  some  of  the  world's  consummate  "hackers."  Furthermore, 
the  language  implementors  are  in  close  contact  with  the  language  users — they 
are  often  the  same  people.  It  is  also  true  that  the  programs  these  researchers 
have  developed  are  particularly  complex  and  difficult  to  manage. 

AI  programs  tend  to  have  certain  characteristics  that  greatly  influence  the 
practice  of  programming.  Most  obviously,  they  are  big.  As  with  other  large 
programs,  designers  and  programmers  usually  try  to  break  the  system  down 
into  several  discrete  "modules"  that  can  be  written  and  tested  separately.  It 
often  happens  in  AI  programs  that  the  modules  will  be  heavily  interdependent, 
no  matter  how  the  breakdown  of  the  task  is  done;  the  programmer  then  has  no 
choice  but  to  write  each  module  with  the  necessary  flexibility  for  interactions. 
Finally,  since  the  development  of  an  AI  program  is  usually  a  research  effort,  the 
program  tends  to  be  always  in  a  state  of  flux,  subject  to  frequent  modification 
and  occasional  major  restructuring.  In  other  words,  in  the  course  of  his  (or 
her)  research,  an  AI  programmer  may  produce  dozens  or  even  hundreds  of 
variations  of  his  system,  looking  for  the  effects  of  changes  in  both  design  and 
implementation. 

One  programming  style  frequently  used  in  AI  projects  emphasizes  incre- 
mental development,  module  by  module.  Each  new  module  is  added  to  what 
already  exists,  and  the  expanded  configuration  is  tested  to  see  how  it  behaves 
with  the  new  module  added.  During  incremental  development,  not-yet-written 
modules  may  be  simulated  by  a  person  interacting  with  the  program.  In  other 
cases,  the  system  will  run  with  only  some  of  its  modules  (see,  e.g.,  Article  V.C1, 
in  Vol.  I). 

Another  programming  style,  "structured  growth,"  is  described  in  Sande- 
wall  (1978): 

An  initial  program  with  a  pure  and  simple  structure  is  written,  tested,  and 
then  allowed  to  grow  by  increasing  the  ambition  of  its  modules.  The  pro- 
cess continues  recursively  as  each  module  is  rewritten.  The  principle  applies 
...  to  the  flexibility  of  the  data  handled  by  the  program,  the  sophistication 


65 


66  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

of  deduction,  the  number  and  versatility  of  the  services  provided  by  the 
system,  etc.  (p.  60) 

Sandewall  notes  that  the  classical  structured-programming  method  of  stepwise 
refinement  is  not  often  used  in  Artificial  Intelligence. 

To  sum  up  briefly,  AI  programmers  must  impose  some  workable  organiza- 
tion upon  a  large  set  of  interacting  modules,  one  that  is  flexible  enough  to 
allow  constant  modification,  correction,  and  growth  of  the  system.  The  sup- 
port provided  by  a  good  programming  environment  is  essential. 

In  looking  further  at  the  question  of  why  AI  languages  tend  to  have  highly 
developed  environments,  it  is  also  significant  that  the  programming-support 
system  of  a  language  often  resembles  an  AI  system  in  its  own  right.  It  may 
rely  on  a  large  database  describing  the  program  and  consist  of  several  modules 
(editor,  debugger,  etc.)  that  interact  strongly.  Consider,  then,  the  advantages 
of  developing  environment  facilities  in  an  AI  language,  presumably  the  one 
being  supported. 

Although  one's  wish  list  of  programming-support  features  might  be  end- 
less, the  following  list  includes  the  most  important  ones: 

1.  An  interactive  language,  that  is,  one  in  which  statements  can  be  typed  in 
as  commands  and  are  executed  immediately.  Compiler-based  languages 
are  generally  not  interactive. 

2.  A  good  editor,  if  possible,  one  that  can  deal  with  a  program  according 
to  its  structure  as  a  program  (not  just  as  text  composed  of  characters). 

3.  Interactive  debugging  facilities,  that  is,  breaks,  backtraces,  and  facilities 
for  examining  and  changing  program  variables. 

4.  Input/output  routines.  The  most  common  input/output  actions  should  be 
specially  supported  by  standard  system  input/output  functions,  so  that 
the  programmer  is  not  burdened  with  such  details. 

In  the  following  discussion  of  the  environments  of  individual  languages,  keep 
these  basic  features  in  mind — not  all  of  these  languages  have  all  the  basic 
features,  and  some  go  well  beyond  them. 


LISP 

Basic  LISP  lends  itself  quite  well  to  various  environment  facilities.    All 
dialects  of  basic  LISP  have  some  environment  features: 

1.  LISP  is  an  interpreted  language.  This  means  that  LISP  is  used  naturally 
in  an  interactive  mode,  which  is  itself  a  very  important  environment 
feature.  And  since  the  support  programs  are  also  written  in  LISP,  they 
will  be  interactive.  Interpreted  languages  are  also  easier  to  debug,  since  it 
is  the  source  program  that  is  actually  executed,  rather  than  the  relatively 
opaque  object  program  that  results  from  compiling  the  source  code. 


C5  Programming  Environment  67 

2.  The  simple  syntax  of  LISP  programs  and  the  standard  representation  of 
programs  in  list  structures  have  been  pointed  to  as  important  features  of 
LISP  for  AI  programs  that  involve  the  creation,  inspection,  and  manipula- 
tion of  other  programs.  These  features  can  be  exploited  by  editing  and 
debugging  routines,  which,  of  course,  must  themselves  manipulate  pro- 
cedures. 

3.  The  flexibility  of  function  calling  in  LISP  makes  it  easy  for  environment 
programs  to  call  each  other.  For  example,  the  debugger  could  call  the 
editor  to  insert  or  remove  breakpoint  statements. 

4.  LISP  has  an  elementary  database  facility — property  lists  and  association 
lists — that  is  useful  for  storing  information  about  user  programs. 

Almost  any  LISP  system  includes  some  debugging  facilities  and  a  scheme 
for  printing  LISP  programs  with  indentions  for  easier  reading.  (Because  of 
the  rather  difficult-to-read  form  of  LISP  functions  in  the  usual  embedded 
list  format  with  parentheses,  a  "pretty  printing"  facility  is  an  important 
programming  aid.)  The  major  LISP  dialects,  MACLISP  and  INTERLISP,  are 
certainly  among  the  most  highly  developed  programming  environments  ever 
created. 

INTERLISP 

Although  there  are  important  differences  in  philosophy  and  performance 
between  MACLISP  and  INTERLISP,  in  practice,  the  two  languages  offer  very 
similar  programming  environments.  For  one  thing,  as  was  the  case  with  the 
development  of  the  languages  themselves,  features  that  prove  useful  in  one 
system  are  copied  over  to  the  other.  We  discuss  the  major  support  facilities 
of  INTERLISP  here;  some  of  the  differences  between  these  two  major  dialects 
were  mentioned  in  Article  VI. B. 

The  name  INTERLISP  stands  for  "Interactive  LISP"  and  refers  to  a  LISP 
programming  system  that  has  been  developing  steadily  for  over  10  years, 
both  in  language  features  and  in  programming-support  facilities  (see  Masinter, 
1981).  The  major  environment  features  are  mentioned  here.  INTERLISP  is  a 
"residential"  system:  The  facilities  reside  in  core  and  can  be  called  without 
the  user  leaving  LISP.  Another  important  general  point  is  that  the  facilities 
are  well  integrated  with  each  other  (although,  on  occasion,  this  integration 
can  lead  to  unpredictable  interactions  and  consequent  difficulties;  Sandewall, 
1978,  p.  51). 

The  INTERLISP  editor  operates  directly  on  the  list  structure  of  programs 
and  data.  It  is  itself  a  LISP  function,  or,  more  precisely,  an  assemblage  of 
functions.  Thus,  the  user  can  define  composite  editor  commands  as  macros 
or  even  define  editing  macros  that  call  arbitrary  LISP  programs.  Conversely, 
INTERLISP  programs  themselves  can  call  the  editor  and  give  it  commands. 


68  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

INTERLISP's  debugging  package  offers  the  standard  facilities  for  breaking 
and  tracing  functions.  Upon  an  error  break,  a  new  read-evaluate-print  loop 
is  entered,  in  which  the  user  can  ask  for  a  backtrace  or  evaluate  any  LISP 
statement  (including  statements  to  examine  or  change  variables).  An  extensive 
input/output  file  package  is  provided  that  assists  in  the  difficult  task  of 
keeping  track  of  the  many  functions  and  modules  in  a  typical  LISP  program. 
In  particular,  the  file  package  keeps  track  of  which  functions  are  being  used, 
possibly  read  in  from  several  of  the  programmer's  disk  files,  and  automatically 
updates  the  file  copy  of  the  code  when  the  programmer  edits  a  function  in 
core. 

The  "Programmer's  Assistant"  monitors  and  records  all  user  inputs  and 
retains  a  history  of  the  computation.  For  instance,  the  user  can  ask  the 
Assistant  to  repeat  a  command  or  undo  the  effect  of  one.  The  intended 
impression  is  that  of  an  attentive  assistant  who  carefully  watches  what  the 
programmer  is  doing  and  can  take  over  some  of  the  repetitious  tasks  when 
asked.  The  DWIM  (Do  What  I  Mean)  facility  attempts  to  figure  out  what 
the  programmer  really  meant  to  say  when  he  typed  in  an  uninterpretable 
command;  for  instance,  DWIM  corrects  spelling  errors. 

CLISP  (Conversational  LISP)  is  a  set  of  convenient  surface  syntax  con- 
structs that  are  translated  into  ordinary  LISP.  It  includes  various  abbrevia- 
tions, a  record  package,  a  pattern-match  compiler,  algebraic  notation,  and 
other  things.  (CLISP  is  actually  implemented  through  the  error-catching 
mechanism  of  INTERLISP:  Any  input  that  cannot  be  recognized  as  LISP  is 
analyzed  to  see  if  it  is  valid  CLISP  before  the  system  indicates  that  an  error 
has  been  made.) 

PLANNER  and  CONNIVER 

PLANNER  and  CONNIVER  are  interpreters  written  in  MACLISP  and 
have  access  to  some  of  the  MACLISP  programming-support  facilities.  Neither 
system  has  been  fully  implemented  or  used  extensively,  so  relatively  little  work 
has  gone  into  additional  support  facilities. 

One  novel  programming-support  mechanism  implemented  in  PLANNER 
concerns  the  style  of  tracing  a  program's  execution.  Tracing  involves  going 
back  through  the  steps  of  a  computation  (function  calls  in  LISP),  usually 
from  some  error  break.  PLANNER  offers  a  trace-as-you-go  facility:  By  saying 
(THTRACE  (object)),  the  programmer  can  request  a  trace  of  a  particular 
function,  a  goal,  all  goals,  or  various  other  "objects";  then,  as  his  program 
runs,  the  system  prints  out  information  every  time  his  object  is  activated. 
Considering  that  PLANNER'S  control  structure  results  in  an  extensive  tree  of 
goals  and  actions,  it  does  make  sense  to  trace  the  whole  tree  as  it  develops, 
rather  than  backtrack  from  one  particular  node — which  would  reveal  only  one 
branch  of  the  tree. 


C5  Programming  Environment  69 

QLISP 

QLISP  is  embedded  in  INTERLISP,  and  care  was  taken  to  preserve  the 
extensive  INTERLISP  environment  while  extending  the  language  with  QLISP 
constructs.  QLISP,  like  the  INTERLISP  package  CLISP,  is  implemented  by 
means  of  the  error-catching  mechanism:  When  the  interpreter  comes  to  a 
QLISP  construct,  it  translates  it  into  INTERLISP  and  executes  that.  It  also 
stores  the  translated  version,  so  that  retranslation  is  not  needed.  In  programs, 
LISP  and  QLISP  can  be  freely  mixed.  QLISP  is  thus  a  surface  extension  of 
INTERLISP,  whereas  PLANNER  and  CONNIYER  were  distinct  language  sys- 
tems built  on  top  of  MACLISP.  Implementation  of  QLISP  constructs  through 
the  error  mechanism  implies,  by  the  way,  that  execution  of  pure  LISP  con- 
structs is  not  slowed  down  at  all  by  the  presence  of  QLISP. 

Some  difficulties  arose  in  trying  to  treat  QLISP  contructs  as  if  they  were  on 
a  par  with  INTERLISP  constructs.  For  instance,  because  they  are  translated 
into  INTERLISP  before  being  executed,  QLISP  functions  would  not  show  up  on 
a  trace  or  backtrace.  A  special  QTRACE  facility  had  to  be  added  to  get  around 
this  problem.  And  some  "unfortunate  interactions"  resulted  from  the  clever 
adaptation  of  some  of  the  INTERLISP  support  facilities  to  implement  certain 
QLISP  language  features.  For  instance,  the  CLISP  pattern-matching  feature 
becomes  unusable  because  QLISP  uses  it  for  its  own  pattern  matching.  The 
QLISP  manual  (Wilber,  1976)  contains  many  warnings  about  how  to  avoid 
running  into  these  painful  effects.  For  the  most  part,  though,  INTERLISP 
environment  features  carry  over  directly  to  QLISP. 

QLISP  also  offers  a  standard  function,  NEWSTATEMENT,  that  allows  the 
user  to  define  surface  syntax  and  an  execution  routine  for  some  new  statement. 
This  extensibility  feature  is  employed  typically  to  "provide  alternative  control 
structures  for  invoking  the  standard  QLISP  statements,  or  to  provide  special 
syntax  for  user-defined  QLAMBDA  functions"  (Sacerdoti  et  al.,  1976,  p.  13). 

SAIL 

SAIL  was  designed  with  both  real-time  robotics  applications  and  the 
PDP-10  computer  in  mind.  For  this  reason,  SAIL  emphasizes  convenient  access 
to  the  operating  system  from  within  user  programs.  The  language  itself 
has  many  standard  functions  compiled  as  monitor  calls  to  the  operating  sys- 
tem. The  run-time  environment  includes  especially  convenient  input/output 
facilities,  such  as  interrupt  handling.  Provision  is  also  made  for  linking  SAIL 
programs  to  hand-coded  assembly-language  algorithms  (for  efficiency). 

Sfnce  SAIL  is  a  compiler-based  language  and  is  not  interactive,  the  expe- 
rience of  writing  and  debugging  SAIL  programs  is  considerably  different  from 
the  other  AI  programming  languages  we  have  discussed.  Programs  are  written 
separately,  with  whatever  text  editor  is  convenient,  and  then  compiled  into 
machine  code.    Unlike  the  other  languages  in  which  each  (small)  function 


70  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

is  written  separately,  SAIL  programs  are  block  structured  and  usually  will 
have  many  procedures  nested  inside  the  main  program.  Testing  of  individual 
procedures  (functions)  is  more  difficult  than  in  LISP  because  they  usually 
cannot  be  run  in  isolation.  Some  of  these  drawbacks  have  been  overcome  by 
the  interactive  debugging  system,  BAIL,  which  has  been  added  to  the  SAIL 
programming  environment  (Reiser,  1976). 

POP-2 

POP-2,  although  again  not  an  interpreted  language,  has  an  incremental 
compiler  that  allows  an  interactive  style  of  programming  similar  to  that 
of  LISP.  The  programmer  can  type  in  any  statement  and  have  it  executed 
immediately,  or  he  can  define  functions  and  edit  them.  POP-2  functions  tend 
to  be  even  smaller  than  LISP  functions. 

POP-2,  as  mentioned  before,  relies  on  library  packages  for  its  extended 
data,  control,  and  pattern-matching  features.  This  allows  the  core  language 
to  remain  quite  small.  The  packages,  however,  cannot  be  integrated  as  tightly 
as  the  features  in  INTERLISP,  which  in  turn  is  a  very  large  running  program. 

The  POP-2  editor  (which,  incidentally,  is  neither  especially  powerful  nor 
oriented  to  POP-2  syntax)  does  reside  in  core  permanently.  Some  of  the  avail- 
able packages  include  facilities  for  tracing  and  debugging,  timing  of  individual 
functions,  automatic  documentation  of  the  various  packages,  and  special 
routines  for  debugging  stack  errors  (the  POP-2  stack,  remember,  is  explicitly 
manipulable  by  the  program). 

Summary 

The  programming  environment  is  the  least  Al-specific  of  the  four  aspects 
of  AI  programming  languages  discussed.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  an  area 
that  AI  languages  have  pioneered.  The  key  word  is  interaction.  In  the 
environments  we  have  examined,  we  can  distinguish  several  different  kinds 
of  features  that  facilitate  interactive  programming.  The  most  important, 
of  course,  is  for  the  programming  language  itself  to  be  interactive.  In  an 
interactive  language,  programs  are  built  up  of  small  modules  (procedures, 
functions)  that  are  each  tested  immediately  after  they  are  typed  in,  rather 
than  after  the  entire  program  is  completed  and  run  through  a  compiler.  This 
kind  of  interaction  facilitates  bug  detection  and  correction. 

The  Programmer's  Assistant  feature  of  INTERLISP  exemplifies  another 
kind  of  interaction — at  the  meta-level,  in  a  sense.  User  commands  to  the 
Assistant  refer  not  to  LISP  objects  but  to  the  user's  manipulations  of  LISP 
objects.  For  example,  the  Assistant  may  be  told  to  repeat  an  action  or  show 
the  recent  history  of  user  commands. 

For  smooth  interaction  it  is  important  that  the  various  components  of  an 
environment  be  well  integrated  with  each  other.  INTERLISP  is  the  only  one 


C5  Programming  Environment  71 

of  the  languages  covered  that  (by  and  large)  accomplishes  this  integration. 
Almost  any  component  can  be  called  from  within  almost  any  other.  In 
the  other  languages,  components  generally  can  be  called  only  from  the  top 
level.  INTERLISP  also  provides  a  concept  of  structural  editing  that  many 
programmers  find  to  be  an  extremely  useful  tool — the  editor  commands  are 
specially  designed  for  manipulating  list  structures. 

The  next  general  advance  in  AI  programming  environments  will  be  facili- 
tated by  the  special-purpose  LISP  machines  now  becoming  available  commer- 
cially. In  these  single-user  work  stations,  the  programmer  has  a  powerful 
computational  tool  that  is  designed  for  LISP  programming  and  that  can  be  a 
highly  integrated  system — from  the  disk  to  the  graphics  display. 


D.     DEPENDENCIES  AND  ASSUMPTIONS 


THIS  ARTICLE  outlines  a  technique  for  recording  the  inferential  steps  taken 
by  a  reasoning  program,  using  dependency  records  to  link  conclusions  with 
the  reasons  behind  them.  One  important  requirement  on  the  design  of  intel- 
ligent programs  is  that  they  be  responsibly  humble  about  their  conclusions 
and  actions;  that  is,  they  should  be  able  to  explain  their  conclusions  and 
actions  in  terms  of  the  information  supplied  by  their  informants.  This  ability 
to  defer  responsibility  for  conclusions  to  their  sources  is  crucial  in  the  transfer 
of  expertise  from  an  expert  to  a  program,  for  the  expert  must  be  able  to  assign 
credit  or  blame  for  unexpected  conclusions  and  actions  to  forgotten,  miss- 
ing, or  erroneous  knowledge-base  elements  or  procedures  (see  Article  VII. B). 
Similarly,  such  restraint  is  crucial  in  any  learning  done  by  the  program,  for 
the  program  must  be  able  to  analyze  the  reasons  for  its  own  successes  and 
failures  (see  Chap.  XIV,  in  Vol.  III). 

These  considerations  alone  are  enough  to  suggest  that  intelligent  programs 
should  record  information  about  their  inferences,  so  that  they  can  refer  to 
these  records  during  credit  or  blame  assignment.  In  fact,  several  other  con- 
siderations also  suggest  keeping  these  dependency  records,  namely,  the  control 
of  program  actions,  the  adoption  and  abandonment  of  assumptions,  and  the 
recovery  of  improperly  abandoned  conclusions. 

Recorded  dependencies  aid  in  controlling  the  actions  of  a  program, 
since  credit  assignment  is  important  in  search  as  well  as  in  transfer  of  exper- 
tise and  learning.  One  standard  search  technique  that  can  be  augmented  in 
this  manner  is  chronological  backtracking,  in  which  a  space  of  hypothetical 
situations  is  being  searched.  An  error  or  inconsistency  encountered  in  one  of 
these  situations  signals  for  backtracking — all  actions  and  assumptions  after 
the  most  recent  choice  point  are  retracted  and  the  next  alternative  at  that 
point  is  examined  (see  Chap.  II,  in  Vol.  I,  and  the  discussion  of  PLANNER  in 
Article  VI.C3). 

In  situations  in  which  the  temporal  order  of  previous  choices  is  not  of 
primary  importance,  however,  chronological  backtracking  is  needlessly  ineffi- 
cient. Instead,  by  examining  a  trace  of  the  actions  and  assumptions  at  each 
successive  situation,  the  source  of  the  problem  may  be  identified  and  the  next 
alternative  chosen  in  this  light,  avoiding  searches  through  numerous  irrelevant 
combinations  of  assumptions  and  actions.  For  example,  in  a  chess-playing 
program  that  examines  several  alternative  moves  a  few  ply  ahead,  a  threat 
discovered  while  considering  one  move  could  be  an  important  constraint  in 
deciding  which  alternative  moves  to  explore  (see  Article  II.C5c,  in  Vol.  i). 

In  addition  to  their  credit- assignment  applications,  recorded  dependencies 
can  also  be  used  to  maintain  the  set  of  currently  active  database  elements. 

72 


D  Dependencies  and  Assumptions  73 

There  have  been  three  other  techniques  used  for  this  purpose,  each  of  which 
has  its  problems: 

1.  Manual  changes  to  the  database,  whenever  a  new  assumption  is  made  or 
action  is  taken,  are  the  most  straightforward  way  of  keeping  track  of 
the  current  state  of  things.  However,  the  job  of  keeping  track  of  all  the 
ramifications  of  the  updates — new  conclusions  that  can  be  drawn,  old 
conclusions  that  are  no  longer  valid,  and  so  forth — gets  to  be  a  major 
problem  in  any  reasonably  sized  knowledge  base. 

2.  Context  mechanisms,  as  supplied  in  several  of  the  AI  programming  lan- 
guages described  in  Article  VI. C2,  shared  the  problems  of  chronological 
backtracking  (in  which  they  played  an  important  role).  In  particular,  the 
context  mechanisms  of  these  languages  needlessly  discarded  information 
discovered  in  an  abandoned  search. 

3.  Change-triggered  procedures,  like  the  antecedent  theorems  in  PLANNER 
(Article  VI. C3),  automatically  perform  some  knowledge- base  maintenance 
function  when  the  programmer  specifies  some  change.  This  approach 
had  a  problem  common  to  all  procedural- know  ledge  representations,  namely, 
that  all  of  the  triggers  had  to  be  carefully  tailored  as  a  set  to  avoid 
unintended  infinite  loops  of  adding  and  erasing  database  entries. 

By  allowing  a  global,  static  perspective  on  the  actions  of  the  program's  infer- 
ence procedures,  explicit  tracking  of  dependencies  allows  coherent  treatment 
both  of  new  inferences  and  of  assumptions  made  on  the  basis  of  incomplete 
information.  The  techniques  described  below  make  it  possible  to  adopt  an 
assumption  when  necessary  on  the  basis  of  incomplete  information,  to  subse- 
quently abandon  the  conclusions  drawn  from  the  assumption  should  it  later 
be  abandoned,  and  to  recover  the  previously  abandoned  conclusions  if  the 
assumption  is  reinstated. 

History 

Dependency  records  were  first  employed,  in  robot  problem-solving  pro- 
grams, to  help  clean  up  the  consequential  database  entries  following  robot 
actions  or  failures.  The  effects  of  actions  were  typically  represented  in 
ADD/DELETE  lists.  Fikes  (1975)  kept  track  of  derivations,  so  that  all  conse- 
quences of  a  database  entry  could  be  erased  when  that  entry  was  deleted  by 
order  of  a  delete  list  (see  Article  II. D5,  in  Vol.  I,  on  STRIPS).  Hayes  (1975)  kept 
track  of  the  dependence  of  each  planning  decision  on  other  such  decisions,  so 
that  all  consequential  decisions  could  be  abandoned  when  some  plan-execution 
error  or  independent  worldly  change  invalidated  the  preconditions  of  a  deci- 
sion about  some  plan  step. 

The  role  of  dependencies  was  then  broadened  by  Stallman  and  Sussman 
(1977),  who  in  the  context  of  electronic  circuit  analysis  employed  dependencies 
in  explanations  of  conclusions,  in  abandoning  and  retrieving  consequences  of 


74  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

abandoned  or  reinstated  assumptions,  and  in  dependency- directed  (nonchrono- 
logical)  backtracking.  London  (1978)  developed  similar  techniques  for  use  in 
robot  planning,  improved  to  conduct  incremental  revisions  of  conclusions. 

Building  on  the  work  of  Stallman  and  Sussman,  Doyle  (1979)  introduced 
assumptions  as  dependency  records  of  nonmonotonic  inferences,  such  as 
THNOT  in  PLANNER  (see  Article  XII.E,  in  Vol.  Ill,  on  nondeductive  reason- 
ing and  nonmonotonic  logic),  and  identified  the  role  of  such  assumptions 
in  dependency-directed  backtracking.  Doyle  (1980)  also  illustrated  the  use 
of  dependencies  in  explicitly  guiding  program  actions  through  a  process  of 
decision-making  based  on  dialectical  argumentation.  The  survey  and  bibliog- 
raphy by  Doyle  and  London  (1980)  should  be  consulted  for  descriptions  of 
other  papers  concerned  with  these  techniques. 

Recording  and  Maintaining  Dependencies 

The  fundamental  data  structures  involved  in  dependency  records  are 
nodes  and  justifications.  Nodes  label  database  entries,  inference  rules,  proce- 
dures, and  so  forth,  for  use  in  justifications.  Justifications,  in  turn,  represent 
inference  steps  from  combinations  of  nodes  to  another  node  (more  properly, 
from  the  referents  of  combinations  of  nodes  to  the  referent  of  another  node). 
The  simplest  sort  of  justification  is  a  list  of  antecedent  nodes.  For  example, 
suppose  a  program  has  the  following  entries  in  its  knowledge  base: 


Node-1 
Node-2 
Node-3 


The  patient  has  a  cold 

If  the  patient  has  a  cold,  he  sneezes 

If  A,  and  A  implies  B,  then  B, 


where  Node-1  and  Node-2  are  facts  and  Node-3  is  an  inference  rule.  The 
program  might  then  infer  a  new  statement,  The  patient  sneezes,  labeled 
Node-4,  and  record  the  list  (Node-1  Node-2  Node-3)  as  a  justification  of  Node-4. 

The  currently  active  set  of  nodes  can  be  defined  in  terms  of  the  current 
set  of  justifications.  A  node  is  currently  active  if  it  has  a  valid  justification, 
where  a  justification  is  valid  if  each  of  the  nodes  it  mentions  is  currently 
active.  Newly  created  nodes  are  thus  inactive.  Empty-list  justifications  are 
always  valid,  and  the  nodes  they  justify  are  called  premises  and  are  always 
active.  Premises  form  a  base  from  which  all  other  currently  active  nodes  may 
be  explained  in  terms  of  valid  justifications. 

The  currently  active  set  of  nodes  controls  the  program  actions.  For 
example,  instead  of  using  procedures  that  are  triggered  when  a  database  entry 
is  added  or  erased,  a  program  might  use  procedures  that  are  triggered  upon  the 
inactive-to-active  or  active-to-inactive  transitions  of  a  node.  While  nothing 
prevents  the  justification  of  one  node  in  terms  of  currently  inactive  nodes,  the 
normal  use  is  to  draw  conclusions  from  currently  active  nodes. 

The  currently  active  set  of  nodes  is  updated  whenever  justifications  are 
added  or  erased  by  a  revision  procedure,  which  we  will  call  RP.   This  use  of 


D  Dependencies  and  Assumptions  75 

RP  is  sometimes  referred  to  in  the  literature  as  truth  maintenance,  dependency- 
network  maintenance,  or  belief  revision.  If  a  justification  J  for  node  N  is 
added,  RP  checks  to  see  if  each  node  in  J  is  active.  If  so,  N  is  made  active,  and, 
recursively,  all  inactive  nodes  with  justifications  mentioning  TV  are  reexamined 
to  see  if  they,  too,  can  be  made  active.  If  a  valid  justification  for  N  is  erased,  a 
list  is  made  of  N  together  with  all  the  active  nodes  depending  on  N  via  other 
valid  justifications.  Each  of  these  nodes  is  made  inactive.  Then,  each  node  on 
the  list  is  reexamined  to  see  if  it  can  be  made  active.  This  deactivation  and 
reexamination  is  used  to  avoid  making  nodes  active  on  the  basis  of  circular 
arguments. 

Erasing  justifications  is  a  bad  idea  for  several  reasons,  however,  not  the 
least  of  which  is  that  it  needlessly  discards  valuable  information  about  past 
inferences  and  adoption  of  premises  (other  reasons  are  discussed  by  Doyle, 
1979,  1980).  To  avoid  erasures,  nonmonotonic  justifications  are  used  to  create 
assumptions.  A  nonmonotonic  justification  is  a  pair  (A,  I)  of  lists  of  nodes 
and  is  valid  only  if  each  node  in  A  is  active  and  each  node  in  /  is  inactive. 

For  example,  the  justification  of  the  statement  The  patient  has  normal 
digestion,  labeled  Node-5,  might  rely  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  reason  to 
believe  he  has  abnormal  digestion  (another  fact,  represented  by,  say,  Node-6: 
The  patient  has  abnormal  digestion).  The  justification  for  Node-5  would  be 
represented  by  the  form  ((  ) ,  (Node-6)).  As  long  as  there  is  no  known  justifi- 
cation for  Node-6,  Node-5  would  be  active.  These  justifications  are  called  non- 
monotonic because  the  set  of  active  nodes — the  facts  that  are  believed  to  be 
true  at  any  one  time — can  shrink  upon  the  addition  of  a  new  justification. 
Nonmonotonic  justifications  allow  the  effect  of  defeating  justifications  without 
losing  information.  For  example,  if  some  indication  of  abnormal  digestion  were 
found,  Node-6  could  be  activated,  causing  Node-5  to  be  deactivated,  without 
changing  in  any  way  the  form  of  its  justification. 

Although  the  extension  of  RP  to  handling  nonmonotonic  justifications 
may  appear  to  be  a  simple  task,  the  surprising  subtlety  of  the  many  problems 
involved  makes  this  extension  a  nest  of  traps  for  the  unwary.  Two  key  reasons 
for  the  delicacy  of  this  matter  are  that  inactive  nodes  have  consequences  and 
that  ambiguities  of  revision  must  be  settled  by  RP.  On  the  first  point,  the  very 
fact  that  a  node  is  inactive  may  be  used  in  the  nonmonotonic  justification 
of  another  node,  as  in  our  digestion  example.  Hence,  changing  a  node  from 
inactive  to  active  may  invalidate  justifications,  making  inactive  the  nodes  they 
support,  and  vice  versa. 

As  for  ambiguities,  suppose,  for  example,  that  Node-7  has  the  justification 
((  ) ,  (Node-8))  and  Node-8  has  the  justification  ((  ) ,  (Node-7));  that  is,  they 
are  mutually  exclusive  nodes.  If  RP  must  choose  one  of  Node-7  and  Node-8  to 
be  active,  great  care  is  required,  since  other  nodes,  possibly  including  other 
assumptions  and  contradictory  nodes,  may  depend  on  the  choice.  RP  must 
be  able  to  sift  through  the  global  ramifications  of  such  local  ambiguities  (see 
Doyle,  1979). 


76  Programming  Languages  for  AI  Research  VI 

Assumptions  enter  dependency-directed  backtracking  by  filling  the  role  of 
choice  points  in  chronological  backtracking.  For  each  active  node,  RP  main- 
tains a  distinguished,  noncircular  explanation  by  picking  one  valid  justification 
as  the  supporting  justification.  Thus,  an  assumption  is  properly  an  active  node 
whose  supporting  justification  is  nonmonotonic.  To  reject  a  node,  that  is,  to 
make  it  inactive,  the  program  just  traces  through  its  supporting  justification 
and  chooses  some  underlying  assumption  as  the  culprit.  This  assumption 
is  then  defeated  by  creating  a  new  node  that  is  used  to  activate  one  of  the 
inactive  nodes  mentioned  in  its  supporting  justification. 

For  example,  let  us  suppose  that  Node-9  has  the  supporting  justification 
((  ),  (Node-10  Node-11)).  This  can  be  thought  of  as  saying:  Make  Node-9 
active  first,  and  if  that  fails  try  Node-10  or  Node-11.  Backtracking  might  add 
the  justification  ((  ) ,  (Node-11))  for  Node-10,  thereby  defeating  the  assump- 
tion Node-9  and  setting  up  Node-11  as  the  next  alternative.  As  this  example 
shows,  assumptions  may  be  defeated  without  discarding  justifications,  thereby 
avoiding  loss  of  information  about  past  assumptions.  In  other  words,  the  set  of 
justifications  always  grows  monotonically,  while  giving  rise  to  a  nonmonotoni- 
cally  changing  set  of  active  database  entries. 

Discussion 

Many  unanswered  questions  make  the  technique  of  dependencies  and 
assumptions  an  active  area  of  investigation  in  AI.  One  such  question  concerns 
the  mechanisms  that  RP  should  use  to  resolve  the  ambiguities  when  several 
possible  revisions  present  themselves.  A  second  question  is  how  the  existing 
RP  algorithms  might  be  improved,  since  each  has  certain  deficiencies.  A 
third  question,  then,  is  how  systems  should  be  organized  so  that  dependency 
information  can  be  conveniently  recorded  and  used  (see,  e.g.,  the  proposals 
made  by  de  Kleer  et  al.,  1979). 

In  spite  of  these  unanswered  questions,  the  technique  of  tracking  depen- 
dencies and  assumptions  is  important  because  the  solution  of  complex  prob- 
lems often  demands  making  simplifying  or  heuristic  assumptions,  either  about 
the  problem  itself  or  about  the  way  to  proceed  in  solving  it.  Later,  these 
assumptions  can  be  reasoned  about  in  several  ways.  One  way  is  to  correct  the 
assumptions  leading  to  inconsistencies  or  to  fruitless  paths  of  investigation. 
Other  ways  are  to  extend  the  solution  of  the  simplified  problem  to  that  of  the 
complex  original  problem,  to  compare  the  importance  of  alternate  collections 
of  assumptions,  and  to  index  abstract  solutions  to  problems. 

References 

See  Doyle  (1979,  1980)  and  de  Kleer  et  al.  (1979);  also,  the  bibliography 
by  Doyle  and  London  (1980). 


Chapter  VII 

Applications-oriented  AI  Research: 

Science 


CHAPTER  VII:     APPLICATIONS-ORIENTED 
AI  RESEARCH:  SCIENCE 


A.  Overview  /  79 

B.  TEIRESIAS  /  87 

C.  Applications  in  Chemistry  /  102 

1.  Chemical  Analysis  /  102 

2.  The  DENDRAL  Programs  /  106 

a.  Heuristic  DENDRAL  /  106 

b.  CONGEN  and  Its  Extensions  /111 

c.  Meta-DENDRAL  /  116 

3.  CRYSALIS  /  124 

4-  Applications  in  Organic  Synthesis  /  134 

D.  Other  Scientific  Applications  /  143 

1.  MACSYMA  /  U3 

2.  The  SRI  Computer-based  Consultant  /  150 

3.  PROSPECTOR  /  155 

4-  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Database  Management  /  163 


A.     OVERVIEW 


OVER  the  past  decade,  many  of  the  fundamental  AI  techniques  described 
in  the  previous  chapters  on  search,  knowledge  representation,  and  natural- 
language  processing  have  been  applied  in  the  form  of  expert  systems,  that 
is,  computer  systems  that  can  help  solve  complex,  real-world  problems  in 
specific  scientific,  engineering,  and  medical  specialties.  These  systems  are  most 
strongly  characterized  by  their  use  of  large  bodies  of  domain  knowledge — facts 
and  procedures,  gleaned  from  human  experts,  that  have  proved  useful  for 
solving  typical  problems  in  their  domain.  Expert-systems  research  promises 
to  lead  to  AI  applications  of  great  economic  and  social  impact.  But  far 
from  being  solely  concerned  with  applying  AI  problem-solving  techniques,  the 
research  described  in  this  and  the  following  two  chapters  has  often  addressed 
fundamental  questions  concerning  the  nature  of  knowledge,  both  in  terms  of 
formal  representational  systems  and  as  an  essentially  social  phenomenon — 
knowledge  as  something  that  must  be  shared  and  transferred  among  men  and 
machines. 

Evolution  of  Expert  Systems 

AI  research  in  the  1960s  identified  and  explored  several  general-purpose 
problem-solving  techniques.  This  work  introduced  and  refined  the  concept  of 
heuristic  search  (see  Chap.  II,  in  Vol.  I)  as  an  important  model  of  problem 
solving.  Many  of  the  AI  systems  developed  during  this  period,  like  GPS,  the 
Logic  Theorist,  REF-ARF,  QA4,  and  PLANNER  (all  described  elsewhere  in 
the  Handbook),  dealt  with  problems  in  simple,  constrained  domains  such  as 
chess,  textbook  problems,  robot  planning,  blocks-world  manipulations,  and 
puzzles  like  "Tower  of  Hanoi"  and  "Missionaries  and  Cannibals."  But  by  the 
mid-1960s,  some  researchers  in  the  DENDRAL  project  at  Stanford  and  the 
MACSYMA  project  at  M.I.T.  had  begun  work  on  the  first  expert  systems — 
organic  chemical  analysis  in  the  case  of  DENDRAL  and  symbolic  integration 
and  formula  simplification  in  MACSYMA. 

These  systems  were  designed  to  manipulate  and  explore  symbolically 
expressed  problems  that  were  known  to  be  difficult  for  human  researchers  to 
solve.  The  problems  were  characterized  by  the  increasing  number  of  solution 
possibilities  that  had  to  be  examined  as  the  problem  specifications  grew  in 
complexity — the  larger  the  size  of  the  problem  specification  (e.g.,  the  size  of 
the  molecule  or  the  complexity  of  the  expression  to  be  integrated),  the  more 
difficult  it  was  for  human  researchers  to  discover  solutions  or  be  confident 
that  all  valid  solutions  had  been  found.   This  combinatorial  explosion  in  the 


79 


80  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

solution  search  space  often  outstripped  the  abilities  of  human  researchers.  The 
capability  of  AI  systems  to  deal  with  the  larger  solution  spaces  is  important 
in  that  it  extends  the  types  of  problems  that  can  be  solved  with  the  same 
conceptual  tools. 

More  recently,  several  other  factors  have  motivated  research  on  expert- 
systems  development.  Most  notably,  expert  systems  promise  to  be  quite 
profitable  because  they  can  help  solve  hard  problems  that  require  the  best 
(most  expensive)  human  expertise.  (See,  e.g.,  Articles  VII. C4  and  VII. D3  on 
systems  that  may  help  design  chemical-synthesis  techniques  and  explore  for 
mineral  deposits.)  In  some  domains,  like  medical  diagnosis,  the  fact  that  the 
exhaustive  nature  of  problem  solving  in  expert  systems  ensures  that  remote 
possibilities  are  not  overlooked  is  important.  And  often  the  very  codification  of 
expertise  in  suitable  form  for  an  expert  system  is  an  illuminating  and  valuable 
part  of  the  expert-systems  development.  (This  systematic  reorganization  of 
what  is  known  can  lead,  e.g.,  to  new  insights  into  the  structure  of  the  domain 
or  to  new  ideas  about  how  to  teach  it.) 

In  a  domain  like  medicine  (and  unlike  symbolic  integration)  where  the 
nature  of  the  problem  is  not  sufficiently  understood  to  completely  specify 
the  search  space,  large  amounts  of  domain-specific  knowledge  have  to  be 
represented  and  reasoned  with.  Thus,  while  heuristic-search  management 
is  still  a  major  concern  in  the  construction  of  any  expert  system,  efficient 
implementation  and  automated  maintenance  of  large  knowledge  bases  must 
also  be  addressed.  A  particularly  important  design  issue  is  devising  effective 
means  for  acquiring  such  large  amounts  of  knowledge  from  the  human  experts, 
who  insist  on  "talking  about"  what  they  do  rather  than  "dumping"  what  they 
know,  as  computers  do. 

The  issue  of  acquiring  knowledge  from  human  experts  is  now  seen  as  a 
part  of  the  general  problem  of  transfer  of  expertise.  Since  humans  are  both 
the  source  and  the  eventual  users  of  expertise,  current  concerns  in  expert- 
systems  design  center  on  considerations  of  how  humans  talk  about  what  they 
know.  For  an  expert  system  to  be  truly  useful,  it  should  be  able  to  learn  what 
human  experts  know,  so  that  it  can  perform  as  well  as  they  do,  understand 
the  points  of  departure  among  the  views  of  human  experts  who  disagree,  keep 
its  knowledge  up  to  date  as  human  experts  do  (by  reading,  asking  questions, 
and  learning  from  experience),  and  present  its  reasoning  to  its  human  users 
in  much  the  way  that  human  experts  would  (justifying,  clarifying,  explaining, 
and  even  tutoring).  These  issues  in  the  transfer  of  expertise  can  be  seen  as  a 
microcosm  of  many  of  the  central  concerns  of  Artificial  Intelligence. 

Representing  Expertise 

Specialists  are  distinguished  from  laymen  and  general  practitioners  in  a 
technical  domain  by  their  vast  task-specific  knowledge,  acquired  from  their 
training,  their  subsequent  readings,  and  especially  their  experience  of  many 


A  Overview  81 

hundreds  of  cases  in  the  course  of  their  practice.  Whether  car  mechanics  or 
neurosurgeons,  experts  can  solve  problems  that  others  cannot,  because  they 
know  things  that  nonexperts  do  not.  Sometimes  this  knowledge  is  in  the  form 
of  specific  facts  about  the  domain  that  have,  over  the  years,  been  committed  to 
memory,  and  sometimes  the  expertise  appears  as  hunches,  "educated  guesses" 
about  the  way  to  proceed  in  problem  solving. 

Representing  and  using  the  various  types  of  knowledge  that  characterize 
expertise  constitute  one  principal  focus  of  expert- systems  research.  Among 
the  things  that  might  be  useful  for  an  expert  system  to  know  about  are: 

1.  Facts  about  the  domain:  "The  shin  bone  is  connected  to  the  ankle  bone" 
or,  more  typical  of  human  experts,  "The  automatic  choke  on  '77  Chevys 
often  gets  stuck  on  cold  mornings"; 

2.  Hard-and-fast  rules  or  procedures:  "Always  unplug  the  set  before  you 
stick  a  screwdriver  into  the  back" ; 

3.  Problem  situations  and  what  might  be  good  things  to  try  to  do  when 
you  are  in  them  (heuristics):  "If  it  won't  start  but  you  are  getting  a 
spark,  check  the  fuel  line"; 

4.  Global  strategies:  differential  diagnosis; 

5.  A  "theory"  of  the  domain:  a  causal  explanation  of  how  an  internal- 
combustion  engine  works. 

All  of  the  knowledge-representation  schemes  described  in  Chapter  III  (in  Vol.  i) 
have  been  used  in  expert  systems;  in  fact,  much  original  work  on  knowledge 
representation  has  been  done  in  the  context  of  expert-systems  design. 

Note  that  much  of  the  knowledge  that  characterizes  human  expertise  is 
hunchlike,  in  the  sense  that  it  does  not  constitute  definite  consequences  of 
actions  or  certainty  of  conclusions.  Reasoning  with  such  knowledge  has  been 
the  key  idea  that  made  expert  systems  possible  and  constitutes  the  main 
problem  in  developing  their  power  further.  In  particular,  inexact  reasoning, 
using  hunches  or  heuristics  to  guide  and  focus  what  would  otherwise  be  a 
search  of  an  impossibly  large  space  (see  Articles  II. C3  and  II. C4,  in  Vol.  i), 
has  resulted  in  systems  with  human-level  problem-solving  abilities.  Indeed, 
these  systems  have  at  times  proved  superior  to  the  human  experts,  primarily 
because  they  consider  a  much  larger  set  of  possible  solutions  (as  much  as 
several  orders  of  magnitude  larger)  and  do  not  miss  unlikely  or  unexpected 
possibilities,  once  these  have  been  noted  as  worthy  of  consideration  by  the 
expert  who  built  the  knowledge  base. 

Transfer  of  Expertise 

Solving  real- world  problems  at  human-expert  levels  of  performance  is  only 
the  beginning  of  expert-systems  design.  Most  of  the  applications  systems 
described  in  this  chapter  can  be  viewed  as  consultants  that  formulate  opinions 


82  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

and  give  advice  to  their  users.  The  tasks  these  consultants  are  designed 
to  perform  require  the  application  of  facts  and  relationships  known  only  by 
specialists.  The  current  systems  emphasize  the  cognitive  abilities  that  support 
interaction  with  the  user  during  problem  solving,  such  as  the  ability  to  explain 
lines  of  reasoning  or  to  acquire  new  domain  knowledge  interactively. 

Typically,  such  a  system  will  be  considered  "intelligent"  if  it  meets  the 
following  criteria:  (a)  The  system  gives  correct  answers  or  useful  advice, 
and  (b)  the  concepts  and  reasoning  processes  it  uses  to  solve  the  problem 
resemble  those  that  the  user  might  employ.  This  last  concern  has  led  to  the 
design  of  systems  that  can  explain  their  reasoning  about  a  case,  maintain 
a  focused  dialogue  with  a  user  when  pursuing  relevant  facts  and  inferences 
about  his  (or  her)  case,  and  employ  knowledge  at  the  conceptual  level  of 
the  user  when  solving  and  explaining  both  the  problem  and  the  system's 
solution.  Successfully  addressing  these  primarily  human- engineering  concerns 
has  required  many  advances  in  AL  These  abilities  and  developments  are 
detailed  for  each  system  in  the  following  articles  (see  especially  Article  VII. B). 

Explanation  and  the  opacity  of  knowledge.  As  mentioned  pre- 
viously, a  major  design  issue  for  some  of  these  systems,  for  the  consultants 
in  particular,  is  whether  the  system  needs  to  explain  its  reasoning  to  a  user. 
This  capability  is  implemented  primarily  to  convince  users  that  the  system's 
reasoning  is  appropriate  and  that  its  conclusions  about  a  case  are  reasonable. 

Sometimes  the  problem-solving  expertise  of  the  system  is  in  a  form  that 
is  not  at  all  similar  to  the  expertise  that  a  human  expert  would  apply  to 
obtain  the  solution.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  the  DENDRAL  programs,  the 
generator  of  chemical-structure  candidates  employs  a  procedure  for  exhaus- 
tively producing  possible  structures  based  on  various  graph-theoretic  notions 
that  organic  chemists  who  use  the  system  are  unlikely  to  know  or  care  about. 
Thus,  a  major  portion  of  the  DENDRAL  expertise  resides  in  a  procedure  that  is 
conceptually  opaque  to  the  typical  user.  The  generator  was  developed  because 
it  was  discovered  that  the  method  used  by  chemists  to  find  solutions  for  these 
problems  is,  in  fact,  incomplete,  while  the  method  used  by  the  DENDRAL 
program  has  been  mathematically  proved  to  be  complete.  A  similar  situation 
exists  in  the  MACSYMA  system,  which  uses  the  Risch  algorithm  for  evaluat- 
ing various  types  of  integrals.  While  mathematically  correct,  the  algorithm 
is  rarely  employed  by  human  mathematicians  because  of  its  complexity.  The 
correctness  and  continuing  success  of  these  programs  serve  as  their  primary 
form  of  explanation:  The  user  community  is  thereby  convinced  that  the  per- 
forming system  is  both  acceptable  and  usable. 

In  contrast,  consultation  systems  like  MYCIN  and  PROSPECTOR  have 
been  designed  to  represent  and  explain  the  reasoning  process  of  the  system 
in  a  manner  that  is  understandable  to  the  knowledgeable  user.  These  sys- 
tems require  a  representational  formalism  capable  of  supporting  the  reason- 
ing and  explanation  abilities  that  would  closely  approximate  the  conceptual 
framework  of  the  expert  and  the  user.     Since  most  of  these  scientific  and 


A  Overview  83 

technical  domains  have  a  well-defined  set  of  concepts  that  their  practitioners 
use  consistently,  the  systems'  designers  have  capitalized  on  this  consistency 
and  have  designed  the  programs  to  accept  and  reason  with  knowledge  using 
these  concepts. 

Assuming  that  a  system  has  an  explanation  facility,  the  system  designer 
faces  another  issue:  Should  the  system  reason  and  apply  the  expertise  in 
a  manner  that  resembles  the  methods  of  human  experts?  In  MYCIN,  for 
example,  no  claim  is  made  by  the  designers  that  the  simple  backward-chaining 
reasoning  methodology  has  any  resemblance  to  the  methods  actually  employed 
by  human  physicians  in  diagnosing  infectious  diseases.  Although  the  medical 
concepts  employed  by  the  system  are  familiar  to  most  physicians,  the  method 
of  inferring  the  infections  and  causal  organisms,  while  understandable  by 
physicians,  bears  little  resemblance  to  their  normal  diagnostic  reasoning.  By 
contrast,  the  PIP  and  INTERNIST  systems  emphasize  the  similarities  of  their 
diagnostic  procedures  to  those  of  physicians. 

Knowledge  acquisition.  During  the  development  of  the  knowledge 
base,  experts  are  unlikely  to  present  all  of  the  relevant  facts  and  relationships 
for  expert  performance  in  the  domain.  Being  human,  experts  tend  to  forget 
or  to  simplify  details  about  their  knowledge,  requiring  the  system  to  augment 
its  knowledge  at  a  later  time.  Since  the  knowledge  imparted  to  the  system 
is  largely  empirical  and  the  domains  are  themselves  developing  rapidly,  it  is 
necessary  for  the  system  to  make  these  changes  easily  and  in  an  incremental  or 
modular  fashion.  Thus,  most  of  the  recent  applications  systems  have  empha- 
sized representation  schemes  that  allow  for  the  incremental  construction  of 
the  knowledge  base. 

Most  researchers  have  approached  incremental  construction  by  means  of 
production-rule  knowledge  representation.  Each  rule,  and  rule  set,  represents 
a  "chunk"  of  domain  expertise  that  is  communicable  to  the  user  and  that  can 
be  added  to  or  deleted  from  the  system's  knowledge  base  with  relatively  con- 
strained changes  in  the  system's  behavior  (see  Article  III.C4  and  the  discussion 
of  modularity  in  knowledge  representation  in  Article  III.A,  in  Vol.  I).  Thus,  the 
system  can  be  improved  by  modifying  the  knowledge  base  with  new  rule  sets 
that  deal  with  new  subdomains.  Furthermore,  the  production-rule  formalism 
can  directly  accommodate  the  knowledge  of  the  domain  experts  in  the  form 
that  they  most  often  communicate  it — for  example,  "In  this  situation  I  suspect 
this  problem  and  perform  these  tests." 

The  Status  of  Applications  Research 

The  major  domains  of  expertise  that  have  been  developed  as  applica- 
tions systems  include  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  various  diseases  (see 
Chap.  VIII),  the  design  of  computer  assistants  for  both  the  analytic  and  the 
synthetic  aspects  of  organic  chemistry  (Sec.  VII. C),  interactive  tutoring  systems 
in  education  (Chap.  DC),  and  assistants  for  performing  advanced  mathematics 


84  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

(Article  VII. Dl).  A  number  of  other  notable  applications  have  been  developed, 
including  applications  of  AI  to  database  information-retrieval  problems  (see 
Article  VII. D4)  and  a  geological  prospecting  assistant  (Article  VII. D3). 

Among  the  rapidly  growing  host  of  applications-oriented  systems  are 
SACON,  a  system  for  advising  structural  engineers  in  the  use  of  a  large, 
finite-element  analysis  program  for  modeling  various  mechanical  structures 
(Bennett  et  al.,  1978);  PUFF,  a  system  for  diagnosing  a  patient  with  pulmonary 
dysfunctions  (Feigenbaum,  1977);  and  HEADMED,  a  system  for  diagnosing 
and  treating  psychiatric  patients  (Heiser,  Brooks,  and  Ballard,  1978).  More 
recent  are  McDermott's  (1981)  Rl  expert  on  computer-system  configurations 
and  Stefik's  (1980)  work  on  an  aid  in  designing  experiments  in  molecular 
genetics  (see  also  Article  XV. D2,  in  Vol.  Ill,  on  MOLGEN).  Current  research 
in  this  area  includes  extensions  of  the  expert-system  paradigm  to  computer- 
based  assistants  for  computer-system  failure  diagnosis,  aids  for  VLSI  circuit 
design,  more  sophisticated  database-query  systems,  and  systems  that  can  act 
as  tutors  in  their  areas  of  expertise  (see  Article  DC.C6). 

One  important  development  in  current  research  on  expert  systems  is 
the  emergence  in  recent  years  of  "expert-systems-building,,  systems,  which 
facilitate  the  construction  of  expert  systems  in  any  domain.  For  example,  the 
EMYCIN  system  (van  Melle,  1980)  consists  of  the  basic  control  structure  of 
MYCIN,  but  with  MYCIN'S  infectious-disease  knowledge  base  removed.  With 
another  knowledge  base  substituted  in  the  same  production-rule  format  as 
MYCIN'S,  this  "Empty  MYCIN"  system  retains  the  capability  of  interacting 
with  the  user  during  a  case,  to  explain  its  reasoning,  and  to  answer  questions 
about  a  case  in  the  new  domain.  EMYCIN  has  been  used  successfully  to 
develop  the  applications  in  the  treatment  of  pulmonary  dysfunction,  in  struc- 
tural analysis,  and  in  the  psychiatric  diagnosis  mentioned  earlier.  Several 
other  expert-systems-building  systems  are  being  developed,  including  IRIS 
(see  Article  VIII.B6),  AGE  (Nii  and  Aiello,  1979),  OPS  (Forgy  and  McDermott, 
1977),  and  ROSIE  (Fain  et  al.,  1981;  Hayes-Roth  et  al.,  1981).  Systems  such 
as  these,  which  attempt  to  facilitate  the  construction  of  expert  systems,  are 
an  important  area  of  current  research. 

Another  primary  research  activity  in  the  near  future  will  be  the  develop- 
ment of  better  facilities  for  acquiring  the  domain  concepts  and  the  empirical 
knowledge  that  expert  systems  must  have.  Feigenbaum  (1977)  suggests  that 
the  painful  process  of  knowledge  engineering,  which  involves  domain  experts 
and  computer  scientists  working  together  to  design  and  construct  the  domain 
knowledge  base,  is  the  principal  bottleneck  in  the  development  of  expert  sys- 
tems. Efficient  interfaces  for  acquiring  this  domain-specific  knowledge,  along 
the  interactive  transfer-of-expertise  lines  explored  in  TEIRESLAS  (Article  VII. B) 
or  the  automatic  theory-formation  methods  used  by  the  Meta-DENDRAL  sys- 
tem (Article  VII. C2c),  need  to  be  developed  before  significantly  larger  expert 
systems  can  be  constructed. 


A  Overview  85 

The  size  of  current  systems  is  typically  given  in  terms  of  some  convenient 
measure  of  the  domain-specific  knowledge  contained  by  the  system.  For 
example,  the  MYCIN  system  has  approximately  450  rules  and  a  similar  number 
of  clinical  parameters  with  which  it  diagnoses  and  prescribes  treatments  for 
patients  with  bacteremia,  cystitis,  and  meningitis.  The  SYNCHEM  system 
has  approximately  390  transforms  for  constructing  plausible  organic-synthesis 
routes.  The  amount  of  expert  knowledge  contained  in  a  system  has  been 
primarily  a  function  of  the  level  of  involvement  and  effort  of  the  human  expert. 
These  systems  have  the  potential  for  supporting  larger  knowledge  bases,  but 
there  has  been  no  attempt  yet  to  construct  more  comprehensive  systems.  At 
present,  only  selected  subdomains  are  actually  represented. 

It  is  clear  that  researchers  in  AJ  and  computer  science  will  have  to  develop 
new  techniques  for  handling  the  truly  large-scale  knowledge  bases  of  the 
future.  A  step  in  this  direction  has  been  taken  with  the  development  of 
techniques  for  representing  knowledge  about  knowledge,  or  meta- knowledge 
(see  Article  III.A,  in  Vol.  I,  and  Article  VII. B).  This  domain-specific  knowledge 
provides  a  means  for  determining  the  consistency  and  appropriateness  of 
various  knowledge  sources  used  by  the  system.  Current  research  is  examining 
the  representation  and  application  of  meta-knowledge  as  a  way  to  organize 
large  amounts  of  domain  knowledge  so  that  it  is  used  effectively  by  the 
program  while  remaining  comprehensible  to  the  human  user  and  expert. 

The  Applications  Chapters 

Chapters  VII,  VIII,  and  DC  describe  research  in  expert-systems  technology. 
The  present  chapter,  with  articles  discussing  some  design  issues  in  the  con- 
text of  the  TEIRESIAS  system  and  the  important  applications  in  analytic  and 
synthetic  chemistry,  also  presents  an  article  about  an  expert  system  in  math- 
ematics, MACSYMA,  and  some  articles  on  scientific-applications  research  that 
did  not  fit  in  anywhere  else,  including  the  geology  consultant  PROSPECTOR. 
Chapter  VIII  describes  the  research  on  medical  applications,  and,  finally,  Chap- 
ter DC  discusses  AI  applications  to  tutoring  systems,  principally  the  work  on 
what  is  called  Intelligent  Computer-assisted  Instruction  (ICAI). 

Each  article  on  an  individual  system  will  attempt  to  include: 

1.  A  description  of  the  problem  domain  (e.g.,  chemistry,  infectious  disease), 
the  particular  task  the  applications  system  was  designed  to  perform 
(e.g.,  elucidate  chemical  structures,  diagnose  and  recommend  treatment 
for  a  patient  with  an  infectious  disease),  and  the  major  motivations  for 
the  system's  design,  both  for  AI  and  for  the  task  domain; 

2.  A  description  of  the  task-specific  knowledge  used  by  the  system  to  per- 
form the  problem-solving  task  (e.g.,  knowledge  about  probable  bond 
breaks  for  a  compound  in  a  mass  spectrometer,  knowledge  about  pos- 
sible infections  and  their  causal  organisms); 


86  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

3.  A  description  of  the  particular  AI  methods  employed  to  represent  this 
knowledge  and  a  description  of  how  the  represented  knowledge  is  used 
to  reason  about  a  particular  case,  sometimes  including  an  annotated 
sample  interaction  between  a  user  and  the  system; 

4.  An  indication  of  the  current  level  of  expertise  of  the  system  and  an 
indication  of  its  present  status  and  possible  future  development. 

Throughout  these  articles,  emphasis  is  placed  on  illuminating  the  major  AI 
issues  involved  in  the  design  of  these  systems. 

References 

Duda  and  Gaschnig  (1981)  present  an  excellent  popular  review  of  expert- 
systems  technology.  The  forthcoming  book  edited  by  Hayes-Roth,  Waterman, 
and  Lenat  is  a  thorough  and  up-to-date  discussion  of  the  issues  and  status 
of  expert-systems  research.  The  book  edited  by  Waterman  and  Hayes-Roth 
(1979)  is  an  earlier  presentation  of  many  of  these  issues.  Feigenbaum  (1977) 
gives  a  short  review  of  expert-systems  research,  as  does  the  textbook  by 
Winston  (1977).  Also  of  interest  is  a  special  issue  of  the  Journal  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  (Sridharan,  1978)  on  AI  applications  in  science  and  medicine. 


B.     TEIRESIAS 


TEIRESIAS  is  a  system  that  assists  in  entering  and  updating  the  large  knowl- 
edge bases  used  in  expert  systems.  Although  TEIRESIAS  is  not  itself  an 
application  of  AI  to  some  domain,  it  deals  with  many  important  issues  in 
expert-systems  design  that  are  relevant  to  all  of  the  programs  described 
in  this  section  of  the  Handbook.  The  system  was  developed  by  Randall 
Davis  as  part  of  his  doctoral  research  with  the  MYCIN  project  at  Stanford 
University,  and  this  article  assumes  some  familiarity  with  MYCIN'S  rule-based 
knowledge-representation  scheme  and  its  backward- chaining  control  structure 
(see  Article  VIII. Bi).  However,  the  ideas  and  techniques  that  TEIRESIAS  uses 
are  not  necessarily  limited  to  MYCIN'S  domain  of  infectious  diseases  or  to  its 
production-rule  formalism. 

Knowledge-based  Programs 

As  discussed  in  Article  VILA,  systems  that  attain  expert-level  performance 
in  problem-solving  tasks  derive  their  power  from  a  large  store  of  task-specific 
knowledge.  As  a  result,  the  creation  and  management  of  large  knowledge 
bases  and  the  development  of  techniques  for  the  informed  use  of  knowledge 
are  now  central  problems  of  AJ  research.  TEIRESIAS  was  written  to  explore 
some  of  the  issues  involved  in  these  problems. 

Most  expert  programs  embody  the  knowledge  of  one  or  more  experts  in  a 
field  (e.g.,  infectious  diseases)  and  are  constructed  in  consultation  with  these 
experts.  Typically,  the  computer  scientist  mediates  between  the  experts  and 
the  program  he  (or  she)  is  building  to  model  their  expertise.  This  is  a  difficult 
and  time-consuming  task,  because  the  computer  scientist  must  learn  the  basics 
of  the  field  in  order  to  ask  good  questions  about  what  the  program  is  supposed 
to  do.  TEIRESIAS 's  goal  is  to  reduce  the  role  of  the  human  intermediary 
in  this  task  of  knowledge  acquisition,  by  assisting  in  the  construction  and 
modification  of  the  system's  knowledge  base. 

The  human  expert  communicates,  via  TEIRESIAS,  with  the  performance 
program  (e.g.,  MYCIN),  so  that  he  can  discover,  with  TEIRESIAS's  help, 
what  the  performance  program  is  doing  and  why.  TEIRESIAS  offers  facilities 
for  modifying  or  adding  to  the  knowledge  base  to  correct  errors:  Through 
TEIRESIAS,  the  human  expert  can  "educate"  the  program  just  as  he  would 
tutor  a  human  novice  who  makes  mistakes.  Ideas  about  how  this  "debugging" 
process  is  best  carried  out  are  at  the  core  of  TEIRESIAS's  success.  As  discussed 
in  Chapter  XIV  (in  Vol.  Ill),  TEIRESIAS  can  be  viewed  as  a  learning  program, 
since  it  incorporates  advice  from  the  human  expert.    The  expert,  however, 


87 


88  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

does  much  of  the  work,  since  he  must  state  the  advice  in  terms  that  the 
system  understands  (fully  operational)  and  then  must  evaluate  the  system's 
performance  and  assign  credit  or  blame  to  individual  rules.  (See  especially 
Article  XIV.C  on  learning  by  taking  advice.) 

TEIRESIAS  recognizes  the  inexact,  experiential  character  of  the  knowledge 
that  is  often  required  for  knowledge-based  systems  and  (as  examples  below 
will  illustrate)  offers  the  expert  some  assistance  in  formulating  new  "chunks  of 
knowledge"  of  this  sort.  The  system  also  provides  a  mechanism  for  embody- 
ing strategic  information  about  how  to  proceed  in  problem  solving  (e.g.,  diag- 
nosis in  MYCIN).  Meta-rules  (also  discussed  below)  help  direct  the  use  of 
object-level  rules  in  the  knowledge  base  and  provide  a  mechanism  for  encoding 
problem-solving  strategies. 

Interactive  Transfer  of  Expertise 

It  is  an  established  result  that  an  expert  knows  more  about  a  field  than 
he  realizes  or  is  capable  of  articulating  completely.  Thus,  asking  him  a  broad 
question  like  "Tell  me  everything  you  know  about  staph  infections"  will  yield 
only  a  fraction  of  his  knowledge  on  the  subject.  TEIRESLAS's  approach  is  to 
present  the  expert  with  some  errors  made  by  an  already  established,  but  still 
incomplete,  knowledge-based  program  and  to  ask  a  focused  question:  "What 
do  you  know  that  the  program  doesn't  know  that  makes  your  expert  diagnosis 
different  in  this  case?" 

This  interaction  is  called  transfer  of  expertise:  TEIRESIAS  incorporates 
into  the  performance  program  the  capabilities  of  the  human  expert.  It  does  not 
attempt  to  derive  new  information  on  its  own  but,  instead,  tries  to  "listen"  as 
attentively  and  intelligently  as  possible,  to  help  the  expert  augment  or  modify 
the  knowledge  base. 

Interactive  transfer  of  expertise  between  an  expert  and  an  expert  program 
begins  when  the  expert  identifies  an  error  in  the  performance  of  the  program 
and  invokes  TEIRESIAS  to  help  track  down  and  correct  the  error.  Errors  are 
manifest  as  program  responses  that  the  expert  would  not  have  made  or  as  lines 
of  reasoning  that  the  expert  finds  odd,  superfluous,  or  otherwise  inappropriate. 
The  first  kind  of  error  might  be,  for  example,  a  wrong  conclusion  about  the 
identity  of  a  bacterium.  The  second  kind  of  error  occurs  when  the  performance 
program  asks,  during  a  consultation,  a  question  that,  in  the  expert's  opinion, 
does  nothing  to  resolve  the  identity  of  the  bacterium. 

Both  kinds  of  errors  are  assumed,  by  TEIRESIAS,  to  be  indicative  of  a 
deficit,  or  "bug,"  in  the  performance  program's  knowledge  base.  Transfer 
of  expertise  begins  when  TEIRESIAS  is  called  upon  to  correct  the  deficit. 
TEIRESIAS  fixes  bugs  in  the  knowledge  base  by: 

1.    Stopping  the  performance  program  when  the  human  expert  identifies  an 


B  TEIRESIAS  89 

2.  Working  backwards  through  the  steps  in  the  performance  program  that 
led  to  the  error,  until  the  bug  is  found; 

3.  Helping  the  expert  fix  the  bug  by  adding  or  modifying  knowledge. 

To  identify  faulty  reasoning  steps  in  the  performance  program,  the  expert 
can  use  the  WHY  and  HOW  commands  to  ask  TEIRESIAS  to  back  up  through 
previous  steps,  explaining  why  they  were  taken.  Of  course,  the  same  explan- 
atory abilities  can  also  be  employed  when  there  is  no  bug,  to  help  the  user 
follow  the  system's  line  of  reasoning.  Since  many  large  performance  programs 
carry  out  very  complex  inferences  that  are  essentially  hidden  from  the  person 
using  the  program,  this  is  a  valuable  facility. 

Meta- level  Knowledge 

One  of  the  principal  problems  of  AI  is  the  question  of  appropriate  rep- 
resentation and  use  of  knowledge  about  the  world  (see  Chap.  Ill,  in  Vol.  I). 
Numerous  techniques  have  been  employed  to  represent  domain  knowledge  in 
various  applications  programs.  A  central  theme  of  the  research  on  TEIRESIAS 
is  exploring  the  use  of  meta- know  ledge.  Meta-level  knowledge  is  simply  the 
representation  in  the  program  of  knowledge  about  the  program  itself — about 
how  much  it  knows  and  how  it  reasons.  This  knowledge  is  represented  in 
the  same  formalism  as  the  domain  knowledge,  yielding  a  program  containing 
object-level  representations  that  describe  the  external  world  and  meta-level 
representations  that  describe  the  internal  world  of  the  program,  its  self- 
knowledge. 

Meta-level  knowledge  takes  different  forms  as  it  has  been  explored  in  AI 
and  psychology  (Barr,  1979),  but  it  can  be  summed  up  as  "knowing  about 
what  you  know."  In  general,  it  allows  the  system  both  to  use  its  knowledge 
directly  and  to  examine  it,  abstract  it,  and  direct  its  application.  The  attempt 
to  construct  capabilities  for  explanation,  knowledge  acquisition,  and  strategic 
reasoning  in  TEIRESIAS  led  directly  to  the  incorporation  of  explicit  meta- 
level  knowledge.  (The  representation  and  importance  of  meta-knowledge  are 
discussed  in  more  depth  in  Article  IILA,  in  Vol.  I.) 

Explanation 

There  are  two  important  classes  of  situations  in  which  expert  systems 
should  be  able  to  explain  their  behavior  and  results.  For  the  user  of  the 
system  who  needs  clarification  or  reassurance  about  the  system's  output,  the 
explanation  can  contribute  to  the  transparency,  and  thus  the  acceptance, 
of  the  system.  The  second  major  need  for  explanation  is  in  the  debugging 
process  described  above,  where  a  human  expert,  in  order  to  locate  some  error 
in  the  knowledge  base,  makes  use  of  the  system's  explanations  of  why  it 
has  done  what  it  has  done.    The  first  of  these  applications  of  explanation 


90  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

has  been  explored  in  the  question-answering  facility  of  the  MYCIN  system; 
the  explanation  capability  in  TEIRESIAS  has  explored  both  uses  but  has 
concentrated  on  the  latter. 

The  techniques  in  TEIRESIAS  for  generating  explanations  are  based  on 
two  assumptions  about  the  performance  program  being  examined,  namely, 
(a)  that  a  recapitulation  of  program  actions  can  be  an  effective  explanation, 
as  long  as  the  correct  level  of  detail  is  chosen,  and  (b)  that  there  is  some 
shared  framework  for  viewing  the  program's  actions  that  will  make  them 
comprehensible  to  the  user.  In  the  MYCIN-like  expert  systems  that  employ 
production-rule  knowledge  bases,  these  assumptions  are  valid,  but  it  is  easy 
to  imagine  expert  systems  in  which  one  or  both  are  violated.  For  example,  the 
first  assumption  simplifies  the  explanation  task  considerably,  since  it  means 
that  the  solution  requires  only  the  ability  to  record  and  play  back  a  history 
of  events.  This  assumption  rules  out,  in  particular,  any  need  to  simplify 
those  events.  However,  it  is  not  obvious,  for  instance,  that  an  appropriate 
level  of  detail  can  always  be  found.  Furthermore,  this  approach  of  recapitula- 
tion, which  often  offers  an  easily  understood  explanation  in  programs  that 
reason  symbolically,  might  not  apply  to  expert  systems  that  perform  primarily 
numeric  computations. 

A  simple  recapitulation  will  be  an  effective  explanation  only  if  the  level 
of  descriptive  detail  is  constrained.  It  must  be  detailed  enough  that  the  oper- 
ations the  system  cites  are  comprehensible;  the  conceptual  level  must  be  high 
enough  that  the  operations  are  meaningful  to  the  observer,  with  unnecessary 
detail  suppressed;  and  it  must  be  complete  enough  that  the  operations  cited 
are  sufficient  to  account  for  all  behavior. 

The  second  assumption  concerns  the  user's  comprehension  of  the  expert 
system's  activity,  which  depends  on  the  fundamental  inference  mechanism  of 
the  program  and  the  level  at  which  it  is  examined.  Consider  a  program  that 
does  medical  diagnosis  using  a  statistical  approach  based  on  Bayes's  theorem. 
It  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  explanation  of  its  actions  the  program  could 
give  if  it  were  queried  about  computed  probabilities.  No  matter  what  level 
of  detail  is  chosen,  such  a  program's  actions  are  not  (nor  were  they  intended 
to  be)  a  model  of  the  reasoning  process  typically  employed  by  physicians. 
Although  they  may  be  an  effective  way  for  the  computer  to  solve  diagnosis 
problems,  there  is  no  easy  way  to  interpret  these  actions  in  terms  that  will 
make  them  comprehensible  to  humans  unacquainted  with  the  program  (see 
the  discussion  of  the  opacity  of  reasoning  in  Article  VILA). 

Thus,  the  absence  of  mechanisms  for  simplifying  or  reinterpreting  com- 
putation means  that  TEIRESIAS 's  approach  is  basically  a  first-order  solution 
to  the  general  problem  of  explanation.  However,  in  the  context  of  a  MYCIN- 
like  expert  system,  for  which  TEIRESIAS  was  designed,  the  simple  AND/OR 
goal-tree  control  structure  offers  a  basis  for  explanations  that  typically  needs 
little  additional  clarification.  (The  operation  of  TEIRESIAS's  explanation 
facility  is  illustrated  in  the  lengthy  sample  protocol  at  the  end  of  this  article.) 


B  TEIRESIAS  91 

The  invocation  of  a  rule  is  taken  as  the  fundamental  action  of  the  system. 
This  action,  within  the  framework  of  the  goal  tree,  accounts  for  enough  of 
the  system's  operation  to  make  a  recapitulation  of  such  actions  an  acceptable 
explanation. 

In  terms  of  the  constraints  noted  earlier,  TEIRESIAS's  explanations  are 
sufficiently  detailed — the  actions  performed  by  a  rule  in  making  a  conclusion, 
for  instance,  correspond  closely  enough  to  the  normal  connotation  of  that 
word — that  no  more  detailed  explanation  is  necessary.  The  explanation  is  still 
at  a  sufficiently  high  conceptual  level  that  the  operations  are  meaningful,  and 
the  explanation  is  sufficiently  complete.  There  are  no  other  mechanisms  or 
sources  of  information  that  the  observer  needs  to  know  in  order  to  understand 
how  the  program  reached  its  conclusions.  See  Swartout  (1981)  for  a  discussion 
of  the  explanation  capabilities  of  expert  systems  in  the  context  of  the  Digitalis 
Therapy  Advisor  (Article  VIII.B5). 

Knowledge  Acquisition:  Rule  Models  and  Schemas 

When  the  expert  has  identified  a  deficit  in  the  knowledge  base  of  the 
performance  program,  TEIRESIAS  questions  the  expert  in  order  to  correct 
the  deficit.  This  process  relies  heavily  on  meta-level  knowledge  about  the 
performance  program,  encoded  in  rule  models  and  schemas.  In  other  words, 
TEIRESIAS  uses  these  data  structures  to  represent  knowledge  about  what  the 
performance  program  knows. 

The  meta-level  knowledge  about  objects  in  the  domain  includes  both 
structural  and  organizational  information  and  is  specified  in  data- structure 
schemas.  Acquisition  of  knowledge  about  new  objects  takes  place  as  a  process 
of  instantiating  a  schema — creating  the  required  structural  components  to 
build  the  new  data  structure  and  then  attending  to  its  interrelations  with 
other  data  structures.  By  making  inquiries  in  a  simple  form  of  English  about 
the  values  of  the  schema's  components,  this  knowledge-acquisition  process  is 
made  to  appear  to  the  expert  as  a  natural,  high-level  inquiry  about  the  new 
concept.  The  process  is  more  complex,  of  course,  but  the  key  component  is 
the  system's  description  of  its  own  representation. 

TEIRESIAS's  rule  models  are  empirical  generalizations  of  subsets  of  rules, 
indicating  commonalities  among  the  rules  in  that  subset.  For  example,  in 
MYCIN  there  is  a  rule  model  for  the  subset  of  rules  that  conclude  affirmatively 
about  organism  category,  indicating  that  most  such  rules  mention  the  concepts 
of  culture  site  and  infection  type  in  their  premise.  Another  rule  model  notes 
that  those  rules  that  mention  site  and  infection  type  in  the  premise  also  tend 
to  mention  the  portal  of  entry  of  the  organism. 

The  knowledge  about  the  contents  of  the  domain  rules  represented  in  the 
rule  models  is  used  by  TEIRESIAS  to  build  expectations  about  the  dialogue. 
These  expectations  are  helpful  in  translating  the  English  statements  into  the 
performance  program's  internal  representation  and  in  identifying  information 


92  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

missing  from  the  expert's  entry.  An  example  of  TEIRESIAS's  use  of  rule 
models  in  its  knowledge-acquisition  dialogue  is  given  in  the  sample  protocol 
below. 

Meta-rules  and  Performance  Strategies 

In  performance  programs  with  sufficiently  small  knowledge  bases  (like 
MYCIN'S),  exhaustive  invocation  of  the  relevant  parts  of  the  knowledge  base 
during  a  consultation  is  still  computationally  feasible.  However,  with  the 
inevitable  construction  of  larger  knowledge  bases,  exhaustive  invocation  will 
become  unrealistic.  In  anticipation  of  this,  meta-rules  are  implemented  in 
TEIRESIAS  as  a  means  of  encoding  strategies  that  can  direct  the  program's 
actions  more  selectively  than  exhaustive  invocation  can.  The  following  meta- 
rule is  from  MYCIN'S  infectious-disease  domain: 

META-RULE  001 
IF  (1)    the  infection  is   a  pelvic-abscess,    and 

(2)  there  are  rules  that  mention  in  their 
premise  Enterobacteriaceae,    and 

(3)  there  are  rules   that  mention  in  their 
premise  gram  positive  rods, 

THEN  There  is   suggestive  evidence    (.4)    that  the  rules 

dealing  with  Enterobacteriaceae   should  be  evoked 
before  those  dealing  with  gram  positive  rods. 

This  rule  suggests  that,  since  enterobacteria  are  commonly  associated  with 
a  pelvic  abscess,  it  is  a  good  idea  to  try  rules  about  them  first,  before  the 
less  likely  rules  mentioning  gram  positive  rods.  Note  that  this  meta-rule  does 
not  refer  to  specific  object-level  rules.  Instead,  it  specifies  certain  attributes 
of  the  rules  it  refers  to,  for  example,  that  they  mention  in  their  premise 
Enterobacteriaceae. 

An  Example:  TEIRESIAS  in  the  Context  of  MYCIN 

We  now  illustrate  TEIRESIAS's  operation  in  affiliation  with  the  MYCIN 
system  (see  Article  VIII. Bi),  paying  particular  attention  to  the  explanation  and 
knowledge-acquisition  facilities  of  TEIRESIAS.  MYCIN  is  intended  to  provide 
a  physician  with  advice  about  the  diagnosis  and  drug  therapy  for  bacterial 
infections.  The  user  interacts  with  TEIRESIAS,  which  in  turn  communicates 
with  the  MYCIN  system,  although  the  user  is  unaware  of  more  than  one  pro- 
gram being  involved.  The  system  asks  questions  about  the  patient,  the  infec- 
tion, the  cultures  grown  from  specimens  from  the  patient,  and  any  organisms 


B  TEIRESIAS  93 

(bacteria)  growing  in  the  culture.  (Typically,  of  course,  the  exact  identity  of 
the  organism  is  not  yet  known.) 

MYCIN'S  knowledge  base  is  composed  of  rules  that  specify  a  situation 
(involving  information  about  the  patient,  culture,  and  organism)  and  the 
conclusions  that  can  be  drawn  in  that  situation.  For  example,  to  conclude 
whether  a  patient  suffers  from  a  bacterium  in  the  Enterobacteriaceae  category, 
MYCIN  invokes  rule  95: 

RULE  095 
IF  The  site  of  the  culture  is  blood,    and 

the  gram  stain  is  positive,    and 

the  portal  of   entry  is  gastrointestinal  tract,    and 
[A- the  abdomen  is  the  locus  of   infection,    or 
B-the  pelvis   is  the   locus  of   infection] 

THEN  There  is   strongly  suggestive  evidence  that 

Enterobacteriaceae  is  the  class  of  organisms 
for  which  therapy  should  cover. 

MYCIN  asks  questions  of  the  physician  to  determine  which  rules  are  applicable 
in  the  current  case — that  is,  to  determine  the  "situation."  To  determine  if  the 
organism  is  of  type  Enterobacteriaceae,  MYCIN  would  inquire  whether  each 
clause  in  the  IF-part  of  rule  95  were  true. 

The  procedure  of  working  backward  from  the  conclusion  to  the  situa- 
tion that  would  make  the  conclusion  true  is  called  backward  chaining  and 
is  MYCIN'S  fundamental  reasoning  mechanism.  Backward  chaining  can  go 
several  levels  deep,  meaning  that  the  clauses  in  a  situation  that  must  be  true 
(for  the  conclusion  to  be  true)  might  themselves  be  conclusions  of  other  rules. 
For  example,  a  condition  on  the  identification  of  Enterobacteriaceae  is  that 
the  infection  be  localized  in  the  abdomen  or  the  pelvis;  but  this  condition  is 
itself  a  conclusion,  and  it  is  only  true  if  its  conditions  (that  the  culture  from 
these  places  is  recent  and  is  therapeutically  significant)  are  true.  Furthermore, 
the  condition  of  therapeutic  significance  has  its  own  conditions,  and  so  on. 
Here  is  a  protocol  showing  MYCIN'S  basic  style  of  interaction  (the  physician's 
responses  are  prefixed  by  **): 

Patient  281 


1)  Patient's  name 
**  Albert  Hall 

2)  Sex: 
**  Male 


94  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

3)  Age: 

**  34 

4)  Have  you  been  able  to  obtain  positive  microbiological 
information  about  a  possible  infection  of  Albert  Hall? 

**  Yes 

Infection  1 


5)  What  is  the  infection? 
**  Primary-Bacteremia 

6)  Please  state  when  signs  and  symptoms  of  infection-1 
first  appeared: 

**  15-Dec-80  12:00 
Culture  1 


7)  From  what  site  was  the  specimen  for  culture-1  taken? 
**  Blood 

8)  Please  give  the  date  and  time  when  this  blood  culture  was 
obtained: 

**  16-Dec-80  12:00 

The  first  significant  organism  from  this  blood  culture  will  be 
referred  to  as: 


Organism- 1 

9)  Enter  the  identity  of  organism-1 
*  *  Unknown 

10)  Is  organism-1  a  rod,  or  coccus  (etc.): 
**  Rod 

11)  The  gram-stain  of  organism-1: 
**  Gram  negative 

12)  Did  organism-1  grow  in  the  aerobic  bottle? 
**  Yes 

13)  Did  organism-1  grow  in  the  anaerobic  bottle? 
**  Yes 


TEIRESIAS 


95 


My  therapy  recommendations  will  be  based  on  the  following 
probable  infection (s)  and  potential  causative  organism (s) : 

INFECTION- 1  is  PRIMARY-BACTEREMIA 
<Item-l>  E.COLI  [ORGANISM-1] 
<Item-2>  PSEUDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA  [ORGANISM-1] 

In  sum,  MYCIN  constructs  a  goal  tree  (see  Article  II. B2,  in  Vol.  i)  of  questions 
that  must  be  resolved  in  the  course  of  the  consultation  to  conclude  the  identity 
of  a  bacterium.  When  it  cannot  resolve  a  question  by  inference  from  what  it 
already  knows,  it  asks  the  respondent  to  provide  an  answer.  Each  node  of  the 
goal  tree  has  subnodes  that  result  from  the  application  of  a  rule,  as  shown  in 
Figure  B-l. 

Explanation:  HOW  and  WHY.  Suppose  that  during  a  consultation 
with  MYCIN  the  clinician  wants  an  explanation  of  the  reasoning  behind  some 
question  that  MYCIN  has  asked.  The  explanation  given  by  TEIRESIAS  in 
response  to  the  physician's  question,  WHY,  involves  backing  up  the  goal  tree 
to  the  previous  node  and  presenting  the  rule  used  to  derive  the  subnode  from 
its  ancestor.  (Again,  the  physician's  responses  are  prefixed  by  **.) 


Enterobacteriaceae 


Rule  095 


Site  =       Gram=         Portal  =         Locus = 
Blood      Positive       G.  I.  Tract   Abdomen  or 

Pelvis 


Rule  021 


Recent  Culture 


Therapeutically 
Significant 


Rule  054 


Sterile        Significant  Non- 

Method  of     Number  of  sterile 

Collection     Organisms  Site 


Figure  B-l.     A  MYCIN  goal  tree. 


96  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

First,  MYCIN'S  question: 

What  is  the   suspected  portal  of   entry  of  organism-1   into  this 
sterile   site? 

The  physician  requests  an  explanation. 

**    WHY 

Then  TEIRESIAS  proceeds  to  explain  it's  "reasoning." 

[I.e.,  why  is  it  important  to  determine  the  suspected  portal 
of  entry  of  organism-1  into  this  sterile  site?] 

[3.0]  ...  in  order  to  find  out  about  an  organism  or  class  of 
organisms  for  which  therapy  should  cover. 

It  has  already  been  established  that 

[3.1]  The  site  of  the  culture  is  blood 

[3.2]  The  stain  of  the  organism  is  gram  positive 

Therefore  if: 

[3.3]  The  portal  of  entry  of  the  organism  is  G.I. 
[3.4]  [Abdomen  is  the  locus  of  infection,  or 
Pelvis  is  the  locus  of  infection] 

Then 

There  is  strongly  suggestive  evidence  (.9)  that 
Enterobacteriaceae  is  the  class  of  organisms 
for  which  therapy  should  cover. 

[Rule  095] 

In  contrast  to  WHY,  which  spells  out  "higher"  nodes  in  the  goal  tree,  the  HOW 
command  asks  TEIRESIAS  to  explain  the  nodes  lower  down  the  tree  that  have 
been  or  will  be  expanded.  For  example,  in  the  following  exchange,  the  expert 
asks  how  MYCIN  will  determine  whether  the  abdomen  or  the  pelvis  is  the 
locus  of  infection: 

**    HOW    [3.4] 

Note:  [3.4]  is  the  prefix  of  the  statement  of  interest  in  the  exchange  above. 

[I.e.,    how  were  you  determining  that  the  Abdomen  is  the  locus 
of   infection,    or  that  the  Pelvis   is  the  locus  of   infection?] 

[4.0]    At  that  point  Rule  021  was  being  used. 

If  the  doctor  now  wants  to  see  rule  21,  he  asks  TEIRESIAS  to  explain  HOW 
it  was  used,  referring  to  the  prefix  [4.0]  of  the  statement  in  which  it  was 
mentioned: 


B  TEIRESIAS  97 

**    HOW    [4.0] 

[I.e.,  how  was  Rule  021  used?] 

[5.0]  It  has  already  been  established  that 
[5.1]  the  culture  is  recent. 

Therefore  if : 

[5.2]  There  is  therapeutically  significant  disease 

associated  with  the  occurrence  of  this  organism 

Then 

It  is  definite  (1.0)  that  the  site  of  the  culture 
is  the  locus  of  infection  in  the  patient. 

The  explanation  facilities  of  TEIRESIAS  involve  climbing  up  and  down 
MYCIN'S  goal  tree,  explaining  why  questions  are  asked  and  how  they  are 
answered.  If  MYCIN  makes  a  misdiagnosis,  these  same  facilities  are  used  to 
back  up  through  the  rules  that  achieved  the  diagnosis  until  the  expert  has 
found  the  faulty  one  or  determined  that  one  is  missing.  TEIRESIAS  is  then 
used  to  expedite  the  alteration  or  construction  of  rules  by  the  expert.  (See 
Article  DC.C8  for  a  discussion  of  how  a  similar  explanation  facility  is  used  in 
the  tutorial  system  EXCHECK.) 

Knowledge  acquisition.  TEIRESIAS  can  help  an  expert  formulate  rules 
in  English  because  it  has  expectations  about  what  rules  "look  like."  These 
expectations  are  stored  internally  as  rule  models  that  are  formed  automati- 
cally by  examining  all  the  rules  in  the  knowledge  base.  TEIRESIAS  knows,  for 
example,  that  there  is  a  class  of  rules  that  have  as  their  conclusions  the  prob- 
able identity  of  a  bacterium  and  that  these  rules  typically  have  as  conditions 
(a)  the  site  of  the  culture,  (b)  the  stain  of  the  culture,  and  (c)  the  probable 
portal  of  entry  of  the  bacteria.  These  rule  models  help  TEIRESIAS  translate 
English  versions  of  new  rules  into  a  machine  representation  acceptable  to 
MYCIN. 

To  illustrate  TEIRESIAS 's  debugging  and  correction  facilities,  we  will  con- 
tinue with  the  consultation  shown  earlier.  Suppose  that  after  MYCIN  presents 
the  expert  with  its  diagnosis,  TEIRESIAS  steps  in  and  checks  whether  the 
expert  agrees  (the  physician's  response  is  indicated  by  **): 

My  therapy  recommendation  will  be  based  on  the  following 
probable   infection (s)    and  potential  causative  organism (s) : 

INFECTION-1    is  PRIMARY  BACTEREMIA 
<Item-l>  E.COLI    [0RGANISM-1] 
<Item-2>  PSEUDOMONAS -AERUGINOSA    [ORGANISM- 1] 

Now  TEIRESIAS  steps  in. 


98  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

Are  all  these  identities  correct? 

**  No. 

Are  there  any  identities  missing? 

**  Yes. 

Which  ones? 

**  KLEBSIELLA-PNEUMONIAE,  PROTEUS-NON-MIRABILIS 

Are  there  any  identities  which  shouldn't  have  appeared? 

**  Yes. 

Which  one(s)? 

**  PSUEDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA 

Do  you  want  to 

1]  track  down  the  problem  yourself,  or 

2]  allow  me  to  guide  the  debugging,  or 

3]  ignore  it  for  now  and  fix  it  another  time. 
Type  1,  2,  or  3. 

**  2. 

If  the  expert  had  typed  1,  he  would  have  used  the  HOW  and  WHY  com- 
mands to  debug  the  problem,  as  discussed  above. 

We'll   start  with  PSEUDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA  first: 

TEIRESIAS  starts  debugging  by  trying  to  find  out  why  an  inappropriate 
diagnosis  occurred.  Frequently,  solving  one  problem  will  make  others  "go 
away"  as  well. 

The  following  rules  were  used  in  deducing  that  the  identity  of 
organism-1   is  PSEUDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA: 

RULE  184 
Since 

[1.1]  The  category  of  organism-1   is  not  known 

[1.2]  The  gram  stain  of   organism-1   is  gram  negative 

[1.3]  The  morphology  of   organism-1   is  rod 

[1.4]  the  aerobicity  of   organism-1   is  facultative 

There   is  weakly  suggestive  evidence    (.3)    that  the  identity 
of   organism-1   is  PSEUDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA. 

Is   this  rule  correct? 

Note  that  this  rule,  which  resulted  in  the  wrong  conclusion,  is  not  neces- 
sarily an  incorrect  rule.  It  might  be  (and  in  fact  is)  the  case  that  it  was 
incorrectly  invoked  because  one  or  more  of  its  conditions  are  true  when 
they  should  be  false. 


B  TEIRESIAS  99 

**    Yes. 

Should  its  premise  have  failed  for  this  case? 

**  Yes. 

Which  clause  of  the  premise  should  have  failed? 

**  Clause  1. 

The  expert  believes  that  MYCIN  should  have  known  the  category  of 
ORGANISM-1.  MYCIN  failed  to  establish  the  category,  causing  rule  184 
to  be  used. 

Should  it  have  been  possible  to  conclude  a  category? 

**  Yes. 

Which  one? 

**  Enterobacteriaceae. 

There  were  no  rules  successfully  invoked  in  the  attempt  to 
deduce  that  the  category  of  organism-1  is  Enterobacteriaceae. 

The  following  (potentially  applicable)  rules  were  NOT  executed 
because  the  marked  [++]  clause  failed: 

RULE  116 
If 
1)  The  identity  of  organism-1  is  not  known 
++  2)  The  gram  stain  of  organism-1  is  not  known 

3)  The  morphology  of  organism-1  is  not  known 

4)  The  site  of  culture-1  is  CSF 

5)  The  infection  is  meningitis 

6)  The  age  of  Albert  Hall  is  less  than  or 
equal  to  2  months 

Then  there  is  weakly  suggestive  evidence  (.33)  that  the 
category  of  organism-1  is  Enterobacteriaceae 

RULE  050 
If 

1)  The  morphology  of  organism-1  is  rod 

2)  The  gram  stain  of  organism-1  is  gramneg 

3)  The  aerobicity  of  organism-1  is  facul 

++  4)  The  infection  with  organism-1  was  acquired 
while  the  patient  was  hospitalized 

Then  there  is  suggestive  evidence  (.7)  that  the  category  of 
organism-1  is  Enterobacteriaceae. 

Are  all  these  rules  correct? 

**  Yes. 


100  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

Should  any  of   them  have  been  successfully  invoked? 

**    No. 

This  would  be  the  case  if  one  of  the  marked  premises  was  false  because  it 
was  "stepped  on"  by  yet  another  rule  farther  back  in  the  chain. 

Is  there  a  rule  missing? 

**  Yes. 

Would  you  like  to  give  me  such  a  rule  now? 

**  Yes. 

Good  . . . 

The  expert  then  proposes  another  rule  to  TEIRESIAS: 

If: 

1  **  THE  PATIENT'S  INFECTION  IS  PRIMARY-BACTEREMIA 

2  **  THE  SITE  IS  ONE  OF  THE  STERILE  SITES 

Then: 

**  THERE  IS  EVIDENCE  (.8)  THAT  THE  CATEGORY  IS 
ENTEROBACTERIACEAE 

TEIRESIAS  parses  this  rule  into  its  internal  representation  and  then 
translates  it  back  into  English,  so  that  the  expert  can  check  it.  We  pick 
up  the  dialogue  after  the  expert  has  agreed  on  the  parse.  TEIRESIAS  is 
applying  its  rule  model. 

I  hate  to  criticize,  Dr.  Davis,  but  did  you  know  that  most 
rules  about  what  the  category  of  an  organism  might  be, 
that  mention 

the  site  of  a  culture 

the  infection 

Also  mention  - 

[A]  the  portal  of  entry  of  the  organism 

Shall  I  try  to  write  a  clause  to  account  for  [A] ? 

**  Yes. 

Here  we  see  one  of  the  utilities  of  the  rule  model.  TEIRESIAS  prompts 
the  expert  to  add  a  bit  of  knowledge  that  is  typically  found  in  rules  like 
these  and  offers  to  fix  the  rule  itself.  This  completion  is  accomplished  by 
looking  at  other  rules  that  fit  the  same  rule  model,  to  find  the  most  likely 
portal- of- entry  clause. 

How  about  - 

[A]  The  portal  of  entry  is  gastrointestinal.   OK? 

**  Yes. 


B  TEIRESIAS  101 

TEIRESIAS  then  does  some  finishing  up:  checking  the  complete  rule  with  the 
expert  for  final  approval  and  asking  the  expert  to  write  a  brief  description 
(for  bookkeeping  purposes)  of  why  the  rule  was  needed.  Finally,  it  runs  the 
consultation  again  internally,  using  the  responses  from  the  early  part  of  the 
dialogue,  which  it  has  stored.  It  turns  out  that  adding  the  rule  above  did,  in 
fact,  correct  the  other  problems  with  the  first  consultation,  and  this  time  the 
diagnosis  is  satisfactory  to  the  expert. 

Summary:  TEIRESIAS  and  Expert  Systems 

TEIRESIAS  aids  a  human  expert  in  monitoring  the  performance  of  a 
knowledge-based  system.  When  the  human  expert  spots  an  error  in  the 
program's  performance,  in  either  the  program's  conclusions  or  its  line  of 
reasoning,  TEIRESIAS  assists  in  finding  the  source  of  the  error  in  the  database 
by  explaining  the  program's  conclusions — retracing  the  reasoning  steps  until 
the  faulty  (or  missing)  rule  is  identified.  At  this  point,  TEIRESIAS  assists 
in  knowledge  acquisition,  modifying  faulty  rules  or  adding  new  rules  to  the 
database.  Meta-level  knowledge  about  the  kinds  of  rules  and  concepts  in 
the  database  is  applied  to  build  expectations  in  TEIRESIAS 's  model-based 
understanding  process.  Meta-level  knowledge  is  also  used  to  encode  problem- 
solving  strategies,  in  particular,  to  order  the  invocation  of  rules  so  that  those 
that  are  most  likely  to  be  useful  (given  the  current  knowledge  of  the  program) 
are  tried  first. 

References 

The  principal  reference  on  TEIRESIAS  is  the  doctoral  dissertation  by 
Davis  (1976).  Applications  of  meta-knowledge  in  expert  systems  are  discussed 
in  Davis  and  Buchanan  (1977).  See  also  Davis  (1977,  1978,  1980). 


C.     APPLICATIONS  IN  CHEMISTRY 
CI.     Chemical  Analysis 


COMPUTER  PROGRAMS  have  been  developed  as  aids  in  almost  every  aspect 
of  chemistry  As  evidenced  by  recent  articles  in  two  journals  devoted  to  uses  of 
computers  for  chemical  problems,  Computers  and  Chemistry  and  Journal  of 
Chemical  Information  and  Computer  Science,  most  of  the  computer  programs 
have  focused  on  numeric  problems  of  data  acquisition,  data  reduction,  complex 
electronic-energy  calculations,  and  the  like.  By  contrast,  AI  methods  have 
found  application  in  two  major  classes  of  nonnumeric  chemical-reasoning 
problems:  (a)  determining  the  molecular  structure  of  an  unknown  organic 
compound — that  is,  the  analysis  or  structure-determination  problem;  and 
(b)  planning  a  sequence  of  reactions  in  order  to  synthesize  organic  chemical 
compounds — the  synthesis  problem. 

Structure  Elucidation 

The  elucidation  of  molecular  structures  is  fundamental  to  the  application 
of  chemical  knowledge  to  important  problems  in  biology  and  medicine.  Some 
of  the  areas  in  which  chemists  are  actively  interested  include:  (a)  identification 
of  naturally  occurring  chemical  compounds  isolated  from  terrestrial  or  marine 
organisms;  (b)  verification  of  the  identity  of  new  synthetic  materials;  (c)  iden- 
tification of  drugs  and  their  metabolites  in  clinical  studies;  and  (d)  detection 
of  metabolic  disorders  of  genetic,  developmental,  toxic,  or  infectious  origins 
through  the  identification  of  organic  constituents  excreted  in  abnormal  quan- 
tities in  human  body  fluids. 

In  many  circumstances,  especially  in  the  areas  of  interest  mentioned  above, 
the  powerful  analytic  techniques  of  x-ray  crystallography  and  x-ray  fine- 
structure  analysis  may  not  be  applicable  (see  Article  VII. C3),  and  chemists 
must  resort  to  structure  elucidation  from  data  obtained  by  various  other 
methods.  Foremost  among  them  historically  is  mass  spectrometry  (discussed 
in  detail  below).  If  a  chemist  wants  to  determine  the  molecular  structure  of 
an  unknown  chemical  compound,  he  (or  she)  first  isolates  a  pure  sample  of 
the  compound.  Two  questions  must  then  be  answered: 

1.  What  are  the  atoms  in  the  compound? 

2.  How  are  the  atoms  arranged  (joined  together)  in  a  three-dimensional 
structure? 


102 


CI  Chemical  Analysis  103 

It  is  relatively  simple  to  determine  the  constituents  of  the  molecule,  but 
the  enormous  number  of  possible  three-dimensional  arrangements  makes  the 
second  question  especially  difficult  to  answer.  It  is  this  problem  that  is 
addressed  by  the  structure-elucidation  programs.  If  the  unknown  substance 
is  a  crystal,  or  can  be  crystallized,  x-ray  crystallography  can  be  used  to 
determine  the  exact  locations  and  connections  of  atoms  in  space. 

If  x-ray  crystallography  and  x-ray  fine-structure  analysis  techniques  can- 
not be  applied,  the  chemist  must  take  a  more  complicated  approach  to  struc- 
ture elucidation.  No  other  tests  are  available  to  tell  the  chemist  the  exact 
molecule;  at  best,  he  can  use  tests  that  help  him  discover  small,  connected 
clusters  of  atoms,  called  molecular  fragments,  which  are  either  present  or 
absent  in  the  compound.  Therefore,  although  the  chemist  may  not  know  the 
structure  of  the  molecule,  he  can  identify  some  of  its  subparts.  From  the  frag- 
ments identified  as  present  in  the  compound  and  those  known  to  be  absent, 
the  chemist  can  derive  a  set  of  constraints.  A  constraint  can  be  thought  of 
as  a  piece  of  a  graph  that  must  either  occur  or  not  occur  in  the  final  graph 
representation  of  the  molecule.  This  is  how  constraints  are  represented  in  the 
structure-elucidation  programs  we  discuss. 

From  the  known  constraints  for  a  given  molecule  under  investigation,  it 
is  often  possible  to  produce  the  graphs  of  all  molecules  that  comply  with 
those  constraints.  An  algorithm  was  developed  by  Joshua  Lederberg  (1964b) 
to  generate  all  possible  acyclic  (unringed)  molecular  structures  from  a  set  of 
atoms;  Brown  and  Masinter  (1974)  developed  an  algorithm  that  worked  for 
cyclic  structures  as  well.  Thus,  it  is  now  theoretically  possible  to  generate 
every  possible  molecular  structure  containing  known  subparts,  but  it  is  often 
prohibitively  expensive  (computationally)  to  do  so.  However,  the  exhaustive 
generation  algorithms  can  often  be  constrained  to  enumerate  a  relatively  small 
set  of  candidate  molecular  structures,  one  of  which  is  the  unknown  molecule. 

If  the  number  of  atoms  in  an  unknown  molecule  is  relatively  small,  and  the 
number  of  known  constraints  is  large,  a  chemist  can  figure  out  the  molecular 
structure  by  hand.  However,  the  manual  approach  has  been  significantly 
augmented  by  computer  programs  developed  in  the  DENDRAL  project  at 
Stanford  University.  These  programs  do  not  generate  all  the  possible  molec- 
ular structures  and  then  discard  structures  according  to  the  constraints.  The 
computation  required  for  the  initial  generation  would  be  prohibitive.  Instead, 
they  use  the  constraints  to  ensure  that  only  a  small  subset  of  the  theoretically 
possible  structures  is  ever  actually  generated. 

Structure  Elucidation  with  Constraints  from  Mass  Spectrometry 

Structure-elucidation  programs  are  designed  to  help  organic  chemists 
determine  the  molecular  structure  of  unknown  compounds.  Experimental 
data  about  the  unknown  compounds  may  be  gathered  by  many  different 
analytic  techniques,    including  mass  spectrometry  (MS),    nuclear   magnetic 


104  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

resonance  spectroscopy  (NMR),  infrared  spectroscopy  (IR),  ultraviolet  spec- 
troscopy (UV),  and  "wet  chemistry"  analysis.  The  first  method  mentioned, 
mass  spectrometry,  is  still  a  new  and  developing  technique.  It  is  particularly 
useful  when  the  quantity  of  the  sample  to  be  identified  is  very  small,  for  mass 
spectrometry  requires  only  micrograms  of  a  sample. 

A  mass  spectrometer  bombards  the  chemical  sample  with  electrons,  caus- 
ing fragmentations  and  rearrangements  of  the  molecules.  Charged  fragments 
are  collected  by  mass.  The  data  from  the  instrument,  recorded  in  a  histogram 
known  as  a  mass  spectrum,  show  the  masses  of  charged  fragments  plotted 
against  the  relative  abundance  of  the  fragments  at  a  given  mass.  Although 
the  mass  spectrum  for  each  molecule  may  be  nearly  unique,  it  is  still  a  difficult 
task  to  infer  the  molecular  structure  from  the  100-300  data  points  in  the  mass 
spectrum.  Partly,  this  is  because  a  spectrum  contains  "noise  peaks"  and  over- 
lapping peaks  originating  from  many  parts  of  the  molecule,  but,  what  is  more 
critical,  the  theory  of  mass  spectrometry  is  not  complete. 

Throughout  Section  C,  the  following  terms  will  be  used  to  describe  the 
actions  of  molecules  in  the  mass  spectrometer: 

Fragmentation — the  breaking  of  a  connected  graph  (molecule)  into  fragments 
by  breaking  one  or  more  edges  (bonds)  within  the  graph. 

Atom  migration — the  detachment  of  nodes  (atoms)  from  one  fragment  and 
their  reattachment  to  other  fragments.  This  process  alters  the  mass  of  all 
of  the  fragments. 

Mass  spectral  process — a  fragmentation  followed  by  zero  or  more  atom 
migrations. 

Other  analytic  techniques  are  commonly  used  in  conjunction  with,  or 
instead  of,  mass  spectrometry.  There  are  some  rudimentary  capabilities  in 
structure-elucidation  programs  for  interpreting  proton  NMR  and  Carbon  13 
(13C)  NMR  spectra.  For  the  most  part,  however,  interpretation  of  other 
spectroscopic  and  chemical  data  has  been  left  to  the  chemist.  The  programs 
still  need  to  provide  a  means  for  integrating  the  chemist's  partial  knowledge 
into  the  generation  of  structural  alternatives. 

Organization  of  the  Chemistry- applications  Section 

The  following  five  articles  cover  the  most  important  research  in  applying 
AI  to  problems  in  chemistry.  The  first  three  articles  describe  the  original 
DENDRAL  system,  the  subsequent  work  on  the  CONGEN  generator  program, 
and  the  Meta-DENDRAL  program,  which  attempts  to  formulate  automatically 
rules  of  mass  spectrometry  from  examples  of  actual  molecule-spectrum  pairs. 
Article  VII.C3  describes  the  CRYSALIS  system,  which  works  in  the  domain 
of  x-ray  crystallographic  analysis  and  has  an  interesting,  blackboard-style  AI 
architecture.  Finally,  Article  VII. C4  describes  three  research  systems,  LHASA, 


Cl  Chemical  Analysis  105 

SECS,  and  SYNCHEM,  all  in  the  area  of  synthetic  chemistry.  Here,  the  goal 
is  not  to  figure  out  the  structure  of  an  unknown  molecule,  but  rather  to  find 
a  technique  for  actually  synthesizing  a  known  substance  in  the  laboratory. 


C2.     The  DENDRAL  Programs 
C2a.     Heuristic  DENDRAL 


THE  HEURISTIC  DENDRAL  program  finds  the  relatively  small  set  of  pos- 
sible molecular  structures  of  known  constituent  atoms  that  could  account  for 
the  given  spectroscopic  analysis  of  an  unknown  molecule.  In  1964,  Joshua 
Lederberg  developed  the  DENDRAL  algorithm,  which,  given  a  set  of  con- 
stituent atoms,  enumerates  all  possible  acyclic  (unringed)  molecular  structures 
that  could  be  formed.  This  algorithm  allowed  an  exhaustive  approach  to 
structure  elucidation — the  problem  of  specifying  how  a  complex  molecule  is 
formed  from  its  component  atoms.  In  1965,  the  DENDRAL  project  began  at 
Stanford  University,  with  one  intent  to  show  that  algorithmic  programs  that 
produce  results  exhaustively  but  at  enormous  expense  could  be  augmented  by 
some  of  the  heuristic  knowledge  of  experts  to  produce  much  the  same  results 
with  a  fraction  of  the  effort. 

The  Heuristic  DENDRAL  program  achieved  this  objective  by  augmenting 
the  use  of  the  DENDRAL  structure-enumeration  algorithm  with  data  from 
mass-spectrographic  analysis  of  the  unknown  molecule  and  a  set  of  rules  used 
by  expert  chemists  to  infer  constraints  on  molecular  structures  from  such 
data.  Pressing  expert  chemists  to  formulate  rules  about  mass  spectrometry, 
however,  proved  to  be  an  arduous  process — the  theory  of  mass  spectrometry 
was  incomplete  and  the  rules  about  it  were  inexact  and  difficult  for  experts 
to  explicate.  Therefore,  in  1970,  the  Meta-DENDRAL  project  addressed  the 
problem  of  automatically  inferring  these  rules  of  mass  spectrometry  from 
examples  of  molecular  structures  that  had  been  properly  analyzed  by  humans 
(see  Article  VTI.C2c). 

In  1976,  the  CONGEN  program  became  the  center  of  attention  in  the 
DENDRAL  project.  The  limitations  of  the  DENDRAL  algorithm  were  such 
that  Heuristic  DENDRAL  could  generate  only  acyclic  structures:  ketones,  alco- 
hols, ethers,  thiols,  thioethers,  and  amines.  CONGEN  replaced  Lederberg's 
original  acyclic  structure  generator  with  a  generator  that  did  not  have  the 
acyclic  limitation.  CONGEN  has  been  used  as  a  stand-alone  system  by  research 
chemists  and  is  discussed  in  Article  VII. C2b. 

DENDRAL  has  three  functional  parts,  namely,  PLAN,  GENERATE,  and 
TEST: 

1.  PLAN.  Planning  in  this  context  means  redefining  the  problem  in  terms 
that  reduce  the  effort  of  the  problem  solver — for  example,  the  prob- 
lem of  finding  all  possible  combinations  of  a  set  of  atoms  is  redefined 


106 


C2a  Heuristic  DENDRAL  107 

to  the  problem  of  finding  all  such  combinations  consistent  with  con- 
straints derived  from  mass  spectrometry.  Automatic  inference  of  these 
constraints  is  the  planning  part  of  Heuristic  DENDRAL.  The  constraints 
are  listed  in  two  parts:  molecular  fragments  (clusters  of  atoms)  that  must 
be  in  the  final  molecular  structure  and  fragments  that  must  not  appear 
in  the  final  structure. 

2.  GENERATE.  Within  PLAN's  constraints,  the  DENDRAL  algorithm  gen- 
erates only  those  structures  that  do  not  include  forbidden  subparts  or 
exclude  mandatory  subparts.  The  generator  was  originally  derived  from 
Lederberg's  algorithm.  When  CONGEN  was  implemented  as  a  stand- 
alone system,  these  constraints  were  provided  by  the  chemists  using  the 
program,  not  by  the  planning  part. 

3.  TEST.  This  last  part  of  the  program  ranks  the  resulting  list  of  candidate 
structures  by  simulating  their  behavior  in  a  mass  spectrometer.  The 
structures  resulting  in  simulated  spectra  closest  to  the  empirical  one  are 
ranked  highest. 

Heuristic  DENDRAL  thus  has  two  sets  of  rules  that  encode  the  mass- 
spectrometry  knowledge:  (a)  rules  applied  during  planning  that  interpret 
mass-spectral  data  and  infer  molecular  fragments  and  (b)  rules  applied  during 
testing  that  simulate  the  action  of  the  mass  spectrometer  on  the  structure 
or  structures  proposed  by  CONGEN  and  that  predict  peaks  that  should  be 
observed  in  the  spectrum  of  the  molecule. 

Planning:  Inferring  Constraints  from  the  Mass  Spectrum 

The  Heuristic  DENDRAL  program  is  given  the  mass  spectrum  and  the 
atomic  constituents  of  a  molecule.  From  the  latter  it  can  infer  the  molecular 
weight,  M,  of  the  molecule.  Many  of  the  rules  for  interpreting  mass  spectra 
include  M,  for  example,  the  following  rule  (see  Fig.  C2a-1): 

If  the  spectrum  for  the  molecule  has  two  peaks  at  masses 
x\  and  X2  such  that 

a.  x\  +  X2  =  M+  28,  and 

b.  x\  —  28  is  a  high  peak,  and 

c.  X2  —  28  is  a  high  peak,  and 

d.  at  least  one  of  x\  or  X2  is  high, 
Then  the  molecule  contains  a  ketone  group. 

This  piece  of  knowledge  about  mass  spectrometry  allows  Heuristic  DENDRAL 
to  constrain  its  structure-generating  algorithm  to  produce  molecules  with  a 
ketone  group  as  a  mandatory  constituent.  Many  rules  like  this  one  significantly 
constrain  the  number  of  molecules  generated  by  the  structure  generator. 
For  example,  given  the  spectrum  for  a  molecule  containing  8  carbons,  16 
hydrogens,  and  1  oxygen,  the  constraint-generating  program  can  eliminate 


108 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science 


VII 


Ri 

I 


Ri(xi) 


0=C       fragments  into     0=C 

i 

R2  R2 


Ri 

and/or     0=C 
I 

R2  (x2) 


Intensity 


e/m 


Figure  C2a-1.     Mass  spectrum  data. 

from  consideration  (i.e.,  place  on  a  list  of  forbidden  structures  called  BADLIST) 
all  possible  structures  except  those  containing  ethyl  ketone  3,  which  reduces 
the  number  of  generated  molecular  structures  from  the  topologically  possible 
790  to  a  constrained  set  of  three  (called  the  GOODLIST). 


The  Generator 

The  algorithm  for  generating  molecular  structures  is  complicated  and  has 
no  AI  content;  we  discuss  it  only  in  general  terms  and  refer  the  reader  to 
Buchanan,  Sutherland,  and  Feigenbaum  (1969)  for  a  more  detailed  presenta- 
tion. Article  VII. C2b  discusses  the  more  recently  developed  CONGEN  generator. 

There  are  several  design  characteristics  of  the  generator  that  are  related 
to  the  enormous  number  of  molecules  combinatorially  possible  in  an  analysis 
problem.  First,  the  generator  must  be  proved  to  be  complete — it  must  be 
able  to  generate  all  topologically  possible  molecular  structures.  It  should 
also  be  nonredundant;  that  is,  it  should  generate  each  structure  only  once. 
Redundancy  was  a  problem  for  structures  with  rings,  because  Lederberg's 
algorithm  treated  symmetrically  identical  candidate  molecules  as  unique  struc- 
tures. A  third  characteristic  is  that  the  generator  should  be  flexible  enough 
to  be  focused  by  constraints  from  the  planning  part — it  should  not  blindly 
generate  all  possible  structures,  but  only  those  meeting  the  constraints.  If 
GOODLIST  and  BADLIST  are  empty,  it  should  generate  all  isomers  (structural 
variants)  of  the  given  composition. 

Some  simple  checks  are  made  by  the  generator.  The  composition  should 
be  compatible  with  the  constraints  inferred  from  the  spectrum,  and  the  struc- 
tures generated  should  have  only  the  types  and  amounts  of  atoms  specified  in 


C2a  Heuristic  DENDRAL  109 

the  composition.  Finally,  the  generator  should  not  produce  a  structure  known 
to  be  unstable. 

The  structure  generator  essentially  "grows"  molecules,  starting  with  a 
small  fragment  of  the  molecule  and  adding  pieces  of  the  composition  to  it. 
At  any  point  in  the  growing  process,  there  are  numerous  atoms  or  molecular 
fragments  that  can  be  added  to  the  growing  structure,  and  there  are  many 
places  where  these  parts  can  be  attached.  But  generally  the  constraints  offered 
by  GOODLIST  and  BADLIST  limit  the  number  of  possible  structures  that  might 
be  grown  at  any  point  in  the  process. 

The  Testing  and  Ranking  Routines 

The  programs  MSPRUNE  and  MSRANK  (Varkony,  Carhart,  and  Smith, 
1977)  employ  a  large  body  of  knowledge  about  the  process  of  molecular 
fragmentation  in  a  mass  spectrometer  to  make  testable  predictions  from  each 
plausible  candidate  molecule.  Predicted  data  are  compared  to  the  data  from 
the  unknown  compound,  and  some  candidates  are  thrown  out  (by  MSPRUNE) 
while  others  are  ranked  (by  MSRANK). 

MSPRUNE  works  with  (a)  a  list  of  candidate  structures  from  the  structure 
generator  and  (b)  the  mass  spectrum  of  the  unknown  molecule.  It  uses 
a  fairly  simple  model  of  mass  spectrometry  (encoded  in  rules)  to  predict 
commonly  expected  fragmentations  for  each  candidate  structure.  Predictions 
that  deviate  greatly  from  the  observed  spectrum  are  considered  prima  facie 
evidence  of  incorrectness,  and  the  corresponding  structures  are  pruned  from 
the  list.  MSRANK  then  uses  more  subtle  rules  of  mass  spectrometry  to  rank 
the  remaining  structures  according  to  the  number  of  predicted  peaks  found 
(and  not  found)  in  the  observed  data,  weighted  by  measures  of  importance  of 
the  processes  producing  those  peaks. 

Research  Results 

The  Heuristic  DENDRAL  project,  from  1968  to  the  present,  and  including 
CONGEN,  has  produced  a  number  of  results  of  significance  to  chemists.  The 
work  has  shown  that  it  is  possible  for  a  computer  program  to  equal  the 
performance  of  experts  in  some  very  specialized  areas  of  science.  Published 
papers  on  the  program's  analysis  of  aliphatic  ketones,  amines,  ethers,  alcohols, 
thiols,  and  thioethers  (Duffield  et  al.,  1969;  Schroll  et  al.,  1969;  Buchs  et  al., 
1970)  make  the  point  that  although  the  program  does  not  know  more  than 
an  expert  (and,  in  fact,  knows  far  less),  it  performs  well  on  the  structure- 
elucidation  task  because  of  its  systematic  search  through  the  space  of  possible 
molecular  structures  and  its  systematic  use  of  what  it  does  know  to  constrain 
the  list  of  possibilities. 

A  paper  on  the  program's  analysis  of  estrogenic  steroids  notes  that 
the  program  can  solve  structure-elucidation  problems  for  complex  organic 


110  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

molecules  (Smith  et  al.,  1972).  Another  paper,  on  the  analysis  of  mass  spectra 
of  mixtures  of  estrogenic  steroids  (without  prior  purification),  establishes  the 
program's  ability  to  do  better  than  experts  on  some  problems  (Smith  et  al., 
1973).  With  mixtures,  the  program  succeeds  where  people  fail;  the  task  of 
correlating  data  points  with  each  possible  fragmentation  of  each  possible  com- 
ponent of  the  mixture  is  too  difficult  for  humans  to  do.  Several  articles  based 
on  results  from  CONGEN  demonstrate  its  power  and  utility  for  solving  prob- 
lems of  medical  and  biochemical  importance  (Smith,  1975;  Smith  and  Carhart, 
1976;  Buchanan,  1976;  Mitchell  and  Schwenzer,  1978;  Varkony,  Carhart,  and 
Smith,  1977). 

DENDRAL  programs  have  been  used  in  determining  the  structures  of  the 
following  kinds  of  molecules: 

1.  terpenoid  natural  products  from  plant  and  marine  animal  sources, 

2.  marine  sterols, 

3.  organic  acids  in  human  urine  and  other  body  fluids, 

4.  photochemical  rearrangement  products, 

5.  impurities  in  manufactured  chemicals, 

6.  conjugates  of  pesticides  with  sugars  and  amino  acids, 

7.  antibiotics, 

8.  metabolites  of  microorganisms,  and 

9.  insect  hormones  and  pheromones. 

CONGEN  (discussed  in  the  next  article)  has  also  been  applied  to  published 
structure-elucidation  problems  by  students  in  organic  chemistry  classes  to 
check  the  accuracy  and  completeness  of  published  solutions.  In  several  cases, 
the  program  found  structures  that  were  plausible  alternatives  to  the  published 
structures  (based  on  problem  constraints  that  appeared  in  the  article).  This 
kind  of  information  served  as  a  valuable  check  on  conclusions  drawn  from 
experimental  data. 

References 

See  Lindsay  et  al.  (1980)  for  a  thorough  and  current  treatment  of  the 
DENDRAL  programs.  Buchanan  and  Feigenbaum  (1978)  is  a  shorter  descrip- 
tion of  the  programs.  Also  see  Buchanan,  Sutherland,  and  Feigenbaum  (1969, 
1970)  and  Lederberg  (1964b). 


C2b.     CONGEN  and  Its  Extensions 


CONGEN  (for  CONstrained  GENerator)  is  a  program  that  was  designed  in 
1976  to  replace  the  old  DENDRAL  generator  of  acyclic  (unringed)  structures. 
It  has  proved  to  be  a  powerful  stand-alone  program  to  assist  the  chemist  in 
determining  the  molecular  structure  of  unknown  compounds.  The  purpose 
of  CONGEN  was  twofold:  (a)  to  allow  the  user  to  specify  interactively  cer- 
tain types  of  structural  information  determined  from  any  of  several  sources 
(e.g.,  spectroscopy,  chemical  degradation,  isolation)  and  (b)  to  generate  an 
exhaustive  and  nonredundant  list  of  structures  consistent  with  this  informa- 
tion. Unlike  the  original  Heuristic  DENDRAL  program,  it  does  not  infer  con- 
straints from  mass  spectra  but  allows  the  chemist  to  specify  them.  Another 
difference  between  CONGEN  and  Heuristic  DENDRAL  is  that  the  newer  pro- 
gram can  generate  cyclic  as  well  as  acyclic  molecular  structures.  The  genera- 
tion is  a  stepwise  process,  and  the  program  allows  interaction  at  every  stage 
so  that,  based  on  partial  results,  the  chemist  may  be  reminded  of  additional 
information  he  (or  she)  can  specify,  thus  limiting  further  the  number  of  struc- 
tural possibilities. 

CONGEN  breaks  down  the  problem  statement  given  by  the  chemist  in 
several  different  ways;  for  example,  (a)  hydrogen  atoms  are  omitted  until 
the  final  steps  of  processing,  (b)  parts  of  the  graph  containing  no  cycles  are 
generated  separately  from  cyclic  parts  (and  combined  at  the  end),  (c)  cycles 
containing  only  unlabeled  nodes  are  generated  before  the  nodes  are  labeled 
with  the  names  of  chemical  atoms  (e.g.,  carbon  or  nitrogen),  and  (d)  cycles 
containing  only  three-connected  nodes  (e.g.,  nitrogen  or  tertiary  carbon)  are 
generated  before  two-connected  nodes  (e.g.,  oxygen  or  secondary  carbon)  are 
mapped  onto  the  edges.  At  each  step,  several  constraints  may  be  applied  to 
limit  the  number  of  emerging  chemical  graphs  (Carhart  et  al.,  1975). 

There  are  two  algorithms  at  the  heart  of  CONGEN  whose  validity  in 
producing  nonredundant  structures  has  been  mathematically  proved  (Brown 
and  Masinter,  1974;  Masinter  et  al.,  1974)  and  whose  computer  implemen- 
tation has  been  well  tested.  Combined,  they  are  designed  to  determine  all 
topologically  unique  ways  of  assembling  a  given  set  of  atoms,  each  with  an 
associated  valence,  into  molecular  structures.  The  atoms  may  be  chemi- 
cal atoms  with  standard  chemical  valences,  or  they  may  be  names  repre- 
senting molecular  fragments  (superatoms)  of  any  desired  complexity,  where 
the  valence  corresponds  to  the  total  number  of  bonding  sites  available  within 
the  superatom.  The  algorithms  can  be  thought  of  as  performing  problem 
reduction  and  reconstruction,  or  subproblem  recomposition,  on  molecular  struc- 
tures. 

The  first,  partitioning,  algorithm  breaks  down  the  problem  of  finding  a 
complete  molecular  structure  into  subproblems,  for  example,  to  determine 

111 


112  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

the  structures  of  the  ringed  and  unringed  components  of  the  molecule.  The 
second,  embedding,  algorithm  combines  the  substructures,  found  by  partition- 
ing, into  complete  molecular  structures.  Clearly,  because  of  the  combinatorics 
involved,  neither  partitioning  nor  reconstruction  can  be  unconstrained.  There 
are  simply  too  many  possible  subproblems  to  solve,  and  each  of  them  may 
have  many  solutions.  Consequently,  combining  subproblem  solutions  exhaus- 
tively is  not  feasible.  In  both  algorithms,  constraints  are  brought  to  bear  to 
limit  the  size  of  the  problem.  There  are  three  types  of  these  constraints: 

1.  Graph  theoretic.  Symmetric  structures  are  not  considered  unique. 

2.  Syntactic.  Structures  are  constrained  by  the  valences  of  the  constituent 
atoms.  For  example, 

c 

I 

C— O— c 

is  impossible  because  oxygen  is  bivalent;  that  is,  it  has  only  two  bonding 
sites. 

3.  Semantic.  The  chemist  provides  additional  information  about  the  mole- 
cule that  will  help  to  determine  its  structure. 

Substantial  work  has  gone  into  modifying  the  two  basic  procedures,  par- 
ticularly the  structure-generation  algorithm,  allowing  it  to  accept  a  variety 
of  other  structural  information  (constraints)  and  using  it  to  prune  the  list 
of  structural  possibilities.  Current  capabilities  include  specification  of  good 
and  bad  substructural  features,  good  and  bad  ring  sizes,  proton  distributions, 
and  connectivities  of  isoprene  units  (Carhart  and  Smith,  1976).  Usually  the 
chemist  has  additional  information  (if  only  some  general  rules  about  chemical 
stability),  of  which  the  program  has  little  knowledge  but  which  the  chemist 
can  use  to  limit  the  number  of  structural  possibilities.  For  example,  the 
chemist  may  know  that  the  chemical  procedures  for  isolating  the  compound 
would  change  organic  acids  to  esters;  thus,  the  program  would  not  need  to 
consider  structures  with  unchanged  acid  groups.  In  CONGEN,  the  chemist  is 
given  the  facilities  to  impart  this  knowledge  interactively  to  the  program. 

To  make  CONGEN  easy  for  research  chemists  to  use,  the  program  has 
an  interactive  "front  end."  This  interface  contains  EDITSTRUC,  an  interac- 
tive structure  editor;  DRAW,  a  teletype-oriented  structure-display  program; 
and  the  CONGEN  "executive"  program,  which  ties  together  the  individual 
subprograms  and  assists  the  user  in  various  tasks  such  as  defining  superatoms 
(small  groups  of  connected  atoms)  and  substructures,  creating  and  editing 
lists  of  constraints  or  superatoms,  and  saving  and  restoring  superatoms,  con- 
straints, and  structures.  Recently,  CONGEN  was  rewritten  to  search  depth 
first,  so  that  examples  could  be  produced  right  from  the  beginning  of  the 
computation.  This  often  allows  the  chemist  to  see  that  a  particular  problem 
has  been  poorly  or  incorrectly  constrained  and  to  stop  the  computation  early. 


C2b  CONGEN  and  Its  Extensions  113 

The  current  system  is  running  on  the  SUMEX  computing  facility  at  Stan- 
ford University  and  is  available  nationwide  over  the  TYMNET  network.  It 
has  recently  been  completely  rewritten  in  the  BCPL  programming  language 
to  run  on  various  other  machines. 

Limitations  and  Extensions 

Although  there  are  now  computer  programs,  including  CONGEN,  that 
assist  chemists  in  constructing  structural  isomers  from  information  about 
partial  structures,  the  programs  have  one  serious,  common  limitation.  Each 
program  must  use  nonoverlapping  structural  fragments  as  building  blocks. 
This  limitation  leads  to  at  least  two  important  problems.  First,  the  chemist 
using  such  a  program  must  select  nonoverlapping  partial  structures;  otherwise, 
an  incomplete  set  of  structures  will  result.  This  procedure,  done  manually, 
is  time-consuming  and  prone  to  error.  Second,  as  a  consequence  of  the  first 
step,  problems  are  solved  less  efficiently  by  the  programs  because  a  detailed 
environment  of  fewer  atoms  has  been  specified  (to  ensure  that  there  are  no 
overlaps). 

The  GOODLIST  INTERPRETER  is  a  first  attempt  to  remove  this  limitation 
by  simulating  the  manual  procedure  that  the  chemist  follows  to  arrive  at  a 
set  of  nonoverlapping  constraints.  It  is  designed  to  make  more  efficient  use  of 
information  about  required  structural  features  (GOODLIST  plus  superatoms) 
of  an  unknown  compound.  Some  early  successes  have  demonstrated  that 
new  problems  are  brought  within  the  realm  of  solution  by  the  GOODLIST 
INTERPRETER  that  are  impossible  in  CONGEN  alone,  due  to  the  constraints 
on  computational  resources. 

Stereochemistry 

One  of  the  most  important  new  additions  to  CONGEN  deals  with  the 
problem  of  enumerating  all  the  stereoisomers  of  a  given  compound. 

The  mathematical  problem  of  enumerating  stereoisomers  was  solved  by 
James  Nourse.  Considerations  of  symmetry  as  embodied  in  the  mathematical 
theory  of  groups  were  critical  to  the  solution.  Coupled  with  the  stereoisomer 
generator,  and  given  an  empirical  formula  and  some  constraints,  CONGEN 
can  generate  all  the  stereoisomers  that  are  possible  solutions  to  the  unknown 
target  molecule  to  be  elucidated. 

While  this  approach  to  the  enumeration  of  stereoisomers  involves  very 
few,  if  any,  AI  techniques,  it  solves  a  problem  that  human  beings  find  very 
difficult  to  solve.  Chemists  usually  learn  to  solve  this  problem  through  visual 
intuition.  The  mathematics  involved  is  deep  enough  so  that  many  chemists 
will  not  have  the  patience  to  learn  enough  about  the  algorithm  to  apply  its 
insights  in  enumerating  stereoisomers.  One  of  the  central  problems  for  AI 
work  in  chemistry  now  is  how  to  use  this  new  facility  in  structure  elucidation. 


114  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

EXAMINE 

Often  in  the  course  of  a  structure-elucidation  problem,  a  large  number 
of  candidate  structures,  perhaps  a  hundred  or  more,  are  generated,  and 
additional  constraints  must  be  derived,  either  from  further  data  analysis  or 
from  new  experiments.  The  EXAMINE  function,  written  by  Neil  Gray,  works 
from  within  CONGEN  to  survey,  classify,  display,  or  discard  structures.  This 
function  is  very  useful  to  the  chemist  who  is  searching  for  features  common 
to  a  large  number  of  the  structures  or  for  features  that  are  unique  to  certain 
structures.  The  insights  gained  from  EXAMINE  can  be  used  in  planning  new 
experiments  or  in  further  data  analysis.  In  pursuit  of  these  objectives,  the 
chemist  can  define  functional  groups  and  other  structural  features  or  can  work 
with  a  predefined  library  of  them.  The  EXAMINE  function  is  then  called,  and 
it  examines  the  list  of  candidate  structures  for  the  presence  or  absence  of 
these  features. 

For  example,  the  chemist  can  ask  EXAMINE  to  look  for  all  structures  with 
exactly  one  labile  proton.  (A  labile  proton  is  a  hydrogen  atom  attached  to  a 
nitrogen  atom  or  to  an  oxygen  atom.)  The  chemist  can  represent  this  structure 
in  EXAMINE  as  an  exclusive-OR  statement:  exactly  one  hydrogen  attached  to 
an  oxygen  atom  in  the  structure  OR  (exclusive)  exactly  one  hydrogen  attached 
to  a  nitrogen  atom  in  the  structure.  The  user  can  then  request  EXAMINE  to 
draw  those  structures  that  have  this  characteristic  and  those  that  do  not, 
to  produce  summary  statistics  on  its  frequency  of  occurrence,  or  to  discard 
those  structures  with  or  without  it.  While  CONGEN  is  always  able  to  discard 
or  prune  away  structures  that  do  not  satisfy  certain  constraints,  EXAMINE 
provides  the  interactive  ability  to  develop  Boolean  combinations  of  constraints 
for  pruning,  substructure  search,  or  subsequent  classification. 

REACT 

Before  spectroscopy  became  a  major  tool  of  the  structural  chemist,  all 
structure  elucidation  had  to  be  done  by  means  of  reaction  chemistry,  which 
is  still  a  major  tool  in  solving  structures.  REACT  is  an  interactive  program 
written  by  Tomas  Varkony,  Dennis  Smith,  and  Carl  Djerassi  (1978).  Although 
it  is  a  close  relative  to  the  synthetic  programs  described  in  Article  VII. C4,  its 
purpose  is  to  aid  chemists  in  the  structure-elucidation  task  rather  than  in 
finding  new  synthetic  routes. 

To  show  how  REACT  works  to  reduce  the  number  of  candidate  structures 
found  by  CONGEN,  consider  the  following  example.  A  dehydration  reaction 
can  be  expressed  as  a  production  rule  of  the  form:  "If  you  see  the  pattern 
C — C — O,  convert  it  to  the  pattern  C=C."  We  now  suppose  that  a  dehy- 
dration reaction  was  applied  to  the  unknown  in  question  and  yielded  three 
distinct  structures,  because  the  pattern  C — C — O  occurred  in  the  molecule  in 
three  different  places.   This  information  can  be  used  to  eliminate  structures 


C2b  CONGEN  and  Its  Extensions  115 

from  those  under  consideration.  The  structure  list  generated  by  CONGEN  is 
passed  to  REACT,  the  dehydration  reaction  is  defined  by  the  user  and  then 
applied  to  all  the  candidate  structures,  and  those  that  do  not  yield  exactly 
three  products  can  be  eliminated  from  consideration  as  candidate  structures. 
Although  REACT  does  not  contain  stereochemical,  conformational,  or 
electronic  information  (the  electronegativities  of  its  atoms  and  groups),  it 
still  performs  reliably  in  its  structure-elucidation  function.  Reactions  used 
for  structure  determination  tend  to  have  high  yield,  to  be  reliable,  and  to 
involve  simple  separations.  The  reactions  operate  under  a  wide  variety  of 
conditions  and  usually  involve  rather  simple  changes  to  the  unknown  molecule. 
Thus,  the  perception  routines  do  not  need  the  sophisticated  stereochemical, 
conformational,  and  electronic  information  of  the  organic-synthesis  programs 
discussed  above. 

Summary 

Research  in  the  DENDRAL  project  has  followed  two  themes:  to  build 
a  performance  program  for  analysis  of  molecular  structures  and  to  explore 
some  problems  of  scientific  inference  with  AI  methods.  The  performance  of 
Heuristic  DENDRAL  has  been  evaluated  in  the  same  way  as  that  of  a  research 
chemist — by  publications.  In  addition,  CONGEN  is  used  daily  by  chemists  to 
help  solve  structure-elucidation  problems. 

Because  of  the  combinatoric  size  of  analysis  problems,  exhaustive  problem- 
solving  methods  were  not  an  option,  and  much  thought  was  given  to  what 
knowledge  enabled  chemists  to  solve  these  problems.  DENDRAL  was  one 
of  the  first  programs  to  demonstrate  the  power  of  encoding  domain-specific, 
heuristic  expertise  and  was  therefore  one  of  the  first  projects  to  recognize 
knowledge  acquisition  as  a  major  problem  in  AI  (Buchanan,  Sutherland,  and 
Feigenbaum,  1969;  Davis,  1976).  The  next  article  (VII.C2c)  discusses  automatic 
inference  of  rules  as  one  solution  to  the  problem  of  knowledge  acquisition. 

References 

In  addition  to  the  DENDRAL  references  in  the  previous  article,  the  follow- 
ing may  be  of  interest:  Brown,  Masinter,  and  Hjelmeland  (1974),  Brown  and 
Masinter  (1974),  Carhart  et  al.  (1975),  Carhart  and  Smith  (1976),  Masinter 
et  al.  (1974),  Sheikh  et  al.  (1970),  and  Smith  and  Carhart  (1978). 


C2c.     Meta-DENDRAL 


THE  domain-specific  rules  that  constitute  DENDRAL's  knowledge  about  mass 
spectrometry  were  derived  from  consultation  with  experts  in  that  field.  Since 
the  consultation  process  is  time-consuming,  two  alternatives  to  handcrafting 
knowledge  bases  have  been  explored.  One  is  interactive  transfer  of  exper- 
tise, as  described  in  Article  VII. B.  The  other  is  automatic  theory  formation. 
Meta-DENDRAL  is  a  program  of  the  latter  type.  The  rule-formation  task 
that  Meta-DENDRAL  performs  is  similar  to  grammatical  inference,  sequence 
extrapolation,  and  concept  formation  and  is  classified  in  AI  as  learning  (see 
Chap.  XIV,  in  Vol.  III).  Programs  that  perform  these  tasks  can  all  be  thought 
of  as  "induction"  programs,  because  they  formulate  general  rules  (or  concepts, 
or  patterns)  from  examples. 

Meta-DENDRAL,  is  designed  to  infer  theories  (rule  sets)  for  the  Heuristic 
DENDRAL  program  (Article  VII. C2a),  which  represents  knowledge  about  mass 
spectrometry  as  production  rules.  Automatic  rule  formation  was  chosen  as 
a  paradigm  for  Meta-DENDRAL  for  two  general  reasons.  First,  this  design 
poses  interesting  epistemological  questions,  and,  second,  as  mentioned  before, 
it  is  an  arduous  task  to  derive  rules  from  human  consultants,  especially  when 
the  task  domain  has  only  a  small  number  of  experts  (as  is  the  case  in  mass 
spectrometry). 

Representation  of  Knowledge  About  Mass  Spectrometry 

In  DENDRAL,  knowledge  about  the  fragmentation  processes  in  a  mass 
spectrometer  is  represented  in  the  form  of  production  rules.  Each  rule  specifies 
a  bond  fragmentation  in  a  particular  context  in  a  molecule.  These  rules  are 
used  by  DENDRAL  during  its  TEST  phase  to  predict  mass-spectral  data  points, 
given  a  certain  molecular  structure.  For  example,  one  simple  rule  is: 

Rl.         N— C— C— C  ->  N— C  *  C— C  . 

Rules  are  interpreted  for  each  molecule  in  the  following  way: 

1.  Find  all  places  in  the  molecule  that  match  the  subgraph  expressed  by 
the  left-hand  side  of  the  rule. 

2.  For  each  match,  break  the  molecule  at  the  bond  marked  with  an  asterisk 
in  the  right-hand  side  of  the  rule  and  save  the  fragment  associated  with 
the  atoms  to  the  left  of  the  asterisk. 

3.  Record  the  mass  of  all  saved  fragments. 

Note  that  no  migration  of  atoms  between  fragments  is  predicted  by  rule  Rl. 


116 


C2c  Meta-DENDRAL  117 

The  language  of  processes  (right-hand  sides  of  rules)  is  relatively  simple: 
One  or  more  bonds  from  the  left-hand  side  may  break,  and  zero,  one,  or  more 
atoms  may  migrate  between  fragments.  The  interpretation  of  rule  Rl  in  the 
example  above  is  straightforward:  If  a  molecule  contains  a  nitrogen  atom  and 
three  carbon  atoms  bonded  as  N — C — C — C,  then  it  will  fragment  in  the  mass 
spectrometer  between  the  middle  two  carbon  atoms,  and  the  N — C  fragment 
will  be  recorded  in  the  spectrometer  as  a  peak  at  the  point  in  the  spectrum 
corresponding  to  the  molecular  weight  of  this  fragment. 

Formation  of  Mass-spectral  Rules 

The  task  of  Meta-DENDRAL  is  to  infer  rules,  like  Rl  above,  from  empiri- 
cal data.  Meta-DENDRAL  is  provided  with  descriptions  of  the  structures  of 
a  related  set  of  molecules,  and  with  the  set  of  peaks  produced  by  the  frag- 
mentation of  each  molecule  in  the  mass  spectrometer.  From  these  data  it 
infers  a  small  and  fairly  general  set  of  mass-spectral  rules  to  account  for  the 
fragmentations  of  the  molecules  and  the  corresponding  spectral  peaks. 

Training  instances.  In  order  to  learn  rules,  the  Meta-DENDRAL  pro- 
gram is  presented  with  many  examples  of  actual  input-output  pairs  from 
the  mass  spectrometer.  Each  pair  represents  a  molecular  graph  structure, 
together  with  a  single  data  point  from  the  mass  spectrum  for  that  structure. 
The  rules  to  be  learned  constitute  a  representation  of  the  relevant  fragmenta- 
tions in  the  mass  spectrometer.  Typically,  the  program  starts  with  a  training 
set  of  6-10  related  molecules  and  their  associated  spectra,  each  containing 
50-150  data  points — peaks  marking  the  masses  of  recorded  fragments  (and 
the  relative  abundance  of  fragments  at  those  masses). 

In  a  large  molecule,  rule  Rl  may  apply  more  than  once.  For  example,  the 
spectrum  of  CH3— CH2— CH2— NH— CH2— CH2— CH2— CH3  will  contain 
data  points  at  masses  72  and  86  corresponding  to  the  two  fragments  derived 
from  the  application  of  this  rule: 

CH3— CH2— CH2— NH— CH2 
and 

CH2— NH— CH2— CH2— CH2— CH3  . 

For  a  number  or  reasons,  data  points  are  not  associated  uniquely  with  a 
single  fragmentation  and  atom-migration  process  (rule).  For  example,  a  single 
process  may  occur  more  than  once  in  a  molecule  (as  above),  or  more  than  one 
process  may  produce  identical  fragments,  producing  peaks  at  the  same  mass 
points  in  the  spectra. 


118  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

Spectral  Data  Points  and  Mass-spectral  Processes: 
Statistical  and  Semantically  Constrained  Associations 

Purely  statistical  learning  programs  (Jurs,  1974)  find  associations  indi- 
cated by  the  data  without  judging  the  meaningfulness  of  these  associations. 
This  feature  can  be  advantageous;  at  times,  investigators'  biases  inhibit  their 
seeing  important  associations.  But  it  is  a  disadvantage  when  the  number  of 
associations  is  so  large  that  the  meaningful  ones,  unmarked,  get  lost  in  the 
crowd. 

In  contrast  to  statistical  approaches,  Meta-DENDRAL  utilizes  a  semantic 
model  of  the  domain.  This  model  has  been  included  for  two  important  reasons. 
First,  it  provides  guidance  for  the  rule-formation  program  in  a  space  of  rules 
that  is  much  too  large  to  search  exhaustively  and  in  a  domain  in  which  input 
data  are  often  ambiguous.  Second,  it  provides  a  check  for  the  meaningfulness 
of  associations  produced  by  the  program  in  a  domain  in  which  the  trivial  or 
meaningless  associations  far  outnumber  the  important  ones. 

Semantic  model  of  the  domain.  The  base-level,  or  zero-order,  theory 
of  mass  spectrometry  states  that  every  subset  of  bonds  within  a  molecule  may 
break  and  that  the  resulting  fragments,  plus  or  minus  migrating  atoms,  will 
all  be  recorded.  This  zero-order  model  of  mass  spectrometry  is  not  specific 
enough  to  constrain  effectively  the  rule  search.  Therefore,  some  general 
guidelines  have  been  imposed  on  it,  the  so-called  half- order  theory. 

The  half-order  theory  asserts  that  bonds  will  break  and  atoms  will  migrate 
to  produce  data  points.  This  theory  orders  the  break-and-migrate  process 
according  to  the  following  constraints: 

Constraints  on  fragmentations: 

1.  Double  bonds  and  triple  bonds  do  not  break. 

2.  No  aromatic  bonds  break. 

3.  Only  fragments  larger  than  two  carbon  atoms  show  up  in  the 
data. 

4.  Two  bonds  to  the  same  carbon  atom  cannot  break  together. 

5.  No  more  than  three  bonds  break  in  any  one  fragmentation. 

6.  No  more  than  two  complete  fragmentations  occur  in  one  process. 

7.  At  most  two  rings  fragment  in  a  multiple-step  process. 

Constraints  on  atom  migration: 

1.  At  most  two  hydrogen  atoms  can  migrate  after  a  fragmentation. 

2.  At  most  one  H2O  unit  is  lost  after  any  fragmentation. 

3.  At  most  one  CO  unit  is  lost  after  any  fragmentation. 

One  of  the  most  helpful  features  of  this  model  is  its  flexibility:  Any  of  the 
parameters  can  be  easily  changed  by  a  chemist  to  fit  his  model  of  the  process; 
any  of  these  assumptions  can  be  removed  and,  as  discussed  in  the  following 


C2c  Meta-DENDRAL  119 

section,  additional  statements  substituted  or  added.  This  power  to  guide  rule 
formation  results  in  the  program's  discovering  only  rules  within  a  well-known 
framework;  on  the  other  hand,  it  also  results  automatically  in  rules  that  are 
meaningful  to  the  domain. 

A  chemist  will  often  know  more  about  the  mass  spectrometry  of  a  class  of 
molecules  than  is  embodied  in  the  half-order  theory.  It  is  important,  then,  to 
be  able  to  augment  the  program's  model  by  specifying  class-specific  knowledge 
to  the  program.  This  capability  provides  a  way  of  forming  new  rules  in  the 
context  of  additional  intuitions  or  biases  about  mass  spectrometry.  A  chemist 
can  thus  see  the  most  interesting  rules  (as  defined  by  the  augmentations) 
before  the  other  rules.  For  example,  one  might  be  interested  in  rules  that 
mention  at  least  one  nitrogen  atom  before  one  looks  at  the  numerous  (and 
generally  less  interesting)  rules  that  mention  only  carbon  and  hydrogen  sub- 
structures. 

Learning  strategy.  The  Meta-DENDRAL  program  is  based  on  a  gen- 
erator of  production  rules  that  uses  predetermined  syntax  operating  under 
the  constraints  of  a  semantic  world  model.  The  operation  of  Meta-DENDRAL 
can  be  summarized  as  follows. 

Input.  Recall  that  Meta-DENDRAL  is  not  a  structure-elucidation  program 
but  infers  rules  of  mass  spectrometry,  which  associate  molecular 
structures  and  their  mass  spectra.  Thus,  the  input  to  the  program  is 

a.  the  structure  of  each  of  a  set  of  related  molecules, 

b.  the  spectral  data  points  (peaks)  for  each  of  the  molecules,  and 

c.  the  half-order  theory  (or  some  semantic  theory  to  constrain  the 
generation  of  rules). 

Step  1:  INTSUM.  For  each  molecule,  explain  each  peak  in  its  spectrum  by 
finding  one  or  more  fragmentation  process  that  would  account  for  the  peak. 
The  number  of  plausible  fragmentation  processes  is  limited  by 

a.  considering  only  the  fragmentations  that  are  allowed  by  the 
half-order  theory  (e.g.,  no  spectral  peak  can  be  explained  by 
a  fragmentation  process  that  involves  breaking  a  double  bond) 
and 

b.  considering  only  fragmentations  that  produce  fragments  with 
a  molecular  weight  corresponding  to  the  weight  represented  by 
the  peak.  (Recall  that  each  peak  in  a  mass  spectrum  represents 
a  number  of  molecular  fragments  of  a  given  mass.) 

For  example,  if  the  total  weight  of  the  molecule  under  inspection  is  M, 
and  the  spectrum  has  a  large  peak  associated  with  a  molecular  weight  of 
M  —  47  mass  units,  then  the  only  fragmentation  processes  considered  as 
explanations  for  this  point  would  be  those  that  produce  a  fragment  with  a 
molecular  weight  of  M  —  47.  The  tens,  or  hundreds,  of  other  processes  that 
produce  fragmentations  consistent  with  the  half-order  theory,  like  cleaving 
off  a  hydrogen  atom,  are  not  even  considered.  After  each  data  point  in  the 


120  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

spectrum  for  each  molecule  has  been  explained  by  a  plausible  fragmentation 
process,  the  list  of  processes  is  summarized,  since  the  same  fragmentation 
processes  will  often  be  found  to  account  for  many  spectral  data  points.  The 
final  product  of  INTSUM  is  a  list  of  fragmentation  processes  with  the  total 
evidence  for  each  such  process. 

Step  2:  RULEGEN.  The  rules  provided  by  INTSUM  each  account  for  a  single 
fragmentation  process  in  the  context  of  a  single  molecule.  As  such,  they  are 
not  general.  The  problem  with  general  rules,  on  the  other  hand,  is  that  a 
single  one  may  subsume  several  of  INTSUM's  very  specific  fragmentations, 
but  also  fragmentations  not  represented  in  the  set  produced  by  INTSUM. 
That  is,  a  general  rule  may  correctly  explain  many  data  points  in  mass 
spectra  (positive  evidence)  but  may  also  predict  points  that  do  not  occur  in 
any  of  the  spectra  (negative  evidence).  The  purpose  of  RULEGEN  is  to  find 
a  set  of  rules  that  are  more  general  than  those  of  INTSUM,  using  positive 
evidence  as  a  criterion  of  success.  Negative  evidence  introduced  by  these 
rules  is  handled  by  a  later  step,  called  RULEMOD. 

RULEGEN  works  by  "growing"  a  tree  of  fragmentation  rules,  starting  with 
one  that  is  overly  general  and  adding  features  to  it  so  that  it  becomes  more 
constrained.  The  rule  that  RULEGEN  starts  with  is  X  *  X,  that  is,  the  bond 
between  any  atoms  will  break,  and  the  mass  of  fragment  X  will  be  recorded 
in  the  mass  spectrometer  as  a  peak.  Obviously,  every  fragmentation  rule 
is  a  specialization  of  this  one,  and  it  is  too  general  to  be  interesting.  But 
by  specifying  values  for  four  features — the  identity  of  X ,  the  number  of 
nonhydrogen  neighbors  of  X,  the  number  of  hydrogen  neighbors  of  X,  and 
the  number  of  doubly  bonded  neighbors  of  X — the  general  rule  X  *  X  can 
be  grown  into  something  more  interesting. 

Step  3:  RULEMOD.  RULEGEN  can  generate  rules  that  predict  nonexistent 
data  points  in  the  mass-spectral  data.  This  negative  evidence  is  the  cost  of 
the  coarse  method  used  by  RULEGEN  for  finding  general  rules.  RULEMOD 
"tidies  up"  the  rules  produced  by  RULEGEN  by  merging  rules,  eliminating 
redundancies,  and  making  rules  more  specific  or  more  general.  In  addition, 
if  a  rule  has  been  used  successfully  for  a  time,  but  an  instance  is  found  in 
which  it  is  inappropriate,  RULEMOD  can  modify  the  rule  accordingly. 

Output.  The  output  of  Meta-DENDRAL  is  a  set  of  mass-spectral  fragmen- 
tation rules  that  are  specialized  enough  to  be  interesting,  but  general  enough 
to  be  efficient  and  nonredundant. 

The  Meta-DENDRAL  Program 

The  program  itself  is  organized  as  a  series  of  plan-generate-test  steps, 
as  found  in  many  AI  systems  (Feigenbaum,  Buchanan,  and  Lederberg,  1971). 
After  scanning  a  set  of  several  hundred  molecular  structure/spectral  data- 
point  pairs,  the  program  searches  the  space  of  fragmentation  rules  for  plausible 
explanations  and  then  modifies  its  rules  on  the  basis  of  detailed  testing.  When 
rules  generated  from  a  training  set  are  added  to  the  model  and  another  block 


C2c  Meta-DENDRAL  121 

of  data  is  examined,  the  rule  set  is  extended  and  modified  further  to  explain 
the  new  data.  The  program  iteratively  modifies  rules  formed  from  the  initial 
training  set  (adding  to  them),  but  it  is  currently  unable  to  "undo"  rules. 

Integrating  subsequent  data.  A  requirement  for  any  practical  learning 
program  is  the  ability  to  integrate  newly  acquired  data  into  an  evolving  knowl- 
edge base.  New  data  may  dictate  that  new  rules  be  added  to  the  knowledge 
base  or  that  existing  rules  be  modified  or  eliminated.  Rules  may  be  added 
to  the  rule  base  by  running  RULEGEN  on  the  new  data  and  then  running 
RULEMOD  on  the  combined  set  of  new  and  previously  generated  rules. 

When  an  existing  rule  is  modified,  it  is  important  to  maintain  the  integrity 
of  the  modified  rule  over  past  training  instances.  Consider  the  following 
example:  A  new  training  instance  is  acquired  and,  after  questions  of  credit 
assignment  are  resolved,  it  is  decided  that  rule  R  was  incorrectly  "triggered" 
by  some  situation  S.  The  left-hand  side  of  rule  R  must  be  modified  so  that  it 
no  longer  matches  S.  In  general,  there  would  be  many  changes  possible  to  R 
that  would  kill  the  match  to  S,  but  some  are  better  than  others.  The  correct 
changes  to  R  are  those  that  do  not  alter  past  correct  applications  of  R.  Of 
course,  there  is  no  way  of  knowing  which  of  the  possible  changes  to  R  will 
turn  out  to  be  correct  for  future  data,  and  once  a  change  is  selected,  there  is 
still  the  possibility  of  backtracking  at  some  future  point. 

Mitchell  (1977)  developed  a  method  for  representing  all  versions  of  the 
left-hand  side  of  a  rule  that  are  consistent  with  the  observed  data  for  all 
iterations  thus  far.  This  representation  is  referred  to  as  the  version  space  of 
the  rule.  By  examining  the  version  space  of  R,  one  can  answer  the  question 
"Which  of  the  recommended  changes  to  R  will  preserve  its  performance  on 
past  instances?"  The  answer  is,  simply,  "Any  changes  that  yield  a  version 
of  the  rule  contained  in  the  version  space."  Using  version  spaces  avoids  the 
problem  of  selecting  a  single  unretractable  modification  to  R  and  therefore 
eliminates  the  need  for  backtracking.  For  example,  all  the  elements  of  the 
version  space  that  match  some  negative  instance  S  are  eliminated.  Similarly, 
when  new  data  are  encountered  in  which  a  situation  S'  is  found  to  correctly 
trigger  R,  only  those  elements  of  the  version  space  that  match  S'  are  retained 
(see  Article  XTV.D3a,  in  Vol.  Ill,  for  a  complete  discussion). 

Results 

One  measure  of  the  proficiency  of  Meta-DENDRAL  is  the  ability  of  a 
DENDRAL  program  using  the  learned  rules  to  predict  correct  spectra  of  new 
molecules.  One  of  the  DENDRAL  performance  programs  ranks  a  list  of  plau- 
sible hypotheses  (candidate  molecules)  according  to  the  similarity  of  their 
predictions  (predicted  spectra)  to  observed  data.  The  rank  of  the  correct 
hypothesis  (i.e.,  the  molecule  actually  associated  with  the  observed  spectrum) 
provides  a  quantitative  measure  of  the  "discriminatory  power"  of  the  rule  set. 


122 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science 


VII 


The  Meta-DENDRAL  program  has  successfully  rediscovered  known,  pub- 
lished rules  of  mass  spectrometry  for  two  classes  of  molecules.  What  is  more 
important,  it  has  discovered  new  rules  for  three  closely  related  families  of 
structures  for  which  rules  had  not  previously  been  reported.  These  are  the 
mono-,  di-,  and  tri-keto  androstanes,  which  share  the  common  structural 
skeleton  shown  in  Figure  C2c-1. 

Meta-DENDRAL 's  rules  for  these  classes  have  been  published  in  the  chem- 
istry literature  (Buchanan  et  al.,  1976).  Evaluations  of  all  five  sets  of  rules  are 
discussed  in  that  publication.  This  work  demonstrates  the  utility  of  Meta- 
DENDRAL  for  rule  formation  in  mass  spectrometry  for  classes  of  structures. 

The  most  recent  application  of  Meta-DENDRAL  has  been  to  a  second 
spectroscopic  technique — ISC-nuclear  magnetic  resonance  (13C-NMR)  spec- 
troscopy (Mitchell  and  Schwenzer,  1978).  This  version  provides  the  oppor- 
tunity to  direct  the  induction  machinery  of  Meta-DENDRAL  under  a  model 
of  13C-NMR  spectroscopy.  It  generates  rules  that  associate  the  resonance 
frequency  of  a  carbon  atom  in  a  magnetic  field  with  the  local  structural 
environment  of  the  atom.  Note  that  for  13C-NMR  spectroscopy  there  is 
no  requirement  for  a  half-order  theory,  since  there  is  no  equivalent  to  the 
fragmentation  processes  that  occur  in  mass  spectroscopy.  Each  data  point 
is  assigned  to  a  unique  atom  in  the  molecule  prior  to  the  Meta-DENDRAL 
run.  Thus,  there  is  no  analogue  of  the  INTSUM  phase  required  by  the  mass- 
spectroscopy  version.  Instead,  an  assigned  spectrum  (atoms  to  data  points)  is 
given  directly  to  RULEGEN. 

The  13C-NMR  rules  have  been  generated  and  applied  in  a  candidate- 
molecule-ranking  program  similar  to  the  one  described  above.  Also,  13C-NMR 
rules  formulated  by  the  program  for  two  classes  of  structures  have  been 
successfully  applied  to  identify  the  spectra  of  additional  molecules  (of  the  same 
classes,  but  outside  the  set  of  training  data  used  in  generating  the  rules).  The 


HO 


Figure  C2c-1.     Structural  skeleton  for  three  classes  of  androstanes. 


C2c  Meta-DENDRAL  123 

rule-based  molecule-ranking  program  performs  at  the  level  of  a  well-educated 
chemist  in  both  the  mass-spectral  and  the  13C-NMR  domains. 

References 

See  Lindsay  et  al.  (1980)  for  a  thorough  and  current  treatment  of  the 
DENDRAL  programs,  including  Meta-DENDRAL.  The  thesis  by  Mitchell 
(1978)  is  the  principal  source  on  this  system.  Article  XIY.D4b  in  the  chap- 
ter on  learning  and  inductive  reasoning  (in  Vol.  Ill)  is  a  description  of  Meta- 
DENDRAL  as  a  learning  program. 


C3.     CRYSALIS 


THE  CRYSALIS  system  is  an  attempt  to  apply  AI  methodology  to  the  task 
domain  of  protein  crystallography.  Although  the  computer  has  been  an  essen- 
tial tool  in  x-ray  crystallography  research  for  many  years,  nearly  all  its 
applications  have  been  in  data  collection,  data  reduction,  Fourier  analysis, 
graphics,  and  other  essentially  numerical  tasks  (Feigenbaum,  Engelmore,  and 
Johnson,  1977).  Those  aspects  of  molecular-structure  inference  that  require 
symbolic  reasoning  or  that  use  a  significant  amount  of  judgmental  knowledge 
have  traditionally  been  performed  manually.  A  prime  example  is  the  task  of 
electron- density-map  interpretation. 

In  the  course  of  deriving  a  protein  structure,  the  crystallographer  gener- 
ates an  electron  density  map,  a  three-dimensional  description  of  the  electron 
density  distribution  of  a  molecule.  Due  to  the  resolution  imposed  by  the 
experimental  conditions,  the  electron  density  map  is  an  indistinct  image  of 
the  structure  and  does  not  reveal  the  positions  of  individual  atoms.  The 
crystallographer  must  interpret  the  map  in  light  of  auxiliary  data  and  general 
principles  of  protein  chemistry  in  order  to  derive  a  complete  description  of  the 
molecular  structure.  The  goal  of  the  CRYSALIS  system  is  to  integrate  these 
diverse  sources  of  knowledge  and  data  to  try  to  match  the  crystallographer's 
level  of  performance  in  electron-density-map  interpretation.  Automation  of 
this  task  would  shorten  the  time  taken  for  protein-structure  determination 
by  several  weeks,  to  months,  and  would  fill  in  a  major  gap  in  the  construction 
of  a  fully  automated  system  for  protein  crystallography. 

Description  of  the  Problem 

When  crystallographers  refer  to  an  electron  density  map,  they  usually 
have  in  mind  some  pictorial  representation  of  the  electron  density  defined 
over  a  certain  region  of  space.  The  most  common  representation  is  a  three- 
dimensional  contour  map,  constructed  by  stacking  layers  of  conventional  two- 
dimensional  contour  maps  drawn  on  transparent  sheets.  By  carefully  studying 
the  map,  the  experienced  protein  crystallographer  can  find  features  that  allow 
him  (or  her)  to  infer  approximate  atomic  locations,  molecular  boundaries, 
groups  of  atoms,  the  backbone  of  the  polymer,  and  so  on.  After  several  weeks 
(or  months),  he  has  built  a  model  of  the  molecular  structure  that  conforms 
to  the  electron  density  map  and  is  also  consistent  with  his  knowledge  of 
protein  chemistry,  stereochemical  constraints,  and  other  available  chemical 
and  physical  data  (e.g.,  the  amino  acid  sequence).  Figure  C3-la  shows  a 
portion  of  a  protein  structure  and  Figure  C3-lb  shows  the  associated  electron 
density  map  from  which  it  was  inferred. 


124 


C3 


CRYSALIS 


125 


Figure  C3-1.  (a)  A  portion  of  the  molecular  structure  of  lysozyme;  (b)  a 
view  of  the  electron  density  at  2.8  A  of  an  a-helix  in  lysozyme, 
corresponding  to  the  structure  in  (a)  (Snape,  1974). 


The  automation  of  this  task  would  require  a  computational  system  that 
could  generate  its  own  structural  hypotheses,  as  well  as  display  and  verify 
them.  This  capability  requires:  (a)  a  representation  of  the  electron  density 
function  suitable  for  machine  interpretation,  (b)  a  substantial  chemical  and 
stereochemical  knowledge  base,  (c)  a  wide  assortment  of  model-building  algo- 
rithms and  heuristics,  (d)  a  collection  of  rules  and  associated  procedures  for 
using  this  knowledge  to  make  inferences  from  the  experimental  data,  and  (e)  a 
problem-solving  strategy  for  applying  these  knowledge  sources  effectively,  so 
that  the  appropriate  procedures  are  executed  at  the  times  that  they  are  most 
productive. 

Protein  crystallographers  who  build  models  move  continually  across  a 
large  field  of  basic  facts,  special  features  of  the  data,  and  implications  of 
the  partial  model  already  built,  looking  for  any  and  all  opportunities  to  add 
another  piece  to  their  structure.     There  are  several  desiderata  to  working 


126  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

in  this  "opportunistic"  mode  of  hypothesis  formation:  (a)  The  inference- 
generating  rules  and  the  strategies  for  their  deployment  should  be  separate, 
(b)  the  rules  should  be  separate  from  the  mechanics  of  the  program  in  which 
they  are  embedded,  and  (c)  the  representation  of  the  hypothesis  space  should 
be  compatible  with  the  kinds  of  hypothesis-generating  rules  available.  The 
modularity  of  such  a  system  would  allow  users  to  add  or  change  rules  for 
manipulating  the  database,  as  well  as  to  investigate  different  solution  strategies 
without  having  to  make  major  modifications  to  the  system. 

The  CRYSALIS  Architecture:  The  Blackboard 

A  problem-solving  paradigm  that  meets  the  above  specifications,  to  a 
large  degree,  is  the  blackboard  architecture  of  HEARSAY-II  (see  Article  V.C1, 
in  Vol.  I),  specifically  with  respect  to  the  issues  of  knowledge  integration  and 
focus  of  attention.  In  HEARSAY-II,  an  "iterative  guess-building"  process  takes 
place:  A  number  of  different  knowledge  sources  (facts,  algorithms,  heuristics) 
cooperate  when  working  on  various  descriptions  of  the  hypothesis.  To  use 
the  knowledge  sources  efficiently,  a  global  database — the  blackboard — is  con- 
structed that  contains  the  currently  active  hypothesis  elements  at  all  levels  of 
description.  The  decision  to  activate  a  particular  knowledge  source  depends 
on  the  current  state  of  the  solution  and  on  which  available  knowledge  source 
is  most  likely  to  make  further  progress.  The  control  is,  to  a  large  extent, 
determined  by  what  has  just  been  learned:  A  small  change  in  the  state  of  the 
blackboard  may  provide  the  preconditions  to  instantiate  further  knowledge 
sources  (an  illustration  of  this  process  in  the  context  of  electron-density-map 
interpretation  is  given  below). 

Figure  C3-2  shows  the  types  of  data  and  hypotheses  that  are  found  in 
CRYSALIS.  As  in  HEARSAY-II,  the  hypotheses  are  represented  in  a  hier- 
archical data  structure.  In  our  case,  the  different  information  levels  can 
be  partitioned  into  three  distinctly  different  "panels,"  but  the  concept  of  a 
globally  accessible  space  of  hypotheses  is  essentially  the  same  for  both  systems. 
This  figure  also  illustrates  how  knowledge  sources  (only  a  small  subset  is 
shown)  play  the  same  role  as  in  HEARSAY-II:  adding,  changing,  or  testing 
hypothesis  elements  on  the  blackboard.  Further  explanation  of  these  diagrams 
is  given  in  Engelmore  and  Nii  (1977).  The  processes  of  generating  or  modifying 
hypotheses  and  of  invoking  knowledge  sources  are  nearly  identical  to  those  for 
the  AGE  system  (Nii  and  Aiello,  1978). 

Representation  of  Knowledge  in  CRYSALIS 

As  mentioned  above,  there  are  many  diverse  sources  of  information  in 
protein-structure  inference.  The  problem  of  representing  all  the  knowledge  in 
a  form  that  allows  its  cooperative  and  efficient  use  in  the  search  for  plausible 
hypotheses  is  of  central  concern  to  the  developers  of  CRYSALIS.   The  system 


C3 


CRYSALIS 


127 


Knowledge  Sources 

1.  Peak  finder 

2.  Heavy  atom  hypothesizer 

3.  Heavy  atom  verifier 

4.  Cofactor  hypothesizer 

5.  Cofactor  verifier 

6.  Cofactor  location  verifier 


DENSITY  PLANE 


Figure  C3-2.     Panels  of  the  CRYSALIS  blackboard  and  examples  of  the 
application  of  knowledge  sources. 


128  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

as  currently  developed  draws  upon  many  concepts  that  have  emerged  in  the 
design  of  other  large  knowledge-based  systems — for  example,  production  rules 
and  blackboards.  Following  is  a  description  of  how  these  concepts  have  been 
adapted. 

Knowledge  consists  of  facts,  algorithms,  and  heuristics  (rules  of  good 
guessing).  The  facts  required  for  protein-structure  inference  are  general  physi- 
cal, chemical,  stereochemical,  and  crystallographic  constraints.  Typical  fac- 
tual knowledge  stored  in  the  system  includes  the  physical  properties  of  the 
elements  commonly  found  in  proteins,  the  molecular  structure  and  chemical 
properties  of  the  20  amino  acids,  and  the  bond  lengths  and  the  symmetry 
properties  of  various  crystal  structures.  These  facts  are  encoded  as  tables  or 
as  property  lists  attached  to  specific  structural  entities. 

Algorithms  and  heuristics  comprise  both  the  formal  and  the  informal 
knowledge  that  generates  or  verifies  hypothesis  elements.  The  representation 
of  this  kind  of  knowledge  in  CRYSALIS  follows  two  general  principles: 

1.  Identifiable  areas  of  knowledge  are  decomposed  into  elementary  units,  in 
which  each  unit  increments  the  hypothesis  when  specified  preconditions 
are  met. 

2.  The  elementary  units  are  represented  as  situation- action  rules. 

To  illustrate: 

IF  the  name  of   the  current-residue   is  GLU,    and 

the   shape  of   the   subgraph  is  forked,    and 
the  length  of   the   subgraph  is  between  40  and  75,    and 
the  number  of   associated  peaks  of   the  subgraph  is 
greater  than  1 

THEN      conclude  that  the   subgraph  is  matched,    and 
generate  a  new  superatom  on  the  blackboard, 
with  the  following  properties : 

Type  is   side-chain 

Belongs  to  current-residue 
Data-link  to  subgraph  with  certainty  factor  500. 

Note  that  several  actions  may  be  performed  for  a  given  situation.  Not  shown 
here,  but  present  in  the  LISP  implementation  of  these  rules,  is  a  position  in 
the  rule  for  variable  bindings,  to  avoid  repetitious  calculation  of  parameters 
appearing  in  several  situation-action  clauses.  Also  note  that  at  least  one  of 
the  actions  of  each  rule  is  to  place  a  token  on  an  event  list.  In  the  actual 
implementation,  the  syntax  of  the  "action"  clause  is  represented  as  a  single 
function.  An  example  follows: 

Syntax:  ((inference  type)  (element  being  changed)  (att-value  pairs)) 

Example:       (SUBGRAPH . MATCHED    (GENSUPATOM)    ((TYPE  SIDECHAIN) 

(BEL0NGST0   CURRENT. RESIDUE)     (DATALINK    (SUBGRAPH . 500) )) ) 


C3  CRYSALIS  129 

In  this  example,  an  event.  SUBGRAPH. MATCHED,  will  be  generated  and  queued 
on  the  event  list.  The  event  list  is  used  by  the  interpreter  (discussed  below)  to 
determine  what  to  do  next,  that  is,  which  set  of  knowledge  sources  to  invoke 
after  the  current  event  has  been  processed. 

Event- driven  Control 

The  CRYSALIS  system  uses  an  event- driven  control  structure.  In  this 
scheme,  the  current  state  of  the  hypothesis  space  determines  what  to  do  next. 
The  monitor  continually  refers  to  a  list  of  current  events — the  event  list — that 
triggers  the  knowledge  sources  most  likely  to  make  further  headway.  As  a 
knowledge  source  makes  a  change  in  the  current  hypothesis,  it  also  places  an 
item  on  the  event  list  to  signify  the  type  of  change  made.  Thus,  as  events  are 
drawn  from  the  event  list  for  processing,  new  events  are  added,  so  that  under 
normal  conditions  the  monitor  always  has  a  means  for  choosing  its  next  move. 

The  normal  iterative  cycle  of  problem  solving  uses  the  event  list  to  trigger 
knowledge  sources,  which  create  or  change  hypothesis  elements  and  place 
new  events  on  the  event  lists.  The  system's  behavior  is  opportunistic:  It  is 
guided  primarily  by  what  has  been  most  recently  discovered,  rather  than  by 
the  requirement  to  satisfy  subgoals.  An  event-driven  control  structure  was 
chosen  partly  to  be  efficient  in  selecting  appropriate  knowledge  sources  and 
partly  to  conform  wTith  the  opportunistic  structure-modeling  process  normally 
employed  by  protein  crystallographers. 

Rules 

The  formal  and  informal  procedures  that  comprise  the  knowledge  sources 
are  expressed  as  rules,  as  discussed  above.  These  rules  are  collected  into  sets, 
each  set  being  judged  appropriate  to  use  when  particular  kinds  of  events  occur. 
The  events  generally  reflect  the  level  at  which  the  inference  is  being  made, 
which  in  turn  reflects  the  model's  level  of  detail.  The  correspondence  between 
event  classes  and  rule  sets  is  established  by  another  set  of  rules,  the  task  rules. 
The  task  rules  are  used  to  decide  which  knowledge  source  or  sequence  of 
knowledge  sources  to  call  in  order  to  perform  one  of  the  typical  tasks  in 
building  the  structure — for  example,  tracing  the  protein  backbone  between 
two  anchor  points.  The  decision  is  based  on  the  state  of  the  blackboard 
and  the  items  on  the  event  list.  The  task  rules  thus  form  a  second  layer  of 
rules  that  directs  the  system's  choice  of  knowledge  sources  for  a  given  event, 
reflecting  the  system's  knowledge  of  what  it  knows. 

Once  a  task  either  is  completed  or  fails,  the  system  looks  to  a  higher 
level  of  control  to  determine  what  to  do  next.  At  this  higher  level — the 
strategy  level — the  structure-building  process  can  either  try  to  solve  the  cur- 
rent subproblem  by  another  method  or  shift  attention  to  another  region  of 
the  structure.  Strategy-level  decisions  are  also  expressed  as  rules  and  make 


130  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

use  of  the  current  state  of  the  blackboard  and  event  list.   One  such  strategy 
rule  is: 

IF  the   initialization  task  is   complete,    and 

the  locations  of   two  or  more  atoms  are  known 

(called  toeholds) ,    and 
these  toeholds  are  separated  by  less  than  six 

residues   in  the  amino  acid  sequence,    and 
none  of  the  intervening  residues  is  identified 
from  the  data, 

THEN     select  the  two-point  chain-tracing  task  and  focus 
on  the   sub-sequence  bounded  by  the  toeholds . 

The  part  of  the  monitor  that  interprets  and  obeys  the  event  rules  may 
be  likened  to  a  middle-level  project  manager  who  knows  which  specialists 
to  call  in  as  new,  partial  solutions  to  a  particular  problem  are  discovered. 
Continuing  the  analogy,  the  middle-level  manager  occasionally  gets  stuck  and 
needs  help  from  higher  level  management.  As  mentioned  earlier,  some  high- 
level  decision  (such  as  merging  two  or  more  events  to  produce  a  new  event  or 
shifting  attention  to  another  part  of  the  blackboard)  is  required.  This  level 
of  decision  making  is  embodied  in  a  set  of  strategy  rules,  which  are  used  to 
direct  the  top-level  flow  of  control. 

We  thus  have  a  completely  rule-based  control  structure  that  employs 
three  distinct  levels  of  rules  (or  knowledge):  the  specialists,  commonly  called 
the  knowledge  sources;  the  task  rules,  representing  knowledge  about  the 
capabilities  of  the  specialists;  and  the  strategy  rules,  which  know  when  to 
use  all  available  knowledge  to  solve  the  problem.  Although  this  pyramidal 
structure  of  rules  and  meta-rules  could  continue  indefinitely,  the  flexibility  of 
knowledge  deployment  offered  by  our  three-tiered  system  appears  sufficient 
for  this  problem-solving  system.  Similar  ideas  in  a  simpler  context  have  been 
explored  by  Davis  (1976)  in  his  TEIRESIAS  system  (see  Article  VII.B). 

System  Performance — An  Example 

To  give  some  indication  of  the  system's  current  level  of  performance,  we 
present  a  typescript  in  which  a  typical  hypothesis- formation  task  is  completed. 
The  example  is  the  subproblem  of  extending  the  model  from  an  "island  of 
certainty,"  or  anchor  point,  by  using  the  crytallographic  data  to  determine 
where  to  extend  the  model  in  space  and  by  using  the  amino  acid  sequence  to 
generate  expectations  of  features  that  ought  to  be  present  in  that  region. 

The  knowledge  sources  invoked  in  this  example  use  an  abstraction  of 
the  density  map  called  a  subgraph.  A  subgraph  is  a  collection  of  segments 
obtained  from  a  skeletonized  density  map,  which,  one  hopes,  matches  an 
identifiable  substructure  in  the  protein — for  example,  a  sidechain.  The  amino 
acid  sequence  assumed  here  is  METhionine,  LYSine,  LYSine,  TYRosine,  and 


C3  CRYSALIS  131 

so  forth  (the  example  uses  data  from  the  protein  Rubredoxin).  The  example 
starts  after  passing  control  to  a  knowledge  source  called  ANCHOR. TOEHOLD. 
The  toehold  of  interest  in  this  case  is  the  sulphur  atom  in  the  methionine 
sidechain.  This  toehold  is  just  a  point  in  space  and  must  be  connected  to  the 
skeleton. 

INFERENCE:   EVENT- 1   BY  RULE  1   IN  RULESET  ANCHOR . TOEHOLD 
EVENT  NAME:  TOEHOLD . ANCHORED 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA2 
NEW  PROPERTIES:   ((TYPE  SIDECHAIN)  (BELONGSTO  (MET  .1)) 

(SEGS  (((1  SEG240)  .100)  ((1  SEG238)  .100)))  (MEMBERS  (A3))) 

The  ANCHOR. TOEHOLD  knowledge  source  has  found  subgraphs  of  the 
skeleton,  but  its  limited  knowledge  cannot  assign  much  certainty  to  the 
inference.  The  "real"  matching  of  skeleton  parts  with  expected  residue  is 
accomplished  by  MATCH. SDCHN.  This  knowledge  source  uses  the  shape  of 
the  subgraph,  its  length,  the  number  of  peaks  associated  with  the  candidate 
subgraph,  and  their  heights.  If  a  certainty  factor  (CF)  of  500  or  more  is 
assigned,  the  sidechain  is  considered  to  be  located  (CFs  have  a  range  of  —1000 
to  1000,  with  the  CF  combining  function  the  same  as  that  used  by  MYCIN; 
see  Article  VIII.Bl). 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-2  BY  RULE  3   IN  RULESET  MATCH. SDCHN 
EVENT  NAME:  TOEHOLD 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA3 
NEW  PROPERTIES:  (SEGS  (((1  SEG238)  .823)  ((1  SEG240)  .555))) 

If  a  sidechain  is  found,  the  trace  tries  to  find  the  alpha  carbon  location  by 
finding  a  peak  of  a  certain  type  near  the  root  of  the  sidechain.  The  knowledge 
source  used  to  propose  an  alpha  carbon  position  is  called  POSSIBLE. CALPHA. 
The  system  assumes  that  the  location  of  this  peak  is  a  more  accurate  guide 
than  the  skeleton  for  locating  this  class  of  atom. 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-3   BY  RULE  5   IN  RULESET  POSSIBLE. CALPHA 
EVENT  NAME:  CALPHA 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  A4 

NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  C)  (NAME  CA)  (BELONGSTO  (MET  .1)) 
(D. PEAKS  ((PK076  .500)))) 

Once  the  toehold  has  been  anchored,  this  trace  becomes  essentially  a 
generate-and-test  search,  heavily  constrained  by  the  sequence.  The  basic 
control  cycle  for  the  trace  is,  first,  propose  a  sidechain  and  match  it;  next, 
propose  a  peptide  and  match  that;  and,  finally,  loop  until  a  match  fails. 
Sometimes  the  carbonyl  group  present  in  each  peptide  will  appear  as  a  small 
sidechain.  If  this  happens,  the  proposed  peptide  will  extend  only  from  the  last 
sidechain  up  to  this  pseudo  sidechain,  and  the  peptide  will  fail  to  match.  This 
failure  prompts  the  system  to  try  matching  the  "sidechain"  as  a  carbonyl. 


132  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

Success  of  this  match  would  mean  that  only  half  of  the  peptide  has  been 
found;  the  system  can  then  propose  a  larger  peptide,  which  contains  the  old 
one,  and  proceed  as  before. 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-4  BY  RULE  4  IN  RULESET  MATCH . PEPTIDE 
EVENT  NAME:  PEPTIDE 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA4 

NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  PEPTIDE)  (BELONGSTO  (MET  .1)) 
(SEGS  (((SEG6  SEG8)  .84)))  (PEAKS  (PK076  PK078))) 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-5  BY  RULE  5   IN  RULESET  MATCH . CARBONYL . SC 
EVENT  NAME:  CARBONYL . FOUND 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  A5 
NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  CO)  (NAME  CARBONYL) 

(BELONGSTO  (MET  .1)) 

(SEGS  (((1  SEG5)  .581)))  (PEAKS  (PK036) ) ) 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-6  BY  RULE  4  IN  RULESET  MATCH . PEPTIDE 
EVENT  NAME:  PEPTIDE 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA4 

NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((SEGS  ( ( (SEG6  SEG8  SEGIO)  .420))) 
(PEAKS  (PK076  PK078  PK036))) 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-7  BY  RULE  7  IN  RULESET  MATCH. SDCHN 
EVENT  NAME:  SIDECHAIN 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA6 

NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  SIDECHAIN)  (BELONGSTO  (LYS  .2)) 
(SEGS  (((1  SEG242)  .527)))) 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-8  BY  RULE  5  IN  RULESET  POSSIBLE. CALPHA 
EVENT  NAME:  CALPHA 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  A6 

NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  C)  (NAME  CA)  (BELONGSTO  (LYS  .2)) 
(D. PEAKS  ((PK078  .500)))) 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-9  BY  RULE  4  IN  RULESET  MATCH . PEPTIDE 
EVENT  NAME:  PEPTIDE 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA6 

NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  PEPTIDE)  (BELONGSTO  (LYS  .2)) 
(SEGS  (((SEG232  SEG16)  .600)))  (PEAKS  (PK017  PK125))) 

(Three  more  events,  similar  to  the  preceding  ones,  have  been  omitted.) 

INFERENCE:   EVENT- 13  BY  RULE  6  IN  RULESET  MATCH. SDCHN 
EVENT  NAME:  SIDECHAIN 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA9 

NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  SIDECHAIN)  (BELONGSTO  (TYR  .4)) 
(SEGS  (((6  SEG212  SEG40  SEG36  SEG35  SEG228)  .502)))) 


C3  CRYSALIS  133 

The  matching  cycle  terminates  in  one  of  two  ways.  If  the  skeleton  becomes 
so  overconnected  that  the  access  function  cannot  propose  the  next  subgraph 
(sidechain  or  peptide),  the  trace  fails;  or  if  the  certainty  of  a  match  is  too  low 
and  there  are  no  rules  to  save  the  situation,  the  trace  fails.  Upon  termination, 
one  final  knowledge  source  is  called  to  link  together  hypothesis  elements 
belonging  to  the  same  residue,  creating  an  organizing  "backbone." 

INFERENCE:   EVENT- 14   BY  RULE  3   IN  RULESET  TRACE . CLEANUP 
EVENT  NAME:  LINK-CA-TO-PEPTIDE 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  SA4 
NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((MEMBERS  (A4) ) ) 

(Two  more  events  like  the  preceding  one  are  omitted  here.) 

INFERENCE:   EVENT-17  BY  RULE  7   IN  RULESET  TRACE . CLEANUP 
EVENT  NAME:  BACKBONE 
CURRENT  HYPOTHESIS  ELEMENT:  ST1 
NEW  PROPERTIES:  ((TYPE  BACKBONE)  (CF  511)  (DIRECTION  1) 

(RANGE  (1  .4))  (MEMBERS  (SA1  SA2  SA3  SA4  SA5  SA6  SA7  NIL))) 

Summary 

At  the  present  time,  CRYSALIS  is  capable  of  performing  only  a  small 
portion  of  the  total  task  of  interpreting  electron  density  maps.  The  devel- 
opment and  implementation  of  all  the  knowledge  sources  required  for  the 
complete  task  is  a  long-term  effort.  CRYSALIS  currently  contains  a  rela- 
tively small  knowledge  base  that  permits  the  interpretation  of  portions  of 
high-quality,  high-resolution  (2.0  Angstroms  or  better)  electron  density  maps. 
The  system  is  expected  to  evolve  toward  an  extensive  knowledge- based  prob- 
lem solver  capable  of  complete  interpretation  of  medium-quality,  medium- 
resolution  (2.0  to  2.5  A)  electron  density  maps.  Although  CRYSALIS  is  not 
yet  worthy  of  serious  attention  by  the  protein-crystallographic  community, 
its  defects  lie  primarily  in  its  relatively  meager  knowledge  base  and  not  in 
its  design.  As  new  knowledge  sources  are  added  to  the  system,  its  level  of 
performance  is  expected  to  rise  to  the  point  where  it  will  be  a  significant  aid 
in  the  determination  of  new  protein  structures. 

References 

See  Engelmore  and  Terry  (1978,  1979),  Engelmore  and  Nii  (1977),  and 
Feigenbaum,  Engelmore,  and  Johnson  (1977). 


C4.     Applications  in  Organic  Synthesis 


THE  SYNTHESIS  of  organic  compounds  is  central  to  the  creation  of  new 
chemical  products  and  to  the  development  of  more  efficient  processes  for 
manufacturing  old  products.  However,  the  synthesis  process  for  a  particular 
product  is  typically  expensive  to  run  and  hard  to  design.  Hence,  there  is  great 
interest  among  both  academic  and  industrial  chemists  in  new  tools  for  finding 
synthetic  routes. 

A  synthesis  problem  begins  with  the  structural  description  of  a  compound 
that  someone  wants  synthesized,  often  because  the  compound  has  useful 
properties  (e.g.,  a  drug  or  a  vitamin).  Synthesis  can  also  help  confirm  a  pos- 
tulated structure  for  an  unknown  compound,  since  the  synthesized  compound 
and  the  unknown  compound  will,  if  identical,  produce  identical  test  results. 

Chemists  use  the  computer  and  AI  techniques  to  explore  systematically 
the  synthesis  tree  and  to  help  organize  the  immense  body  of  available  knowl- 
edge about  chemical  reactions.  This  approach  of  exhaustively  exploring  the 
interesting  branches  of  the  synthesis  tree  was  called  the  logic-centered  ap- 
proach by  E.  Corey  and  W.  T.  Wipke  (1969),  who  first  explored  computer- 
aided  organic  synthesis.  Interesting  branches  are  those  most  likely  to  produce 
the  desired  result.  "Interesting'1  is  an  extremely  difficult  concept  to  define 
and  to  cast  into  an  algorithm;  therefore,  for  now,  the  search  for  interesting 
branches  must  be  guided  interactively  by  the  chemist.  Some  of  the  relevant 
considerations  are  the  efficiency  of  a  reaction,  the  cost  of  materials,  and  the 
difficulty  of  meeting  the  experimental  conditions  that  support  a  reaction. 

The  chemist  represents  the  target  structure  graphically  and  relates  it  to 
simpler  chemicals  via  known  chemical  reactions.  He  (or  she)  relates  those  to 
still  simpler  ones,  until  he  reaches  a  set  of  commands,  comparable  to  starting 
materials  that  are  readily  available  from  chemical  supply  houses  or  that  can  be 
easily  synthesized  in  a  few  steps  in  the  laboratory.  A  plan  for  synthesizing  the 
compound,  called  a  synthetic  route,  may  involve  dozens  of  separate  reactions. 
If  the  molecule  is  at  all  complicated,  there  is  an  immense  number  of  distinct 
synthesis  routes.  For  example,  a  simple  steroid  composed  of  about  20  atoms 
has  over  1018  possible  direct  routes. 

Synthesis  routes  can  be  viewed  in  terms  of  an  AND/OR  tree  (discussed  in 
Article  II. C4,  in  Vol.  i).  The  tree  descends  from  the  goal  node,  representing  the 
target  molecule,  to  the  terminal  nodes,  equivalent  to  the  starting  materials. 
The  branches  connecting  the  nodes  are  chemical  reactions.  Since  a  synthesis 
plan  involves  combining  compounds  in  reactions,  the  AND-links  of  the  tree  are 
present  in  any  one  synthesis  route;  alternative  ways  of  making  a  compound 
anywhere  within  the  plan  are  represented  by  OR-nodes. 


134 


C4 


Applications  in  Organic  Synthesis 


135 


The  Three  Major  AI  Synthesis -research  Programs: 
LHASA,  SECS,  and  SYNCHEM 

There  are  three  major  programs  in  computer-aided  organic  synthesis.  The 
earliest  is  LHASA  (Logic  and  Heuristics  Applied  to  Synthetic  Analysis),  which 
was  written  by  Corey  and  Wipke  at  Harvard  and  is  maintained  at  Harvard  by 
Corey  and  his  research  group.  SECS  (Simulation  and  Evaluation  of  Chemical 
Synthesis)  is  an  outgrowth  of  LHASA  and  was  written  by  Wipke  and  main- 
tained by  him  and  his  research  group  at  the  University  of  California  at  Santa 
Cruz.  It  extended  the  LHASA  paradigm  by  the  inclusion  of  stereochemical 
and  conformational  information  into  all  aspects  of  the  computer  program. 
The  third  major  program  is  SYNCHEM  (SYNthetic  CHEMistry),  written  and 
maintained  by  H.  L.  Gelernter  and  his  research  group  at  the  State  University 
of  New  York  at  Stony  Brook.  The  main  features  of  these  three  programs  are 
summarized  in  Table  C4-1. 

Since  SECS  was  designed  to  extend  the  methods  in  LHASA,  much  of  the 
discussion  of  SECS  applies  to  both  programs.  Of  the  three,  only  SECS  is 
demonstrably  transportable  to  computers  other  than  the  one  on  which  it  was 
developed. 

Two  Approaches 

A  major  distinction  between  SECS  (and  LHASA)  and  SYNCHEM  is  that 
SECS  is  oriented  toward  high  performance  while  SYNCHEM  is  oriented  more 
toward  AI  issues  involving  search.  Because  of  this,  and  because  chemists' 
intuitions  about  interesting  pathways  are  hard  to  define,  SECS  relies  on  a 

Table  C4-1 

Chemical  Synthesis  Programs 


Program 


Principal 
designer 


Main  features 


LHASA  E.  J.  Corey  Large  procedural  knowledge  base  of 

transforms;  interactive;  high  performance. 

SECS  W.  T.  Wipke  Separate  knowledge  base  of  many  transforms 

with  special  interactive  language  for  defining 
new  ones  (ALCHEM);  interactive  graphics; 
high  performance. 

SYNCHEM  H.  Gelernter  Motivated  by  AI  search  problems;  evaluation 

during  search  done  by  the  program,  not  by 
a  chemist. 


136  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

chemist's  interacting  with  the  program.  SYNCHEM,  on  the  other  hand, 
searches  the  space  of  possible  synthetic  routes  without  interactive  guidance 
from  a  chemist.  In  operational  terms,  the  main  difference  is  whether  the 
evaluation  function  for  the  search  procedure  is  explicitly  given  to  the  program 
and  used  without  guidance  from  the  chemist  (as  in  SYNCHEM)  or  it  is  not 
explicitly  given  to  the  program  (as  in  SECS  and  LHASA).  In  the  following, 
these  are  called  the  noninteractive  and  interactive  approaches,  respectively. 
SECS  can  be  reconfigured  to  run  noninteractively,  although  with  the  chemist's 
guidance  the  system  tends  to  give  better  results. 

The  Chemical  Knowledge  Base 

The  primary  item  of  knowledge  in  chemical  synthesis  is  the  chemical 
reaction — a  rule  describing  a  situation  in  which  a  change  can  occur  (to  a 
molecular  structure)  plus  a  description  of  that  change.  For  example,  the 
reaction  shown  in  Figure  C4-1  describes  a  change  to  a  molecule  containing  the 
substructure  0=C — C — C=0  in  the  presence  of  the  reagent  oxalyl  chloride. 

To  design  a  synthesis  route  from  starting  materials  to  target  molecule, 
knowledge  of  reactions  can  be  used  in  either  of  two  ways: 

1.  Forward  direction:  Apply  known  reactions  to  starting  materials,  then  to 
the  products  of  those  reactions,  to  the  products  of  products,  and  so 
forth,  until  the  target  is  reached.  The  combinatorics  of  this  approach 
make  it  impossible  in  practice,  because  there  are  thousands  of  possible 
starting  compounds  and  only  one  target. 

2.  Reverse  direction:  Starting  with  the  target  molecule,  determine  which 
reactions  might  produce  it.  Then  look  for  ways  to  make  the  precursors, 
the  precursors  of  precursors,  and  so  forth,  until  the  starting  materials 
are  reached.  Storing  the  reactions  in  the  reverse  direction  makes  it  easier 
to  search  the  tree  of  possible  pathways. 

All  three  programs  have  a  large  knowledge  base  of  reverse  chemical  reac- 
tions called  transforms — production  rules  of  the  condition-action  form  (see 
Article  III.C4,  in  Vol.  i).  The  left-hand  side  of  each  rule  represents  a  substruc- 
ture pattern  to  be  matched  in  the  target  structure  (or  intermediate  structure) 
and  the  right-hand  side  is  a  description  of  precursors  that  will  produce  the 
goal  structure  under  specified  reaction  conditions.  Each  of  the  three  projects 
has  dealt  with  the  problems  of  constructing  a  knowledge  base  in  very  different 
ways.    (Fig.  C4-2  shows  the  representation  in  the  SECS  knowledge  base  for 


0=C— C— C=0  +  Oxalyl  Chloride  ►    0=C— C=C— CL 


Figure  C4-1.     Graphical  representation  of  a  chemical  reaction. 


C4  Applications  in  Organic  Synthesis  137 

the  reverse  reaction  of  the  one  shown  in  Fig.  C4-1,  plus  all  the  associated 
information.) 

1.  The  LHASA  knowledge  base  is  a  set  of  procedures.  Although  it  contains 
very  sophisticated  chemistry  knowledge,  it  is  difficult  to  modify  (see 
Article  III.C2,  in  Vol.  I). 

2.  The  SECS  knowledge  base  contains  about  400  separate  transforms.  New 
transforms  can  be  defined  by  users  and  entered  into  the  knowledge  base 
without  changes  to  the  program.  Because  of  its  clarity,  it  is  useful  for 
illustration  and  is  discussed  in  detail  below. 

3.  The  SYNCHEM  knowledge  base  is  a  library  of  reactions  that  can  be 
updated  by  chemists  without  reprogramming.  Each  reaction  is  compiled 
automatically  into  a  reverse  reaction.  In  addition,  the  knowledge  base 
contains  a  large  library  of  starting  compounds  that  are  available  com- 
mercially. (In  a  newer  version,  SYNCHEM2,  the  catalogue  of  starting 
materials  has  been  replaced  by  a  set  of  stopping  criteria  for  synthesis 
routes.) 

Each  of  the  SECS  transforms  is  stored  external  to  the  SECS  program; 
this  allows  the  knowledge  base  to  be  tailored  to  a  specific  problem  domain. 
Further,  the  number  and  complexity  of  the  transforms  are  not  limited  by  the 
size  of  core  memory.  A  simple,  flexible  language,  called  ALCHEM,  is  provided 
in  which  chemists  can  enter  new  transforms  into  the  knowledge  base. 

ALCHEM  embodies  a  model  of  what  information  is  needed  to  describe 
a  reaction  adequately.  According  to  this  model,  a  transform  consists  of  the 
following  six  sections: 

1.  Transform  name; 

2.  Substructure  key  or  pattern  to  be  matched; 

3.  Character — used  to  help  judge  the  relevance  to  strategic  planning; 

4.  Scope  and  limitations; 

5.  Reaction  conditions — not  to  be  violated  by  the  remainder  of  the  molecule 
containing  the  substructure  key; 

6.  Manipulation  statements — describing  the  graph  transformations  to  be 
performed. 

This  will  be  clarified  below  with  an  example. 

In  the  reaction  shown  in  Figure  C4-1,  one  of  the  oxygens  double-bonded 
to  carbon  is  replaced  by  a  single  bond  to  a  chlorine.  To  go  from  a  graphi- 
cal representation  of  a  synthetic  reaction  to  the  graphical  representation  of 
a  SECS  transform,  we  reverse  the  left-  and  right-hand  sides  and  specify  addi- 
tional important  conditions.  Using  the  ALCHEM  language,  the  chemist  could 
interactively  enter  the  representation  of  this  transform  as  shown  in 
Figure  C4-2. 

In  the  manipulation  statements,  BREAK  BOND  3  refers  to  the  third  bond 
from  the  left  in  the  substructure  key;  the  double  bond  between  the  two  carbons 


138  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 


Comment:     Chloroenones,  0=C— C— C=0  goes  to  0=C— C=C— CL 

Reagent:        Oxalyl  Chloride 

Ref:  Heathcock  and  Clark  (1976). 

Transform  name:  CHLOR-ENONE 

Substructure  key:  0=C— C=C— CL     (1  =  2  —  3  =  4  —  5> 

Priority:  100 

Character:  CHARACTER  ALTERS  GROUP 

Scope  IF  ACID   IS   OFF  PATH  THEN  KILL 

and  limitations:  IF  ESTER  IS  OFF  PATH  THEN  KILL 

IF  HYDROGEN   IS  ALPHA  TO  ATOM  4  THEN 

BEGIN 

IF  HYDROGEN  IS  ALPHA  TO  AT0M2 

THEN  SUBTRACT  75  FROM  PRIORITY 

DONE 

Manipulation  BREAK  BOND  3 

statements:  DELETE  ATOM  5 

ADD  0  OF  ORDER  2  to  ATOM  4 

In  the  actual  reaction,  of  course,  the  chlorinated  compound  comes  from 

the  precursor. 


Figure  C4-2.     ALCHEM  representation  of  a  SECS  transform. 

is  reduced  to  a  single  bond.  Similarly,  DELETE  ATOM  5  refers  to  the  chlorine 
atom  CL,  the  fifth  atom  from  the  left.  When  the  program  is  actually  run, 
a  compiler  called  SYNCOM  translates  the  ALCHEM  statements  into  machine- 
readable  form  before  SECS  reads  the  knowledge  base. 

A  Brief  Description  of  SECS 

SECS  and  LHASA  have  been  designed  to  divide  the  work  between  the 
chemist  and  the  computer  in  an  optimal  way.  Wipke  and  his  associates  (1977) 
explain  their  philosophy  as  follows: 

Our  performance  goal  for  the  program  was  that  the  program  should  be  able 
to  help  a  chemist  find  many  more  good  and  innovative  syntheses  than  the 
chemist  could  working  alone.  Because  of  the  complexity  of  the  problem 
domain,  we  felt  the  chemist  and  computer  working  together  with  each 
assigned  tasks  for  which  they  are  best  suited,  and  with  efficient  interaction 
between  the  two,  would  be  more  effective  than  either  working  alone.   Our 


C4  Applications  in  Organic  Synthesis  139 

goal  was  not  to  replace  the  chemist,  but  to  augment  the  chemist's  problem 
solving  capabilities,  (p.  174) 

Graphics.  To  communicate  with  the  SECS  program,  the  chemist  uses  a 
graphics  terminal  with  a  CRT,  a  minicomputer,  a  keyboard,  and  a  light  pen. 
With  the  pen,  the  chemist  draws  on  the  screen  the  graphical  structure  of 
the  target  molecule  to  be  synthesized.  Much  work  has  gone  into  the  human- 
engineering  aspects  of  the  program,  so  that  the  SECS  graphics  routines  are 
designed  to  be  as  near  as  possible  to  the  chemist's  normal  ways  of  thinking 
in  terms  of  the  structure  diagram  or  the  molecular  model.  There  are  similar 
facilities  in  LHASA.  By  convention,  hydrogen  atoms  are  suppressed.  Also 
by  convention,  only  noncarbon  atoms  (called  heteroatoms)  are  labeled.  This 
is  useful,  since  the  majority  of  nonhydrogen  atoms  in  organic  molecules  are 
carbon. 

Application  of  a  transform.  Applying  a  transform  is  not  simply  a 
matter  of  matching  the  substructure  key  to  a  molecule  and,  if  the  subgraph 
fits,  executing  the  graph-manipulation  statements.  The  scope  and  limitations 
determine  much  of  the  context  in  which  the  transform  will  be  applicable. 
Also,  it  is  necessary  to  check  three-dimensional  information  and  electronic- 
environment  information  (i.e.,  the  tendency  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule  to  be 
positively  or  negatively  charged)  to  make  an  accurate  assessment  of  whether 
a  transform  is  applicable. 

A  situation  commonly  encountered  in  chemical  synthesis  is  that  there  is  a 
functional  group  to  be  modified  and  a  reagent  available  that  would  normally 
bring  about  the  appropriate  change,  but  access  to  the  functional  group  is 
hindered  (spatially)  by  another  functional  group  or  another  portion  of  the 
molecule,  and  the  reagent  does  not  have  the  desired  effect.  Without  the  three- 
dimensional  information  given  by  the  so-called  model-building  routines,  the 
program  has  no  way  of  knowing  that  the  transform  cannot  apply.  After  the 
spatial  modeling  has  been  done,  the  program  can  perceive  that  even  though 
the  required  functional  group  is  present,  the  transform  cannot  be  applied 
directly  because  it  is  inaccessible  to  the  reagent  molecules.  If  the  transform  is 
very  high  priority,  a  means- ends  analysis  can  be  done  to  find  ways  of  altering 
the  molecule,  so  that  the  given  functional  group  is  accessible. 

A  Brief  Description  of  SYNCHEM 

The  aims  of  Gelernter's  group  on  SYNCHEM  are  stated  very  clearly  by 
Gelernter  and  his  associates  (1977): 

Extraordinarily  rapid  progress  during  the  early  stages  of  an  attack  on  a 
new  problem  area  is  a  rather  common  occurrence  in  AI  research;  it  merely 
signifies  that  the  test  cases  with  which  the  system  has  been  challenged  are 
below  the  level  of  difficulty  where  combinatorial  explosion  of  the  number  of 
pathways  in  the  problem  space  sets  in. ...  It  is  the  goal  of  Al  research  to  move 


140  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

that  threshold  higher  and  higher  on  the  scale  of  problem  complexity  through 
the  introduction  of  heuristics — heuristics  to  reduce  the  rate  of  growth  of  the 
solution  tree,  heuristics  to  guide  the  development  of  the  tree  so  that  it  will 
be  rich  in  pathways  leading  to  satisfactory  problem  solutions,  and  heuristics 
to  direct  the  search  to  the  "best"  of  these  pathways,  (p.  1044) 

SYNCHEM  is  noninteractive.  The  molecule  to  be  synthesized  is  input, 
and  the  program  uses  heuristic  search  to  look  for  the  best  synthetic  route. 
The  program  decides  which  node  of  the  tree  to  develop  further,  by  estimating 
the  "cost"  of  reaching  the  goal  from  that  node  plus  the  cost  of  reaching  that 
node  from  starting  materials.  One  of  the  interesting  AI  issues  here  is  that 
the  program's  definition  of  cost  depends  on  the  context  of  the  problem  as 
well  as  on  static  features  such  as  efficiency  of  reactions,  the  monetary  cost 
of  materials,  and  so  forth.  For  example,  costs  are  measured  differently  in  an 
exploratory  research  context  than  in  an  industrial  production  context. 

The  long-range  hope  of  the  SYNCHEM  group  is  that  the  study  of  AI  in  this 
domain  will  lead  to  new  insights  into  AI  and  also  eventually  to  a  noninteractive 
system  that  will  be  of  use  to  chemists. 

SYNCHEM2.  The  first  version  of  SYNCHEM,  written  largely  by  N.  S. 
Sridharan,  was  operational  between  1971  and  1974.  Gelernter's  SYNCHEM2 
supersedes  it  and  contains  many  improvements,  some  of  which  are  discussed 
below.  SYNCHEM2  has  been  designed  so  that  further  changes  in  the  represen- 
tation can  be  made  easily,  with  minimal  reprogramming.  A  major  drawback  of 
the  original  SYNCHEM  was  that  it  entirely  neglected  stereochemistry.  SYN- 
CHEM2  now  incorporates  stereochemistry  into  its  representation  of  molecules 
and  into  its  transform-evaluation  rules.  The  representation  is  flexible  enough 
to  include  electronic  and  conformational  information  (roughly,  bond  lengths, 
bond  angles,  and  other  three-dimensional  information).  The  format  for  speci- 
fying a  transform,  which  had  been  a  simple  fixed-field  input  form,  was 
redesigned  to  be  similar  to  the  ALCHEM  facility  in  SECS. 

Transforms  were  always  applied  serially  in  SYNCHEM,  that  is,  to  one 
functional  group  at  a  time  in  a  molecule.  A  new  feature  in  SYNCHEM2,  called 
multiple  match,  allows  the  program  to  apply  transforms  more  intelligently  to 
all  the  appropriate  functional  groups  in  a  molecule.  More  specifically,  the 
new  program  now  recognizes  that  multiple  occurrences  of  a  functional  group, 
under  certain  circumstances,  can  all  be  transformed  by  a  reaction. 

SYNCHEM  solution  evaluation.  The  following  quotation  (Gelernter 
et  al.,  1977)  illustrates  the  difference  between  organic  synthesis  and  a  more 
familiar  domain  like  theorem  proving: 

Unlike  much  of  the  earlier  work  in  problem  solving  . . .  where  any  formally 
valid  sequence  of  transformations  from  premises  to  goal  provided  an  accept- 
able solution,  we  were  not  to  be  satisfied  by  an  indicated  synthesis  route 
of  very  low  yield,  or  one  requiring  difficult  or  inefficient  separations  of  goal 
molecules  from  by-products  along  the  way,  at  least  not  before  the  machine 
had  tried  and  failed  to  find  a  more  efficient  procedure  of  higher  yield.  ...  It 


C4  Applications  in  Organic  Synthesis  141 

is  the  question  of  relative  merit  of  proposed  solutions  under  the  constraints 
of  the  problem  that  represents  a  substantial  departure  from  most  of  the 
work  reported  in  the  literature  of  artificial  intelligence,  (p.  1042) 

The  complexities  of  the  domain  are  highlighted  by  the  fate  of  one  of 
the  most  significant  results  produced  by  the  program.  SYNCHEM  proposed 
a  synthetic  route  for  a  naturally  occurring  antibiotic  that  was  at  that  time 
under  development  by  A.  R.  Rinehart's  group  at  the  University  of  Illinois.  The 
route  was  considered  interesting  enough  to  merit  a  laboratory  investigation. 
However,  the  laboratory  attempt  failed.  One  of  the  crucial  steps  in  the 
synthesis  route  could  not  be  accomplished  in  the  laboratory  and  the  proposed 
route  had  to  be  reluctantly  abandoned.  No  successful  routes  to  the  molecule 
have  yet  been  found.  All  synthetic  routes,  whether  proposed  by  a  computer 
program  like  SYNCHEM  or  by  a  person,  are  provisional  until  they  can  be 
verified  by  experiment. 

SYNCHEM's  Search  Strategy 

SYNCHEM's  search  algorithm  first  expands  the  goal  node  to  find  all  its 
precursors.  Next,  it  computes  the  cost  of  reaching  the  target  molecule  from 
the  precursors,  taking  into  account  the  efficiency  and  difficulty  of  the  reac- 
tions. It  also  estimates  the  difficulty  of  synthesizing  the  precursor  nodes 
from  the  available  starting  materials.  Subgoal  selection  criteria  are  a  func- 
tion both  of  the  accumulated  heuristic  estimates  of  reaction  merit  and  yield 
along  the  path  from  subgoal  to  goal  and  of  a  prediction  of  the  probable  reac- 
tion merit  and  yield  along  the  best  path  from  starting  materials  to  the  sub- 
goal.  SYNCHEM  updates  the  merit  ratings  with  information  associated  with 
each  intermediate  structure.  Merit,  as  mentioned  above,  is  based  on  most 
recent  estimates  of  compound  complexity  (i.e.,  difficulty  in  synthesizing  it) 
and  reaction-path  merit  (yield,  cost,  etc.)  after  each  cycle  of  subgoal  gener- 
ation. 

The  selection  of  a  new  subgoal  always  begins  with  a  new  scan  of  the 
tree  from  the  top.  Thus,  the  search  is  performed  in  a  best-first  manner:  If 
newly  acquired  information  changes  the  ratings  for  subgoals,  the  next  subgoal 
selected  can  lie  on  a  completely  different  branch  of  the  tree.  In  this  way,  the 
program  will  never  develop  an  unfortunate  choice  (pathway  down  to  starting 
materials)  before  backtracking  and  exploring  more  fruitful  branches. 

Summary 

Computer-aided  chemical  synthesis  is  a  potentially  powerful  new  tool  for 
both  research  and  industrial  chemists.  The  utility  of  any  of  the  programs  dis- 
cussed here  depends  critically  on  the  size  and  accuracy  of  their  knowledge  base 
of  organic  chemical  reactions.    Although  far  from  complete,  the  knowledge 


142  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

bases  now  contain  highly  detailed  descriptions  of  numerous  synthetic  reac- 
tions. All  of  the  programs  have  convincingly  demonstrated  their  ability  to 
find  plausible  synthetic  routes  for  important  organic  materials,  often  in  less 
time  than  chemists  working  alone.  The  SECS  program  has  a  user  community 
of  chemists  in  Europe  and  North  America,  who  add  new  transforms  as  well 
as  use  the  program  for  synthesis  planning.  The  effort  spent  on  human  engi- 
neering for  chemists  has  made  it  possible  for  chemists  to  use  the  program 
effectively  (and  to  want  to  use  it)  and  independently  of  the  program's  design- 
ers. One  of  the  long-range  hopes  of  chemists  and  computer  scientists  working 
in  computer-aided  organic  synthesis  is  that  this  work  on  knowledge  bases  will 
lead  to  an  improved  classification  of  chemical  reactions. 

Because  the  heuristic-search  paradigm  fits  the  synthesis-planning  prob- 
lem well,  Al  research  has  had  much  to  offer.  In  addition,  current  Al  work 
on  knowledge-based  expert  systems  provides  concepts  and  tools  for  repre- 
sentation and  management  of  these  large,  ever-changing  sets  of  chemical  facts 
and  relations. 

References 

See  Corey  and  Wipke  (1969),  Gelernter  et  al.  (1977),  Gund,  Andose,  and 
Rhodes  (1977),  and  Wipke  et  al.  (1977). 


D.     OTHER  SCIENTIFIC  APPLICATIONS 
Dl.     MACSYMA 


MACSYMA  is  a  large,  interactive  computer  system  designed  to  assist  mathe- 
maticians, scientists,  and  engineers  in  solving  mathematical  problems.  It  has 
a  wide  range  of  algebraic-manipulation  capabilities,  all  working  on  symbolic 
inputs  and  yielding  symbolic  results,  as  well  as  an  extensive  numerical  sub- 
routine library  (IMSL)  and  plotting  package.  (Other  mathematics-oriented  AI 
research  projects  are  discussed  in  Articles  II. D3  and  II. D4,  in  Vol.  I,  and  XTV.D4c, 
in  Vol.  III.) 

MACSYMA  is  used  extensively  by  hundreds  of  researchers  from  govern- 
ment laboratories,  universities,  and  private  companies  throughout  the  United 
States.  Many  of  these  users  spend  a  substantial  portion  of  every  day  logged  in 
to  the  system.  Currently,  MACSYMA  runs  exclusively  on  a  Digital  Equipment 
Corporation  KL-10  at  M.I.T.  and  is  accessed  through  the  ARPA  Network; 
however,  there  are  plans  to  distribute  it  to  other  sites  in  the  near  future. 
MACSYMA's  funding  is  provided  almost  exclusively  by  its  user  community. 

The  original  design  for  MACSYMA  was  laid  out  in  1968  by  Carl  Engleman, 
William  Martin,  and  Joel  Moses.  They  built  on  their  previous  experience  with 
the  Mathlab  68  system  and  on  the  doctoral  projects  of  Martin  and  Moses. 
Martin  had  constructed  an  algebraic-manipulation  system  to  solve  certain 
problems  in  applied  mathematics.  Moses  had  produced  a  program,  called  SIN, 
that  was  able  to  perform  indefinite  integration  as  well  as  a  typical  graduate 
student  could  (see  Article  II.D4,  in  Vol.  i).  MACSYMA  had  its  first  users  in 
1971  and  has  undergone  continuous  development  since  then,  for  a  total  of 
about  45  man-years  of  effort. 

The  implementation  of  MACSYMA  is  based  on  the  belief  that  the  way 
to  produce  a  high-performance  program  for  general  mathematics  is  to  build 
in  a  large  amount  of  knowledge.  This  approach  to  system  construction  is 
often  called  knowledge-based  programming  (see  Article  VILA).  MACSYMA  is 
an  extremely  large  system.  It  can  perform  at  least  600  distinct  mathematical 
operations,  including  differentiation,  integration,  solution  of  equations  and 
systems  of  equations,  Taylor  series  expansions,  matrix  operations,  vector  alge- 
bra, and  order  analysis.  The  current  system  consists  of  about  230,000  words 
of  compiled  LISP  code  and  an  equal  amount  of  code  written  in  the  MACSYMA 
programming  language.  About  half  of  this  code  was  written  by  the  staff  of 
the  MACSYMA  project;  the  rest  was  contributed  by  various  users. 

The  primary  goal  of  research  on  algebraic  manipulation  has  been  to 
invent  and  analyze  new  mathematical  algorithms  and  to  extend  previously 

143 


144  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

known  numerical  algorithms  to  symbolic  manipulation.  While  most  of  the 
algorithms  incorporated  into  MACSYMA  were  known  to  mathematicians  prior 
to  its  construction,  a  substantial  number  came  about  as  a  result  of  this 
research.  The  last  decade  brought  the  discovery  of  new  algorithms  for  finding 
the  greatest  common  divisors  of  polynomials  (Brown  and  Traub,  1971;  Moses 
and  Yun,  1973),  factoring  rational  expressions  (Musser,  1975;  Wang  and  Roth- 
schild, 1975),  sum  simplification  (Gosper,  1977),  symbolic  integration  (Moses, 
1971;  Norman,  1975;  Risch,  1969;  Rothstein,  1977;  Trager,  1978),  and  asymp- 
totic analysis  (Fateman,  1976;  Norman,  1975;  Zippel,  1976).  The  nature  of 
this  work  has  been  largely  mathematical  and,  although  AI  was  instrumental 
in  providing  the  environment  in  which  MACSYMA  was  created,  it  has  made 
little  direct  contribution  since  then. 

Knowledge-based  programming  does,  however,  engender  a  number  of  dif- 
ficulties for  which  AI  techniques  offer  partial  answers.  Two  general  classes 
of  difficulties  are  discussed  here:  (a)  user  education  and  (b)  the  handling  of 
mathematical  problems  not  amenable  to  algorithmic  solution. 

Nonalgorithmic  Procedures  in  MACSYMA 

One  of  the  most  pressing  problems  in  algebraic  manipulation  is  sim- 
plification. Symbolic  algorithms  often  generate  large,  unwieldy  expressions 
that  must  be  simplified  into  smaller,  more  meaningful  forms.  (Generally, 
the  size  of  expressions  is  the  most  important  criterion  for  simplicity,  with 
standard  formats  and  particularly  revealing  forms  taking  precedence.)  To 
help  users  simplify  their  results,  MACSYMA  provides  a  variety  of  explicit 
expression-transformation  commands  (such  as  expansion,  factorization,  and 
partial  fraction  decomposition)  and  a  simplifier  that  automatically  applies 
a  set  of  mathematical  rules  to  every  new  expression  as  it  is  constructed. 
Examples  of  these  rules  are: 

x  ■  x  — ►  x2 
sin(x  +  7r/2)  — ►  cosx 

log(ab)  — *  log  a  +  log  b 

The  user  can,  of  course,  define  new  commands  and  new  rules. 

Semantic  Pattern  Matching 

In  applying  a  simplification  rule,  MACSYMA  utilizes  a  semantic  pattern 
matcher  to  find  instances  of  the  rule's  pattern.  The  matcher  is  semantic  in 
that  it  applies  knowledge  about  the  operators  and  constants  in  an  expression  to 
find  nonsyntactic  matches.  For  example,  the  pattern  ax2  +  bx  +  c,  where  a,  b, 
and  c  are  pattern  variables  free  of  x,  will  match  the  expressions  Ax2  +  4x  +  1, 
2x2  +  x  +  1,  x2,  and  (x+1)2.    In  defining  a  rule,  the  user  may  specify  arbitrary 


Dl  MACSYMA  145 

conditions  (in  the  form  of  procedural  predicates)  on  the  pattern  variables. 
For  example,  determining  whether  an  expression  matches  the  above  pattern, 
MACSYMA  would  call  a  user-specified  function  to  check  that  any  tentative 
assignments  for  a,  6,  and  c  are  free  of  x.  As  a  result,  the  pattern  would  not 
match  Ax2  +  3x  +  sin  x. 

One  problem  with  this  pattern  matcher  is  that  the  user  cannot  control 
how  much  "semantics"  the  system  uses  in  finding  a  match.  A  recently  com- 
pleted pattern  matcher  allows  the  user  to  specify  a  set  of  identities  to  use  in 
attempting  to  identify  instances  of  patterns.  For  example,  while  it  is  often 
desirable  that  the  matcher  use  inverses,  in  some  situations  a  user  might  prefer 
a  simpler  matcher,  lest  the  rule  ab  — ►  c  apply  to  every  lone  a  and  b,  as  in 
b  — >  c/a.  With  the  new  pattern  matcher,  the  user  will  be  able  to  specify  when 
the  inverse  axioms  are  to  be  used. 

Simplification  by  Hill  Climbing 

While  the  size  of  an  expression  is  not  the  sole  criterion  for  its  simplicity, 
it  is  a  useful  guideline.  For  those  applications  in  which  the  user  desires 
the  smallest  possible  form  for  an  expression,  MACSYMA  provides  a  search- 
oriented  simplifier  called  SCSIMP.  Given  an  expression  and  a  set  of  rules, 
SCSIMP  applies  each  of  the  rules  to  the  expression,  in  turn,  and  retains  the 
smallest  result.  If  any  such  substitution  leads  to  an  expression  smaller  than 
the  original,  the  process  is  repeated.  For  example,  given  the  identities  below, 
SCSIMP  will  convert  the  first  expression  into  the  last. 

Given:  K2  +  L2  =  1  N2  -  M2  =  1 

First  expression:  K2N2  +  K2M2N2  -  K2L2N2-K2L2 M2N2 

Intermediate:  K4M2N2  +  K4N2  (substituting  for  L) 

Final  expression:  K4N4  (substituting  for  M) 

Note,  however,  that  because  SCSIMP  is  a  hill-climbing  algorithm,  it  is 
not  guaranteed  to  produce  the  smallest  answer.  For  example,  it  would  not 
perform  the  simplification  shown  below,  since  the  intermediate  expression  is 
larger  than  the  initial  expression. 

First  expression:         K2N2  +  L2M2 

Intermediate  form:     K2N2  —  K2M2  +  M2     (substituting  for  L) 

Simplest  form:  K2  +  M2  (substituting  for  N) 

Due  to  the  combinatorics  involved  in  generating  arbitrarily  large  intermediate 
forms,  this  technique  has  not  been  incorporated  into  the  current  version  of 
SCSIMP. 


146  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

The  Relational  Database  and  Inference 

In  certain  problems,  the  symbols  in  mathematical  expressions  have  restric- 
tions on  their  ranges  or  on  other  properties  that  are  useful  in  simplification. 
To  allow  the  user  to  specify  such  properties,  MACSYMA  maintains  a  rela- 
tional database  of  facts  about  symbols,  stored  in  the  form  of  a  semantic  net- 
work. For  example,  a  user  can  declare  (with  the  DECLARE  command)  that 
the  symbol  n  is  restricted  to  integer  values,  and  MACSYMA  can  then  simplify 
cos((2n  -f  1)/tt)  to  0.  Similarly,  one  can  specify  (with  the  ASSUME  command) 
that  x  <  y,  y  <  z,  and  z  <  x,  and  MACSYMA  can  then  deduce  that 
x  =  y  =  z  (using  the  CPM  algorithm  described  below). 

The  database  retrieval  routines  are  supplemented  by  a  fast  but  limited 
inference  algorithm  called  CPM  (Genesereth,  1976),  which  performs  taxonomic 
deductions,  property  inheritances,  set  intersections,  and  other  simple  infer- 
ences. For  example,  given  the  facts  that  x  is  an  integer,  integers  are  rational, 
and  the  real  numbers  are  partitioned  into  rationals  and  irrationals,  CPM 
automatically  deduces  that  x  is  not  an  irrational.  Given  the  fact  that  a 
rational  can  be  written  as  an  integral  numerator  over  an  integral  denominator, 
CPM  automatically  deduces  that  x  can  be  so  written. 

The  CPM  inference  algorithm  was  developed  to  enhance  the  retrieval 
capabilities  of  a  high-level  database  system  organized  as  a  semantic  network. 
It  is  an  elaboration  of  Grossman's  work  (1976)  on  constraint  expressions 
but  has  been  carefully  restricted  so  that  it  can  be  implemented  on  parallel 
hardware.  The  algorithm  is  a  highly  compiled  form  of  domain-independent 
constraint  propagation,  in  which  constraints,  represented  by  labels  on  the 
nodes  of  the  network,  propagate  across  links  to  other  nodes  according  to 
the  laws  of  logic.  It  can  perform  certain  inferences  much  more  efficiently 
than  their  straightforward  implementation  in  procedural  problem-solving  lan- 
guages like  CONNIVER.  Fahlman  (1977)  has  described  how  such  a  constraint- 
propagation  algorithm  can  be  implemented  in  parallel  hardware  for  even 
greater  efficiency. 

Heuristic  Problem  Solving 

MACSYMA  also  includes  a  number  of  specialized  procedural  problem- 
solvers,  for  example,  the  first  phase  of  the  integration  routine  (Moses,  1971), 
the  commands  for  performing  root  contraction  and  logarithmic  contraction, 
and  the  inequality  theorem  prover. 

User  Education 

The  advantage  of  a  large,  knowledge-based  system  like  MACSYMA  over 
a  smaller,  sparer  system  like  REDUCE  (Hearn,  1973)  is  that  MACSYMA  has 
more  mathematical  knowledge  built  in.  As  a  consequence,  the  users  are  not 


Dl  MACSYMA  147 

forced  to  communicate  as  much  mathematical  knowledge  to  the  system.  The 
disadvantage  is  that  MACSYMA  can  be  more  difficult  to  understand  and  to 
use.  For  example,  users  might  be  unaware  of  the  capabilities  available  or  not 
know  the  commands,  or  they  might  get  unexpected  results  that  they  cannot 
explain. 

To  minimize  these  difficulties,  MACSYMA  offers  a  wide  variety  of  on-line 
user  aids  (Genesereth,  1977;  Lewis,  1977),  including  a  frame- oriented  inter- 
active primer,  an  information  network,  and  a  program  for  searching  the  ref- 
erence manual.  In  addition,  some  of  MACSYMA's  commands  are  designed 
to  be  able  to  explain  their  progress.  For  example,  if  the  VERBOSE  option  is 
selected,  the  POWERSERIES  command  prints  out  the  goals  and  subgoals  that 
it  generates  while  working  on  an  expansion. 

Even  with  such  provisions,  users  occasionally  encounter  difficulties  because 
they  do  not  know  the  system.  Furthermore,  such  users  are  often  unwilling 
to  learn  more  about  MACSYMA  than  is  necessary  for  solving  an  immediate 
problem.  The  simplest  way  for  such  users  to  acquire  just  the  information  they 
need  is  to  ask  a  consultant  for  help.  With  the  consultant's  advice,  they  can 
surmount  the  difficulty  and  solve  the  problems. 

Consultation  is  a  method  widely  used  in  computer  centers  as  well  as  in 
business,  law,  and  medicine;  furthermore,  as  computer  technology  becomes 
more  pervasive  and  computer  systems  become  more  complex,  the  need  for 
consultation  grows.  Unfortunately,  human  consultants  are  a  scarce  resource 
and  quite  expensive.  An  experimental  version  of  an  automated  consultant  for 
MACSYMA  novices,  called  the  Advisor,  has  recently  been  implemented.  It 
is  a  program  with  its  own  database  and  expertise,  distinct  from  MACSYMA. 
The  Advisor  accepts  a  description  of  a  difficulty  from  its  user  and  tries  to 
reconstruct  the  user's  plan  for  solving  his  (or  her)  problem.  Based  on  this  plan 
and  its  knowledge  of  MACSYMA,  the  Advisor  then  generates  advice  tailored 
to  the  user's  specific  need.  For  a  description  of  the  Advisor's  operation,  see 
Genesereth  (1978). 

Future  Plans 

In  addition  to  the  features  described  above,  several  other  Al-related 
capabilities  are  under  development  in  MACSYMA.  Two  of  these  are  men- 
tioned here,  namely,  a  new  representation  for  algebraic  expressions  using 
data  abstractions  and  a  knowledge-based,  plan-based  mathematician's  (or 
physicist's,  or  engineer's)  "apprentice." 

David  Barton  has  designed  a  radically  new  scheme  for  representing  alge- 
braic expressions.  MACSYMA  has  two  major  representations,  the  general  one 
that  uses  LISP's  traditional  prefix  format  and  the  rational  one  that  uses  a 
canonical  form  for  polynomials  and  rational  functions.  The  rational  repre- 
sentation has  become  unwieldy  over  the  years,  as  extensions  to  the  system 
have  changed  its  specifications.  For  example,  coefficients  of  polynomials  were 


148  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

originally  assumed  to  be  integers  and  were  later  generalized  to  include  floating- 
point numbers.  A  new  representation  was  desired  to  handle  Taylor  series  that 
contains  rational-number  exponents,  since  the  former  representation,  while 
relatively  close  to  the  rational  representation,  could  not  be  retrofitted  onto 
the  rational  representation.  Barton's  approach  alleviates  these  difficulties  and 
provides  a  capability  for  future  generalization.  His  approach  is,  furthermore, 
a  natural  one  for  abstract  algebra. 

Consider,  for  example,  a  2  X  2  matrix  whose  elements  are  Laurent  series 
in  y  (truncated  at  y2),  whose  coefficients  are  polynomials  in  x,  with  rational 
coefficients.  In  order  to  add  such  a  2  X  2  matrix  to  another  2x2  matrix, 
one  needs  to  know  how  to  add  the  elements.  One  approach  would  be  to 
design  a  general  addition  routine  that  would  check  the  types  of  each  argu- 
ment and  perform  the  appropriate  addition.  This  approach  is  similar  to  the 
one  previously  taken  by  the  rational-function  representation.  In  a  symbolic 
system,  and,  in  fact,  in  most  applications,  the  type  of  object  is  intimately 
related  to  a  set  of  operations  that  can  be  performed  on  it.  In  the  MACSYMA 
context,  these  operations  include  addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  divi- 
sion, differentiation,  substitution,  coefficient  extraction,  and  computation  of 
greatest  common  denominator.  Barton's  approach  is  to  attach  a  tree  of  vec- 
tors to  each  expression.  The  tree  corresponds  to  the  gross  structure  of  the 
expression.  For  example,  each  subexpression,  an  element  in  the  matrix,  has 
a  vector  corresponding  to  it.  The  vector's  elements  are  in  a  fixed  order  and 
contain  pointers  to  the  procedures  that  perform  the  corresponding  operation 
on  the  type  of  the  subexpression. 

Barton's  approach  permits  expressions  to  be  composed  of  arbitrarily 
nested  types.  This  is  a  critical  requirement  in  an  interactive  symbolic  sys- 
tem. Preliminary  tests  of  expressions  represented  in  this  manner  indicate  that 
common  manipulations  are  usually  not  much  slower,  and  often  even  faster, 
than  in  the  former  implementation.  (The  reason  for  a  speed-up  is  that  less 
type-testing  is  needed  in  this  approach.) 

Work  has  also  begun  on  the  design  of  an  apprentice  for  the  MACSYMA 
user.  At  present,  MACSYMA  is  used  mostly  as  a  "symbolic  calculator,"  with 
the  user  directing  its  actions  line  by  line  and  keeping  track  of  the  meaning  of 
each  result.  The  goal  of  the  apprentice  is  to  relieve  the  user  of  much  of  this 
bookkeeping.  The  approach  being  taken  involves  two  components,  namely, 
knowledge  about  the  user's  domain  and  the  use  of  a  high-level,  problem- 
solving  plan  formalism. 

Currently,  most  symbols  in  MACSYMA  have  no  special  meaning,  and  they 
can  take  on  arbitrary  values.  In  particular  problem  areas,  however,  certain 
symbols  have  particular  interpretations  and  range  restrictions.  For  example, 
the  symbol  MASS  has  a  very  special  meaning  to  physicists  and  an  obvious 
range  restriction  (nonnegative).  A  physicist's  apprentice  should  know  this 
range  restriction  and  be  able  to  use  it,  for  example,  in  discarding  negative 
roots  or  performing  integrations.     Similarly,   practitioners  in  certain  fields 


Dl  MACSYMA  149 

like  to  see  their  expressions  written  in  standard  formats,  determined  by  the 
interpretation  of  the  constituent  symbols.  For  example,  electrical  engineers 
usually  prefer  resistance  (Rl)  and  capacitance  (C{)  expressions  written  as 
f(R\ ,  R2,  •  •  •  ,Rn)-  g(C\ ,  C2,  ...  ,Cn),  rather  than  having  the  Rt  and  Cx  inter- 
mixed. 

Another  way  that  an  apprentice  could  be  of  use  in  MACSYMA  is  by 
keeping  track  of  the  user's  plan  for  solving  his  problem.  If  the  apprentice 
knows  the  steps  involved  and  the  significance  of  various  results,  it  could  inform 
the  user  of  potential  errors,  make  suggestions,  and  in  many  cases  carry  out 
steps  by  itself.  The  apprentice  can  gain  familiarity  with  the  user's  plan  in 
various  ways:  It  may  be  a  well-known  mathematical  procedure  (e.g.,  some 
standard  technique  for  solving  partial  differential  equations  or  perturbation 
problems),  the  user  may  have  described  his  intentions  before  beginning  his 
MACSYMA  session,  or  the  user  may  reapply  some  previous  plan.  It  is  expected 
that  this  notion  of  a  problem-solving  plan  will  play  an  extremely  important 
role  in  the  next  generation  of  algebraic-manipulation  systems. 

References 

Unfortunately,  there  is  no  good  introductory  reference  on  the  structure 
of  MACSYMA.  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  MACSYMA  manual  (Mathlab 
Group,  1977)  and  the  primer  (Moses,  1975)  for  an  introduction  to  its  use. 


D2.     The  SRI  Computer-based  Consultant 


A  COMPUTER-BASED  CONSULTANT  (CBC)  is  a  computer  system  that  con- 
tains a  body  of  specialized  knowledge  about  a  particular  task  domain  and 
makes  that  knowledge  conveniently  available  to  users  working  in  that  domain. 
This  article  describes  some  research  done  at  SRI  International  in  the  early 
1970s  on  a  computer-based  consultant  designed  to  help  a  novice  mechanic 
work  with  electromechanical  equipment.  The  goal  of  this  research  is  to  build 
a  system  that  approximates  a  human  consultant  in  its  communication  and 
perceptual  skills,  as  well  as  in  its  reasoning  and  problem-solving  skills. 

The  consultant  was  designed  to  answer  the  user's  spoken  questions  and 
to  monitor  his  (or  her)  progress  on  the  task,  offering  advice  and  reminders 
where  necessary.  To  fit  the  needs  of  a  particular  user,  it  is  essential  that  the 
system  be  able  to  provide  advice  about  the  task  at  several  levels  of  detail.  To 
determine  the  appropriate  level  of  detail,  the  CBC  must  form  a  model  of  the 
user,  monitor  his  performance  as  he  executes  the  task,  and  update  internal 
models  to  reflect  the  current  state  of  the  task  environment. 

Design  of  the  Computer-based  Consultant 

The  particular  task  of  the  SRI  computer-based  consultant  is  to  help  an 
inexperienced  mechanic  repair  and  modify  complex  electromechanical  equip- 
ment. The  mechanic  works  on  a  piece  of  equipment  at  a  special  work  station 
where  he  is  provided  with  a  headset  that  allows  him  both  to  talk  to  the  sys- 
tem and  to  receive  spoken  replies  in  English.  The  system  has  a  commercial 
phoneme-synthesizer  for  giving  spoken  responses  to  the  user  and  a  commer- 
cial phrase-recognizer  for  understanding  his  speech.  A  television  camera  and 
a  laser  range-finder  provide  the  visual  component  for  the  system.  The  laser 
range-finder  can  also  work  as  a  visual  pointer,  so  that  the  system  can  respond 
to  requests  such  as  "Show  me  the  pressure  switch"  by  illuminating  it  with  the 
laser  beam. 

Requests  for  information  by  the  user  are  translated  into  an  internal  repre- 
sentation, or  model,  by  the  natural-language  and  visual  components  of  the  sys- 
tem. These  models  are  used  to  structure  communications  with  the  mechanic 
as  he  performs  the  task.  For  example,  a  question  about  the  location  of  a  part 
( "Where  is  the  pump  brace?" )  is  answered  by  reference  to  a  stored  geometric 
model  that  keeps  track  of  the  spatial  relations  between  the  parts.  Other 
models  are  necessary  for  the  natural-language  components  of  the  system;  for 
instance,  a  discourse  model  is  needed  to  understand  a  spoken  utterance. 


150 


D2  The  SRI  Computer-based  Consultant  151 

Planning  a  Sequence  of  Constructions 

The  user  of  the  CBC  can  request  that  it  plan  a  sequence  of  assembly  steps 
and  relate  this  sequence  to  him  for  execution.  The  CBC  has  a  state-of-the- 
art  planning  component  for  composing  assembly  and  disassembly  sequences 
(see  Chap.  XV,  in  Vol.  III).  There  are  several  kinds  of  knowledge  that  are 
important  in  the  planning  process.  First,  there  is  the  model  of  the  equipment 
itself,  in  this  case,  an  air  compressor,  which  is  essentially  a  graph  whose  nodes 
correspond  to  the  parts  of  the  compressor  and  whose  arcs  correspond  to  the 
mechanical  connection  between  the  parts.  Second,  each  type  of  connection 
has  associated  with  it  a  set  of  procedures  that  tells  how  that  connection  is 
physically  established.  Third,  each  of  these  procedures  may  contain  calls  to 
other  procedures  that  elaborate  how  a  job  is  done. 

This  hierarchy  of  procedural  knowledge  forms  the  basis  for  producing 
plans  that  can  be  presented  to  the  user  at  several  levels  of  detail.  The 
procedural  model  is  used  by  the  planning  program  to  determine  the  order 
in  which  parts  should  be  assembled.  The  planning  program  initially  assumes 
that  the  parts  can  be  connected  in  any  order.  By  checking  preconditions 
and  the  effects  of  performing  each  step,  it  reorders  the  steps  in  the  plan  to 
eliminate  conflicts.  For  example,  the  pump  can  be  installed  only  if  there  is 
no  pulley  on  its  shaft.  The  planner  recognizes  this  fact  and  imposes  an  order 
on  the  plan  so  that  the  pump  will  be  installed  before  its  pulley  is  placed  on 
the  shaft.  When  all  the  conflicts  have  been  resolved,  the  remaining  steps  of 
the  plan  can  be  solved  in  any  order.  This  ability — to  recognize  alternative 
orderings  in  a  plan — is  important  for  a  computer-based  consultant:  The  user 
may  take  the  initiative  and  proceed  with  certain  steps  of  the  assembly  on  his 
own,  and  the  planner  must  recognize  that  the  steps  being  taken  are  valid. 

The  plan  is  represented  as  a  data  structure  called  a  procedural  net  (see 
Article  XV.Dl,  in  Vol.  III).  A  sample  net  is  shown  in  Figure  D2-1.  Each 
node  corresponds  to  an  assembly  step  at  some  level  of  detail.  The  procedural 
net  is  actually  a  hierarchy  of  plans,  all  of  which  accomplish  the  same  task 
but  at  varying  levels  of  detail.  The  2  th  row  in  the  net  corresponds  to  a  plan 
specified  at  the  i th  level  of  detail.  Notice  that  the  plan  splits  into  two  paths  at 
level  2,  indicating  that  the  two  subplans  can  be  performed  in  either  order.  The 
branching  vertical  lines  indicate  the  expansion  of  a  step  into  a  more  detailed 
subplan. 

The  procedural  net  is  useful  for  the  specification  of  plans  at  the  various 
levels  of  detail  required  by  the  user.  The  net  is  also  used  during  planning 
to  represent  partially  formed  plans,  so  that  the  planning  component  of  the 
system  can  be  restarted  during  execution  to  modify  an  existing  plan  if.  for 
example,  new  information  requiring  replanning  is  discovered  as  the  assembly 
proceeds. 


152 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science 


VII 


Level  0 


Assemble 

Air 

Compressor 


Level  1 


Install 
Motor 


Level  2 


Connect 
Motor  to 
Platform 


Install 
Pump 


Install 
Motor 
Pulley 


Connect 
Pump  to 
Platform 


Install 
Pump 
Brace 


Connect 

Pump  Pulley 

to  Pump 


Connect 

After-cooler  Elbow 

to  Pump 


Figure  D2-1.     A  fragment  of  a  procedural  net  (after  Hart,  1975). 


The  system  keeps  an  internal  model  of  the  connectedness  of  the  different 
components  of  the  air  compressor  as  it  is  being  assembled  or  disassembled.  It 
also  keeps  a  "graphical"  model  of  the  locations  of  the  different  components  of 
the  air  compressor.  For  example,  the  graphical  model  knows  about  the  pump, 
motor,  pressure  switch,  and  so  forth,  and  the  connectivity  model  knows  about 
all  the  visible  components. 


D2  The  SRI  Computer-based  Consultant  153 

Interfacing  to  the  Real  World:  Vision  and  Dialogue 

Visual  processing  is  especially  difficult  in  the  domain  of  electromechanical 
machinery  because  the  components  usually  have  only  a  limited  range  of  color 
and  texture  for  a  great  variety  of  possible  shapes.  Shadows  and  highlights  also 
depend  on  the  stage  of  the  assembly  process.  For  these  reasons,  an  approach 
has  been  taken  that  capitalizes  on  prior  knowledge  of  visual  appearances 
and  geometric  relations:  There  is  a  "tool  recognizer"  that  accepts  a  limited 
semantic  description  of  a  tool,  builds  a  model  of  the  tool  from  this  description, 
and  uses  this  model  to  differentiate  the  tool's  image  from  those  of  the  probable 
alternatives. 

There  are  two  other  visual  modules,  both  of  which  rely  on  stored  geometric 
models  of  the  equipment.  The  first  module  allows  the  CBC  to  respond  to 
requests  of  the  form  "Show  me  the  X"  It  points  to  X  with  the  laser  range- 
finder,  which  is  accomplished  by  locating  the  outline  of  the  visible  surface 
of  X.  The  final  module  allows  the  user  to  ask,  "What  part  is  this?"  while  he 
is  pointing  at  the  unknown  part  with  a  special  wand  equipped  with  a  small 
light  at  its  tip. 

The  following  is  a  portion  of  a  dialogue  between  a  novice  mechanic  (whose 
input  is  preceded  by  **)  and  the  CBC  on  the  task  "Assemble  the  air  compres- 
sor." The  example  is  taken  from  Hart  (1975). 

Try  to  achieve  assembled  aircompressor . 

**  How? 

The  top  level  plan  is  . . .  install  pump  . . . 
install  pumpbrace  . . .  install  pumppulley  . . . 
install  belt  . . .  install  belthousingcover  . . . 
Ready  for  questions . 

*  *  Show  me  the  pump . 

Laser  beam  moves  to  point  at  pump. 

Ready  for  questions . 


**  What  is  this? 

User  points  with  wand  at  tank  platform. 

Tank  platform. 
Ready  for  questions. 

**  None. 

Install  pump. 


154  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

**  How? 

Connect  pump  to  platform. 

**  How? 

Get  4  1&  1/4-inch  5/16  hexagonal  bolts  and  4  9/16  flat  washers 
and  4  size  5/16  hexagonal  nuts . 

**  OK. 

Summary 

The  main  goal  of  the  research  on  the  SRI  computer-based  consultant 
was  to  create  the  fundamental  technology  needed  to  build  such  consultant 
systems.  Much  of  this  technology  is  independent  of  the  domain  chosen  and 
of  the  details  of  the  task  environment. 

Work  on  the  electromechanical  CBC  described  here  was  stopped  in  April 
1975.  Since  then,  a  new  consultant  project  has  been  under  way  at  SRI 
International  extending  many  of  the  ideas  from  the  1975  system  and  add- 
ing new  features.  The  new  consultant  system  is  being  used  in  two  entirely 
different  domains:  mineral  exploration  (see  Article  VII. D3)  and  agricultural  pest 
management.  It  appears  that  computer  consultants  are  likely  to  remain  both 
a  fruitful  area  for  AI  research  and  a  practical  means  of  deploying  knowledge 
to  people  working  in  the  specific  task  domains. 

References 

See  Hart  (1975)  and  Nilsson  (1975). 


D3.     PROSPECTOR 


PROSPECTOR  (Duda  et  al.,  1978)  is  a  computer-based  consultation  system 
that  is  being  developed  at  SRI  International  to  assist  geologists  working  on 
certain  problems  in  "hard-rock"  mineral  exploration.  Like  other  expert  sys- 
tems, such  as  MYCIN  (see  Article  VIII.Bl)  and  INTERNIST  (Article  VIII.B3), 
PROSPECTOR  attempts  to  represent  a  significant  portion  of  the  knowledge 
and  the  reasoning  processes  of  experts  working  in  a  specialized  domain.  The 
intended  user  of  this  program  is  an  exploration  geologist  who  is  in  the  early 
stages  of  investigating  an  exploration  site,  or  "prospect."  We  assume  that  he 
(or  she)  has  a  professional  understanding  of  geology  but,  nonetheless,  wants 
the  assistance  of  a  specialist  in  evaluating  the  findings. 

In  an  attempt  to  keep  the  PROSPECTOR  system  domain-independent,  a 
clear  separation  is  maintained  between  the  geological  knowledge  base  and  the 
mechanisms  that  employ  this  knowledge  (although  characteristics  of  the  prob- 
lem domain  have  certainly  influenced  the  design  of  the  system).  Expressed 
abstractly,  the  main  function  of  PROSPECTOR  is  to  match  data  from  a  par- 
ticular situation  against  models  that  describe  a  moderately  large  number  of 
disjoint  classes  of  situations.  In  PROSPECTOR'S  domain,  the  models  are  for- 
mal descriptions  of  the  most  important  types  of  ore  deposits,  and  the  data  are 
primarily  surface  geological  observations.  The  available  data  are  assumed  to 
be  uncertain  and  incomplete,  so  that  the  conclusion  is  expressed  as  a  probabil- 
ity or  a  degree  of  match.  In  addition,  the  program  alerts  the  user  to  different 
possible  interpretations  of  the  data  and  identifies  additional  observations  that 
would  be  most  valuable  for  reaching  a  more  definite  conclusion. 

A  typical  consultation  session  with  PROSPECTOR  begins  with  the  user 
giving  the  system  the  information  about  the  most  significant  features  of  his 
prospect:  the  major  rock  types,  minerals,  and  alteration  products.  The 
program  matches  these  observations  against  its  models  and,  when  the  user 
has  finished  volunteering  information,  proceeds  to  ask  the  user  for  additional 
information  that  will  help  confirm  the  best  matching  model.  At  any  time 
during  the  consultation,  the  user  can  interrupt  to  volunteer  new  information, 
change  previous  statements,  or  request  an  evaluation. 

The  following  edited  excerpt  from  a  PROSPECTOR  session  illustrates 
many  of  these  ideas.  The  data  for  the  run  describe  a  fictitious  porphyry  copper 
deposit  that  has  some,  but  not  all,  of  the  desired  characteristics.  We  begin  at 
the  point  where  the  user  (indicated  by  **)  starts  volunteering  information  to 
the  system. 

**  There  is  quartz  monzonite 
Quartz  monzonite  (5) 


155 


156  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

**  There  is  a  cretaceous  dike 

Cretaceous  dike  (5) 

**  There  is  sericite  and  pyrite 

Sericite  (5)  pyrite  (5) 

**  There  may  be  biotite 

Biotite  (2) 

**  Done 

These  simple  assertions  describe  the  most  prominent  rocks,  minerals,  and 
alteration  products  in  the  target  area.  The  system  indicates  its  recognition 
of  each  statement  by  echoing  the  statement  and  appending  an  assigned 
certainty.  Certainty  factors  range  from  —  5  (positive  that  a  situation 
does  not  hold)  to  5  (positive  that  it  does  hold).  All  assertions  made 
by  PROSPECTOR  have  associated  certainty  factors.  The  program  now 
enters  the  consequent  mode  of  reasoning. 

Presently,  the  models  in  PROSPECTOR  and  their  scores  are: 

1.  Komatiitic  nickel  sulfide  deposit  --  KNSD  (0.0) 

2.  Type-A  porphyry  copper  deposit  —  PCDA  (0.0) 
++current  hypothesis++ 

3.  Kuroko-type  massive  sulfide  deposit  --  MSD  (.001999) 

4.  Western-states-type  sandstone  uranium  deposit  --  WSSU  (0.0) 

5.  Mississippi-Valley-type  lead/zinc  deposit  —  MVTD  (-4.8) 
Which  of  the  above  would  you  like  to  rule  out? 

**  None 

The  volunteered  information  was  sufficient  to  rule  out  one  of  the  models 
but  was  not  nearly  specific  enough  to  establish  any  of  the  others.  The 
choice  of  the  second  model  as  the  current  hypothesis  was  based  not  on 
its  certainty  but  on  the  number  and  types  of  connections  between  it  and 
the  volunteered  statements.  To  avoid  a  possibly  fruitless  investigation  of 
unpromising  models,  the  system  gives  the  user  the  opportunity  to  exclude 
models  of  lesser  interest.  In  this  case,  the  user  allows  all  of  the  models 
to  be  explored,  and  the  system  begins  with  the  current  hypothesis. 

I  am  considering  the  possibility  of  a 

(  Type-A  porphyry  copper  deposit  —  PCDA  ) 

in  the  target  area. 

The  following  questions  are  intended  to  establish  the  nature 
of  the  petrotectonic  setting. 

1 — To  what  degree  do  you  believe  that: 

(  the  target  area  is  in  a  continental  margin  mobile  belt  )  ? 

**  -2 


D3  PROSPECTOR  157 

This  is  a  discouraging  answer  for  the  PCDA  model,  and  it  removes  a 
context  needed  for  the  investigation  of  other  properties  of  the  continental- 
margin  mobile  belt. 

The  following  questions  are  intended  to  determine  the  nature 
of  the  regional  environment. 

2 — To  what  degree  do  you  believe  that: 

(  there  are  granitic  intrusives  in  the  region  )  ? 

**  5 

3 — To  what  degree  do  you  believe  that: 

(  the  region  contains  an  abundance  of  small  stocks  )  ? 


8 — To  what  degree  do  you  believe  that: 

(  igneous  rocks  in  the  region  have  porphyritic  texture  )  ? 

**  Why 

I  am  trying  to  establish  whether  some  of  the  intrusive  rocks  in 
your  area  have  textures  suggestive  of  a  hypabyssal  to  subvolcanic 
environment.   Porphyry  textures  resulting  from  the  rapid  cooling 
and  crystallization  of  a  silicate  melt  which  contains  large 
mineral  grains  are  suggestive  of  relatively  shallow  levels 
of  emplacement. 

Like  MYCIN,  PROSPECTOR  provides  a  variety  of  commands  for  such 
things  as  requesting  a  summary,  changing  previous  answers,  or  volun- 
teering additional  information.  The  above  response  to  a  WHY  command 
is  not  automatically  generated  from  the  rule  but  is  merely  stored  text 
associated  with  the  space. 

8 To  what  degree  do  you  believe  that: 

(  igneous  rocks  in  the  region  have  porphyritic  texture  )  ? 

**  5 

My  certainty  in  (  the  texture  and  morphology  of  the  intrusive 
system  suggest  a  subvolcanic  (hypabyssal)  regional  environment  ) 
is  now:  4.924 

Do  you  want  to  pursue  this  further? 

**  No 

At  this  point  the  system  noted  that  the  certainty  for  the  hypothesis  about 
a  hypabyssal  environment  was  above  4-5,  and  it  also  noted  that  if  the 
remaining  rules  were  answered  in  the  most  unfavorable  way  possible,  the 
certainty  could  not  fall  below  4-5.  To  save  time,  it  let  the  user  decide 
whether  or  not  to  continue  working  on  this  subgoal. 


158  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

The  questioning  continues  as  above  until  it  becomes  necessary  to  consider 
properties  that  vary  within  the  target  area.  Thus,  for  the  first  time  it 
becomes  necessary  to  be  able  to  use  the  rules  more  than  once,  and  a 
communication  convention  must  be  established  to  distinguish  different 
spatial  locations. 

Porphyry  copper  deposits  are  often  composed  of   characteristic 
zones   of   alteration  and  mineralization.       (In  some   cases   these 
can  be  looked  upon  as  different  stages   superimposed  upon  one 
another.)      I   shall  call  the  most  prominent  such  zone  Zone   1. 
Even  though  you  may  have  already  identified  this   zone  as,    say, 
the  propylitic   zone  or  the   sericitic   zone,    I  need  to  consider 
other  possibilities  as  well.      Thus,    the  following  questions 
are  intended  to  determine  the  possibilities   for  Zone   1. 

25 — To  what  degree  do  you  believe  that: 

(  there  are  fresh-looking  feldspars   in  Zone   1   )    ? 

**   -5 

Questioning  continues  in  this  manner.  Eventually,  PROSPECTOR  estab- 
lishes that  two  zones  exist  in  the  region  of  interest  and,  after  examin- 
ing each  in  detail,  it  concludes  that  their  geologic  makeup  supports  the 
hypothesis  that  Type-A  porphyry  copper  exists  in  the  region. 

On  a  scale  from  -5  to  5,    my  certainty  that    (  there  are  alteration 
zones   that  are  favorable  for  a  Type-A  porphyry  copper  deposit  ) 
is  now  4.833 

There  are  two  favorable  factors;    in  order  of   importance: 
2.3.1:    1.      there   is   a  sericitic   zone  in  Zone   1    (4.834) 

+  +   establishes   2.3.1    ++ 
2.3.1:    2.      there   is   a  potassic   zone   in  Zone   2    (4.499) 

There  are  many  factors  that  would  have  been  unfavorable  had  no 
favorable  factor  existed  to  override  them;    in  order  of   importance: 

there  is  a  barren-core   zone  in  Zone   1    (-5.0) 

there  is  a  potassic   zone  in  Zone   1    (-5.0) 

there  is  a  propylitic   zone   in  Zone   1    (-5.0) 

there  is  a  sericitic   zone   in  Zone  2    (-5.0) 

there  is  a  propylitic   zone   in  Zone   2    (-4.989) 

there  is  a  barren-core   zone   in  Zone   2    (-4.495) 

For  which  of   the  above  do  you  wish  to  see  additional   information? 


Knowledge  Representation 

The  data  structure  for  representing  the  geological  knowledge  embodied 
in  PROSPECTOR  is  called  the  inference  network  and  guides  the  plausible 
reasoning  performed  by  the  system.  The  nodes  in  this  network  correspond  to 
various  assertions,  such  as  There  is  pervasively  biotized  hornblende  or  There 


2.3.1 

3. 

2.3.1 

4. 

2.3.1 

5. 

2.3.1 

6. 

2.3.1 

7. 

2.3.1 

8. 

D3  PROSPECTOR  159 

is  alteration  favorable  for  the  potassic  zone  of  a  porphyry  copper  deposit.  In 
a  particular  run,  any  assertion  may  be  known  to  be  true,  known  to  be  false, 
or  suspected  to  be  true  with  some  probability. 

Most  of  the  arcs  in  the  inference  network  define  inference  rules  that  specify 
how  the  probability  of  one  assertion  affects  the  probability  of  another  asser- 
tion. For  example,  the  presence  of  pervasively  biotized  hornblende  suggests 
the  potassic  zone  of  a  porphyry  copper  deposit,  and  the  absence  of  any  biotized 
hornblende  is  very  discouraging  for  that  conclusion.  These  inference  rules  cor- 
respond to  the  production  rules  used  in  MYCIN.  The  remaining  arcs  indicate 
that  an  assertion  is  the  context  for  another  assertion,  preventing  conclusions 
from  being  drawn  until  the  right  contexts  are  established.  For  example,  one 
should  establish  that  hornblende  has  been  altered  to  biotite  before  asking 
about  the  degree  of  alteration. 

The  primary  task  confronting  a  geologist  who  wants  to  prepare  a  new 
model  for  PROSPECTOR  is  the  representation  of  his  model  as  an  inference  net- 
work. The  current  system  contains  models  of  five  different  types  of  deposits, 
developed  in  cooperation  with  five  different  consulting  geologists.  The  statis- 
tics in  Table  D3-1  give  a  rough  indication  of  the  size  and  complexity  of  these 
models. 

To  allow  certain  kinds  of  logical  reasoning  by  the  system,  each  assertion  is 
represented  as  a  space  in  a  partitioned  semantic  network  (see  Article  III.C3,  in 
Vol.  i).  A  typical  space  asserts  the  hypothetical  existence  of  physical  entities 
having  specific  properties  (such  as  being  composed  of  biotite)  and  participating 
in  specific  relations  (such  as  an  alteration  relation).  In  addition,  a  large 
taxonomic  network  describes  important  element-subset  relations  among  the 
terms  mentioned,  such  as  the  fact  that  biotite  is  a  mica,  which  in  turn  is  a 
silicate,  which  in  turn  is  a  mineral. 

The  articulation  of  assertions  as  a  set  of  relations  allows  the  system  to 
recognize  subset-superset  connections  between  pairs  of  assertions.  For  exam- 
ple, the  assertion  There  is  pervasively  biotized  hornblende  is  clearly  related 
to  the  assertion  There  is  mica;  assertion  of  the  first  also  asserts  the  second, 

Table  D3-1 

Size  of  Knowledge  Base  of  Five  PROSPECTOR  Models 

. ,    .  .  Number  of  Number 

Model  „      . 

assertions  ol  rules 


Koroko-type  massive  sulfide 

39 

34 

Mississippi- Valley- type  lead/zinc 

28 

20 

Type  A  porphyry  copper 

187 

91 

Komatiitic  nickel  sulfide 

75 

49 

Roll-front  sandstone  uranium 

212 

133 

Total 

541 

327 

160  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

and  denial  of  the  second  denies  the  first.  This  kind  of  recognition  is  used 
in  two  main  ways.  First,  it  provides  important  intermodel  and  intramodel 
connections  beyond  those  given  explicitly  by  the  inference  rules.  Second,  it 
allows  the  system  to  recognize  connections  between  information  volunteered 
by  the  user  and  the  coded  models. 

Probabilistic  Reasoning 

Some  of  the  logical  constraints  that  hold  between  spaces  have  probabilistic 
implications.  In  particular,  if  A  is  an  instance  (i.e.,  subset)  of  B,  then  the 
probability  of  A  can  never  exceed  the  probability  of  B.  We  maintain  this 
constraint  by  automatically  generating  certain  inference  rules.  For  example, 
if  evidence  E  could  raise  the  probability  of  A  above  the  probability  of  B,  we 
generate  a  rule  from  E  to  B  that  will  increase  the  probability  of  B  sufficiently 
to  just  satisfy  the  constraint.  The  exact  procedure  used  here  is  described  in 
Duda  et  al.  (1977). 

The  various  inference  rules  connect  to  form  an  inference  network;  thus, 
when  the  user  provides  some  evidence,  this  information  can  change  the  prob- 
abilities of  several  hypotheses,  which  in  turn  can  change  the  probabilities  of 
hypotheses  that  depend  on  them.  The  probability  formulas  determine  exactly 
how  these  probability  changes  propagate  through  the  inference  net.  (The 
reader  might  also  refer  to  Articles  VIII. B2  and  VIII.B6,  on  CASNET  and  IRIS, 
for  alternative  methods  of  propagation.) 

Control 

PROSPECTOR  is  a  mixed-initiative  system  that  begins  by  allowing  the 
user  to  volunteer  information  about  the  prospect.  This  volunteered  informa- 
tion is  currently  limited  to  simple  statements  in  constrained  English  about  the 
names,  ages,  and  forms  of  the  rocks  and  the  types  of  minerals  present.  These 
statements  are  parsed  by  LIFER,  a  natural-language  interface  facility  (see 
Article  IV.F7,  in  Vol.  I),  and  represented  as  partitioned  semantic  networks.  A 
network-matching  program  compares  each  of  these  volunteered  spaces  against 
the  spaces  in  the  models,  noting  any  subset,  superset,  or  equality  relations 
that  occur. 

If  a  volunteered  space  is  exactly  equal  to  a  space  in  a  model,  the  probabil- 
ity of  the  model  space  is  updated  and  that  change  is  propagated  through  the 
inference  network.  If  a  volunteered  space  is  a  subset  of  a  space  in  a  model  and 
if  it  has  a  higher  probability  than  the  model  space,  once  again  the  probability 
of  the  model  space  is  updated  and  that  change  is  propagated  through  the 
inference  network. 

Unfortunately,  if  the  volunteered  space  matches  a  superset  of  a  model 
space  (which  is  usually  the  case),  no  probability  change  can  be  made  unless  the 
user  expresses  doubt  about  the  situation.   For  example,  if  the  user  mentions 


D3  PROSPECTOR  161 

biotite,  the  probability  of  the  space  that  asserts  that  there  is  pervasively 
biotized  hornblende  is  unchanged,  unless  the  user  has  said  that  he  doubts 
that  there  is  any  biotite.  However,  it  is  obvious  that  the  system  may  want  to 
follow  up  this  observation,  and  the  existence  of  the  connection  to  the  model 
is  recorded. 

When  the  user  has  finished  the  initial  volunteering,  PROSPECTOR  scores 
the  various  models  on  the  basis  of  the  number  and  types  of  connections  that 
have  occurred  and  selects  the  best  matching  model  for  further  investigation. 
Here,  the  basic  control  strategy  is  MYCIN-like  backward  chaining  or  conse- 
quent reasoning.  At  any  given  time,  there  is  a  current  goal  space  whose  exis- 
tence is  to  be  determined.  The  initial  goal  space  is  the  one  that  corresponds 
to  the  best  matching  model.  The  various  spaces  in  the  models  represent 
either  evidence  that  can  be  sought  from  the  user  (are  "askable")  or  internal 
hypotheses  that  are  to  be  deduced  from  evidence  (are  "unaskable" ).  Naturally, 
the  initial  goal  space  is  always  unaskable.  If  the  current  goal  space  has  any 
unestablished  context  spaces,  they  are  pushed  on  the  goal  stack  and  one  of 
them  becomes  the  new  current  goal. 

If  the  current  goal  is  askable  and  has  not  been  asked  before,  the  user  is 
asked  about  it,  the  effects  of  the  answer  are  propagated  through  the  inference 
network,  and  the  process  is  repeated.  If  it  is  unaskable,  it  must  be  either  the 
consequence  of  one  or  more  inference  rules  or  a  logical  combination  of  one  or 
more  other  spaces.  In  the  former  case,  the  rules  are  scored  to  determine  their 
potential  effectiveness  in  influencing  H,  and  the  antecedent  of  the  best  scoring 
rule  becomes  the  next  goal.  In  the  latter  case,  a  predetermined  supporting 
space  becomes  the  next  goal.  In  either  case,  the  same  procedure  is  repeated 
until  (a)  the  top-level  goal  becomes  so  unlikely  that  another  top-level  goal  is 
selected,  (b)  all  of  the  askable  spaces  have  been  asked,  or  (c)  the  user  interrupts 
with  new  volunteered  information. 

Summary 

This  brief  overview  covers  the  basic  knowledge-representation  and  infer- 
ence mechanisms  used  in  PROSPECTOR.  Many  aspects  of  the  system  have  not 
been  discussed,  such  as  the  treatment  of  quantitative  evidence,  the  matching 
procedure,  the  use  of  graphical  input,  the  inference-network  compiler,  the 
explanation  system,  model-acquisition  aids,  and  the  test  and  evaluation  effort. 

The  five  models  in  the  current  system  are  but  a  fraction  of  what  is 
needed  for  comprehensive  coverage  of  the  prospecting  domain,  and  even  these 
models  have  only  recently  reached  the  degree  of  completeness  required  for 
doing  meaningful  evaluations.  Limited  initial  tests  have  shown  very  close 
agreement  between  the  evaluations  provided  by  the  system  and  the  evaluations 
of  the  model  designers,  using  data  from  actual  deposits  of  the  types  modeled. 
And,  in  fact,  PROSPECTOR  recently  made  a  prediction  about  the  location 
of  molybdenum  ore  at  an  exploration  site  in  the  state  of  Washington  that 


162  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

was  substantially  confirmed  by  subsequent  drilling.  More  information  on  the 
system,  the  extent  of  its  geological  knowledge,  its  performance  on  known 
deposits,  and  its  possible  applications  can  be  found  in  Duda  et  al.  (1978). 

References 

Duda,  Gaschnig,  and  Hart  (1979)  is  a  brief  description  of  PROSPECTOR. 
See  also  Duda  et  al.  (1977,  1978). 


D4.     Artificial  Intelligence  in  Database  Management 


A  DATABASE  MANAGEMENT  SYSTEM  (DBMS)  is  a  computer  system  that 
provides  for  the  storage  and  retrieval  of  information  about  some  domain. 
Typical  examples  are  airline  reservation  systems,  payroll  systems,  and  inven- 
tory systems.  This  article  presents  a  simplified  definition  of  a  DBMS  and 
examines  a  number  of  applications  of  AI  to  database  management. 

A  database  management  system  consists  of  (a)  an  organized  collection  of 
data  about  some  subject  and  (b)  a  data-manipulation  language  for  querying 
and  altering  the  data.  Besides  the  above  essentials,  a  DBMS  may  also  include 
(c)  a  database  schema,  which  describes  the  organization  of  the  data;  (d)  con- 
straints, for  ensuring  the  integrity  of  the  database;  (e)  views,  for  presenting 
individual  users  with  a  "customized"  version  of  the  database;  and  (f)  provi- 
sions for  concurrency  (simultaneous  access  by  several  users),  backup  (recovery 
in  the  event  of  a  system  crash),  and  security  (restricting  the  access  of  various 
users  in  terms  of  which  parts  of  the  database  they  may  access  and  which 
operations  they  may  perform). 

Consider,  for  example,  a  database  of  personnel  records.  Assume  that  the 
records  are  split  into  two  files:  the  ESD  file  with  one  record  for  each  employee, 
containing  his  (or  her)  name,  salary,  and  department,  and  the  DM  file  with 
one  record  for  each  department,  indicating  its  manager  (see  Fig.  D4-1). 

A  schema  for  this  database  would  explicate  which  files  are  in  the  database, 
what  information  is  in  each  file,  and  what  form  the  entries  in  each  record  take. 
For  example: 

Relation  ESD      (Name:    string;    Salary:    integer;    Dept:    string); 
Relation  DM        (Dept:    string;    Manager:    string); 

A  query  like  Who  is  the  manager  of  John  Doe?  might  be  expressed  in  the 
DBMS's  data-manipulation  language  as 

Retrieve  DM. MANAGER  where  DM . DEPT=ESD . DEPT  and  ESD. NAME=" JOHN  DOE", 


ESD  DM 

Name    Salary   Dept.  Dept.      Manager 

John  Doe   $30K  Sales  Sales      J.  Brown 

Al  Smith   $40K  Sales  Marketing  F.  Lamont 

H.  Macken  $25K  Marketing  Inventory  K.  L.  Tang 

Figure  D4-1.     A  database  composed  of  two  files. 
163 


164  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

which  means:  In  the  DM  file,  find  all  records  in  which  the  DEPT  field  matches 
the  DEPT  field  in  a  record  in  the  ESD  file  that  also  has  "John  Doe"  in  its  NAME 
field.  A  typical  constraint  for  this  database  would  be  that  employee  salaries 
must  always  be  greater  than  zero,  which  might  be  expressed  as: 

FOR  ALL  ESD:    ESD. SAL   >   0. 

AI  methodology  has  been  applied  to  DBMSs  in  three  ways.  First,  AI 
techniques  have  been  employed  to  improve  the  user  interface — to  make  it 
easier  for  the  user  to  interact  with  the  system.  Second,  AI  techniques  have 
made  it  possible  to  increase  the  efficiency  of  the  DBMS  system — to  find  the  best 
expression  in  the  data-manipulation  language  for  what  the  user  wants  to  know, 
considering  how  the  data  are  distributed  among  files  in  the  database.  Finally, 
the  similarities  between  AI  and  database  management,  both  of  which  involve 
representation  of  information,  may  be  exploited  to  extend  the  capabilities  of 
a  DBMS,  allowing  it  to  answer  different  kinds  of  questions  about  the  data  and 
about  itself.  Each  of  these  will  now  be  considered  in  turn. 

The  User  Interface 

Improved  user  interfaces  have  been  developed  to  provide  a  degree  of  data 
independence,  allowing  the  user  to  interact  with  the  system  without  consider- 
ing the  manner  in  which  the  database  is  actually  organized.  In  the  following 
paragraphs,  we  discuss  a  number  of  ways  this  can  be  accomplished. 

Natural  language.  The  dominant  aspect  of  the  user  interface  is  the 
data-manipulation  language  for  accessing  the  database.  One  possibility  in  this 
regard  is  to  allow  the  user  to  access  the  database  in  a  natural  language  (NL) 
such  as  English.  Although  NL  processing  is  a  major  subarea  of  AI  research  (see 
Chap.  IV,  in  Vol.  I),  its  use  in  database  management  introduces  new  problems, 
including  the  following: 

1.  Users  of  DBMSs,  once  they  become  familiar  with  the  system,  will  often 
express  their  requests  in  a  very  abbreviated  and  not  necessarily  gram- 
matical form. 

2.  Users  will  often  misspell  words. 

3.  The  DBMS's  parser  may  not  have  a  complete  lexicon  of  the  words  the 
user  might  use  in  his  queries,  since  the  information  in  the  database  is 
always  changing. 

4.  The  user,  while  aware  of  the  structure  of  the  application  domain,  is  often 
ignorant  of  the  structure  of  the  database  and  of  the  connection  between 
the  two. 

Several  NL  systems  focusing  on  database  access  have  been  implemented, 
including  LADDER  (Sacerdoti,  1977),  PLANES  (Waltz,  1978),  ROBOT  (Harris, 


D4  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Database  Management  165 

1977),  and  TQA  (Damerau,  1979).  These  systems  have  explored  such  features 
as  the  ability  to  handle  elliptic  input,  to  correct  spelling  errors,  to  handle 
pronouns,  and  to  use  the  database  to  look  up  unknown  terms  in  the  query. 
(Not  all  systems  provided  all  features.)  The  systems  functioned  in  different 
ways,  but  all  used  a  grammar  of  the  particular  language  and  a  parser  to 
process  the  input  in  terms  of  the  grammar. 

The  LADDER  system,  for  example,  was  designed  to  interrogate  a  database 
of  naval  information.  The  LADDER  grammar  was  designed  to  be  interpreted 
by  the  parser  of  the  LIFER  natural-language  system  (Article  IY.F7,  in  Vol.  I). 
The  following  segment  illustrates  LADDER'S  handling  of  ellipsis  and  spelling 
errors  (the  user's  input  is  preceded  by  **): 

**  Where  is  the  Kennedy 

Parsed! 

(PTP  '6000N03000W'  PTD  7601171200) 

The  ship  was  at  60  degrees  north  latitude,  30  degrees  west  longitude,  at 
noon  on  January  17,  1976. 

**  Pecos 

Trying  ellipsis:  Where  is  Pecos 

The  parser  was  unable  to  make  sense  of  "Pecos"  as  a  sentence,  so  it  tried 
a  substitution  into  the  previous  sentence. 

Parsed! 

(PTP  '2131S00234E  PTD  7601171200) 

**  Who  commands  the  Biddle 

Parsed! 

(RANK  'CAPT'  C0NAM  'J.TOWNES') 

**  What  is  his  lineal  number 

His  =>  ((NAM  EQ  'BIDDLE')  (?  RANK)  (?  CONAM) ) 

The  interpretation  of  "his"  is  the  commander  of  the  Biddle. 

Parsed! 

(LINEAL  4850  RANK  'CAPT'  CONAM  'J.TOWNES') 

**  What  ships  faster  than  the  Kennedy  are  within  500  miles 
of  Naples 

Parsed! 
None 

**  How  far  is  the  Kitty  Hwk  from  Gibralter 

Spelling  — >  Hawk 


166  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

Parsed! 
(GCDIST  1087) 

The  distance  is  1,087  nautical  miles. 

Automatic  derivation  of  a  natural-language  front  end.  A  number 
of  other  DBMS  systems  have  been  designed,  not  to  provide  a  general  NL 
interface  but,  rather,  to  explore  the  usefulness  of  specific  NL  features  in  the 
front  end.  For  instance,  the  TED  system  (Hendrix  and  Lewis,  1981)  functions 
in  a  similar  manner  to  LADDER,  except  that  the  NL  front  end  is  derived 
semiautomatic  ally.  Instead  of  requiring  extensive  programming  to  build  the 
NL  interface,  TED  uses  the  database  schema  and  a  dialogue  it  conducts  with 
the  user;  the  result  of  this  process  is  a  grammar  similar  to  the  one  used  by 
LADDER. 

The  dialogue  may  include  questions  about  the  English  expression  of  con- 
cepts from  the  database,  connections  between  files  in  the  database,  ranges 
of  certain  attributes,  and  so  forth.  The  following  are  simplified  examples  of 
questions  asked  in  formulating  a  front  end  for  a  database  of  naval  information 
like  the  one  for  LADDER: 

Assume  a  file  named  SHIP*,  with  attributes  NAME,   TYPE,  MCS,  and 
MED,  and  a  file  named  UNIT*,  with  attributes  CON  AM  and  HOGEO. 

MCS  is      1.    arithmetic     2.    feature    (yes/no)      3.    symbolic   ? 

**   1 

Please  type  in  the  minimum  and  maximum  values  for  MCS. 

**  0  999 

If  there  are  other  names  for  the  attribute  MCS,  please  list 
them. 

**  Speed 

If  there  is  a  word  wwww  such  that  the  question  "HOW  wwww  IS 
THE  SHIP?"  is  equivalent  to  "WHAT  IS  THE  MCS  OF  THE  SHIP?", 
please  type  wwww. 

**  Fast 


UNIT*  has  links  to  or  from  which  of  the  following  files 
(SHIP*  UNIT*) 

**  SHIP* 


The  current  link  associates  with  each  SHIP  of  file  SHIP*  a  UNIT 
of  file  UNIT*.   Which  properties  of  the  UNIT  (from  file  UNIT*) 
are  inherited  through  this  link  as  properties  of  the  associated 
SHIP  (from  file  SHIP*)? 


D4  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Database  Management  167 

**   CONAM  HOGEO 

At  the  completion  of  this  dialogue,  TED  could  answer  questions  such  as 
List  the  ships. 

What  are  the  home  ports  of  the  fastest  medical  ship  ? 
Which  ships  have  home  port  =  NewY? 

The  language  capability  produced  in  this  way  is  slightly  more  restricted  than 
the  manually  created  one  for  LADDER. 

Cooperative  responses.  The  direct,  literal  response  to  a  user's  natural- 
language  query  may  not  be  what  he  wants  and  might  even  be  misleading.  For 
example,  if  a  user  asks,  "Which  students  failed  Computer  Science  301  last 
spring?"  but  the  course  is  offered  only  in  the  fall,  a  simple  answer  of  "none"  is 
misleading,  although  correct.  A  better  response  would  be  to  inform  the  user 
that  the  course  was  not  offered  in  the  spring.  The  COOP  system  (Kaplan, 
1979)  was  designed  to  provide  exactly  this  kind  of  response.  If  the  state  of 
the  database  violated  the  user's  presumptions,  as  inferred  by  COOP  from  the 
user's  query,  the  system  would  formulate  a  corrective,  indirect  response  that 
was  more  informative  than  the  formally  correct  response. 

Incremental  query  formulation.  Instead  of  specifying  the  query  in 
full,  complex  detail,  the  user  may  expect  help  from  the  system  in  constructing 
it.  Such  interactive  query-formulation  was  the  goal  of  the  RENDEZVOUS 
system  (Codd,  1978).  RENDEZVOUS  operated  by  passing  the  initial  query 
through  a  parser,  which  converted  it  to  a  logical  form.  The  parser  then 
initiated  a  clarification  dialogue  to  resolve  parts  of  the  query  that  were  ambig- 
uous or  unclear.  The  output  from  this  phase  was  processed  by  a  menu  driver, 
which  offered  a  list  of  choices  at  each  point  in  the  dialogue,  attempting  to 
fill  in  any  gaps  in  the  query  specification  by  interrogating  the  user.  Finally, 
the  completed  query  was  passed  to  a  generator,  which  printed  out  an  English 
translation  of  the  final  form  for  the  user's  approval. 

Thus,  RENDEZVOUS  was  designed  to  accept  a  partially  specified  query 
in  rather  rough  form  and  to  attempt  to  complete  it  by  (a)  entering  into  a 
clarification  dialogue  with  the  user  to  resolve  parts  of  the  query  that  were 
unclear  and  (b)  attempting  to  fill  in  "gaps"  in  the  initial  query  specification, 
by  initiating  a  dialogue  such  as  the  following: 

Please  type   in  your  query: 

**  nonexcellent  non  Detroit  suppliers   shipping  part  P37 

What  kind  of  response  to  your  query  are  you  expecting? 

1 .  A  list  of  items  of   information  to  be  printed  from  the 
database 

2.  A  yes/no  or  true/false  answer 

3.  A  count  of   items   from  the  database 

**   l 


168  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

On  which  of   the  following  items  do  you  want  information  printed? 

1 .  Suppliers 

2 .  Shipments 

3.  Parts 

4.  None  of  the  above 

**  l 

Which  of  the  following  items  of  information  on  suppliers  do  you 
want  printed? 

1 .  Number 

2.  Name 

3.  Location 

4 .  Rating 

5.  None  of  the  above 

**  1,  2,  3,  4 

This  is  what  the  system  understands  your  query  to  be: 

Print  the  serial  number,  name,  location,  and  rating 
of  every  supplier  not  rated  excellent  and  not  located 
in  Detroit  who  sent  a  shipment  of  part  number  P37 . 

Is  the  system's  understanding 

1 .  Correct  &  complete 

2.  Not  yet  complete 

3.  Incorrect  ? 

**  2 

Does  the  interpretation  fail  to  mention  any  specif ication(s)  on 
suppliers,  parts,  or  shipments? 

**  Yes 

What  information  do  you  want  to  specify  for  (or  add  to)  your 
query? 

1.  Supplier (s)  (e.g.,  one  named  Acme,  etc.) 

2.  Part(s)  (e.g.,  one  with  quantity  on  hand  10,  etc.) 

3.  Shipment (s)  (e.g.,  one  sent  on  June  23,  1976,  etc.) 

4 .  None  of  the  above 

**  3 

Which  particular  item(s)  of  the  following  information  on 
shipments  do  you  want  to  specify? 

1 .  Serial  number  of  parts  shipped 

2.  Serial  number  of  suppliers  making  shipment 

3 .  Quantity  shipped 

4.  Date  shipped 

5 .  None  of  the  above 

**  4 


D4  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Database  Management  169 

Please  enter  the  date  of  shipment  you  wish  to  specify 

**  Aug75 

This  is  what  the  system  understands  your  query  to  be: 

Print  the  serial  number,  name,  location,  and  rating 
of  every  supplier  not  rated  excellent  and  not  located 
in  Detroit  who,  during  August  1975,  sent  a  shipment 
of  part  number  P37 . 

More  sophisticated  interfaces.  Ideally,  the  user  of  a  DBMS  should  be 
able  to  interact  with  the  system  in  terms  of  the  enterprise  being  modeled,  not 
confining  his  questions  to  concepts  and  terminology  covered  by  the  database 
per  se.  He  should  also  be  able  to  ask  questions  about  the  database — for 
example,  about  the  kinds  of  information  stored  in  it.  Such  concerns,  and 
others,  are  the  goals  of  the  KLAUS  system  currently  under  development  at 
SRI  International  (Haas  and  Hendrix,  1980).  Eventually,  KLAUS  is  intended 
to  assist  users  in  the  management  of  information  in  various  forms  by  serving 
as  an  interface  between  the  user's  need  and  the  resources  of  the  computer 
system. 

A  pilot  implementation,  NanoKLAUS,  can  build  a  model  of  the  domain 
by  engaging  the  user  in  an  interactive  dialogue  in  natural  language.  Following 
is  an  example  of  NanoKLAUS  learning  about  a  naval  domain  like  the  one  used 
by  LADDER  and  TED: 

The  following  demonstrates  acquiring  a  hierarchy  of  classes: 

**  A  submarine  is  a  ship 

You're  saying  that  anything  that  is  a  SUBMARINE  is  also  a  SHIP. 
OK,  now  I  have  assimilated  SUBMARINE. 

**  A  destroyer  is  a  ship 

You're  saying  that  anything  that  is  a  DESTROYER  is  also  a  SHIP. 
Is  SUBMARINE  a  proper  subclass  of  DESTROYER? 

**  No 

Is  SUBMARINE  necessarily  composed  of  entirely  different  members 
from  DESTROYER? 

**  Yes 

Do  SUBMARINE  and  DESTROYER  span  the  set  of  all  SHIPS? 

**  No 

The  following  demonstrates  learning  about  verbs  and  actions: 

**   An  officer  can  assign  a  unit 


170  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

Give  the  -ed  and  -en  form  of  ASSIGN  (e.g.,  for  GO:  WENT,  GONE): 

**  assigned,  assigned 

If  an  OFFICER  can  ASSIGN  something  a  UNIT,  type  the  most  general 
description  of  that  something. 

**  a  task  group 

Can  an  OFFICER  ASSIGN  a  UNIT  TO  a  TASK  GROUP? 

**  Yes 

Note  that,   unlike   TED,  KLAUS  concerns  itself  with  the  domain  being 
represented,  rather  than  just  the  structure  of  the  database. 

Query  Optimization 

AI  techniques  can  also  be  used  in  ways  that  are  not  noticeable  to  the 
user  but  that  result  in  an  improvement  in  the  behavior  of  the  system.  The 
QUIST  system  (King,  1981)  uses  semantic- constraint  information  available 
in  the  database  schema  to  improve  the  execution  of  queries.  For  example, 
a  typical  piece  of  semantic-constraint  information  from  a  database  about 
shipping  might  be  a  statement  like  The  only  ships  over  600  feet  long  are 
tankers.  Applying  this  constraint,  QUIST  can  transform  a  query  like  Which 
ships  are  more  than  700  feet  long?  into  Which  tankers  are  more  than  700  feet 
long?  The  latter  query  might  be  much  more  efficient  to  process  if,  for  example, 
the  information  about  tankers  were  stored  in  a  separate  file  in  the  database. 
QUIST  contains  a  cost  model  that  enables  it  to  estimate  the  cost  of  executing 
a  particular  query.  Different,  but  semantically  equivalent,  formulations  of  a 
query  can  thus  be  compared  with  respect  to  the  cost  of  processing  them. 

The  tanker  example  above  illustrated  a  constraint  on  the  value  of  a 
particular  attribute.  Another  type  of  semantic  constraint  involves  limitations 
on  the  number  of  entities  that  can  be  related  to  other  entities  in  a  particular 
way.  For  example,  the  number  of  ships  that  can  be  docked  at  a  port  may 
be  bounded  by  the  number  of  berths  at  the  port.  With  this  constraint,  the 
query  What  ports  have  more  than  15  French  ships  docked  at  them?  can  be 
transformed  into  the  query  What  ports  with  more  than  15  berths  have  more 
than  15  French  ships  docked  at  them? 

Furakawa  (1977)  developed  a  deductive  database-query  system,  DBAP, 
that  used  a  theorem  prover  to  plan  its  access  to  the  database.  The  theorem 
prover  was  designed  to  make  the  access  efficient  by  observing  a  number  of 
heuristics  like  the  following: 

1.  Do  not  access  the  (logically)  same  record  in  a  relation  more  than  once. 

2.  Get  all  records  that  satisfy  the  given  conditions  to  a  certain  relation  at 
one  time. 


D4  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Database  Management  171 

3.  When  more  than  one  record  is  to  be  accessed,  plan  the  access  order  to 
minimize  the  database  accesses  (this  was  accomplished  by  operating  on 
an  association  graph  listing  the  connections  between  the  relations  in  the 
database). 

Note  that  the  heuristics  used  by  DBAP  are  syntactic,  referring  only  to  the 
structure  of  the  database,  as  compared  to  the  information  about  the  actual 
contents  of  the  database  (e.g.,  the  lengths  of  different  kinds  of  ships)  in  King's 
QUIST  system.  These  methods  are  therefore  differentiated  as  syntactic  query 
optimization  and  semantic  query  optimization. 

Enhancing  DBMS  Capabilities 

Database  management,  like  AI,  is  concerned  with  the  representation, 
retrieval,  and  use  of  information.  Recognition  and  formalization  of  the  simi- 
larities between  the  two  fields  have  exposed  some  shortcomings  in  database 
systems.  Two  issues,  in  particular,  concern  extensions  of  the  data  model, 
which  describes  the  structure  of  the  database  in  the  database  schema,  and 
the  use  of  formal  logic  to  reveal  restrictions  on  the  ability  of  database  systems 
to  represent  certain  kinds  of  information  or  to  perform  certain  operations. 

Improved  data  models.  As  mentioned  above,  DBMSs  typically  incor- 
porate a  database  schema  that  describes  the  organization  of  the  database. 
The  schema  includes  a  description  of  the  objects  in  the  database,  the  opera- 
tions permitted  on  them  (for  both  retrieval  and  update),  and  the  constraints 
that  the  database  must  satisfy.  The  schema  is  actually  expressed  by  means  of 
a  descriptive  language  called  a  data  model,  which  provides  a  set  of  constructs 
for  describing  aspects  of  the  database.  The  idea  of  a  language  for  encod- 
ing knowledge  about  the  database  corresponds  closely  to  the  AI  concept  of 
a  knowledge-representation  language  that  provides  the  appropriate  structure 
for  encoding  some  knowledge  used  by  an  AI  system  (see  Chap.  Ill,  in  Vol.  i). 
The  knowledge  to  be  encoded  with  the  data  model  concerns  the  structure  of 
the  database  itself,  which  will  in  turn  be  used  by  the  DBMS  for  reasoning 
about  queries. 

Sowa  (1976)  and  Roussopoulos  (1977)  independently  developed  data  mod- 
els based  on  the  semantic-network  knowledge-representation  formalism  (see 
Article  III.C3,  in  Vol.  i).  The  models  were  capable  of  representing  such  aspects 
of  DBMSs  as  semantic  constraints,  generalized  inference  for  query  processing, 
and  inheritance  of  properties  between  classes  of  objects.  The  network  notation 
could  be  used  both  for  specifying  the  data  model  and  for  stating  queries. 

For  example,  Sowa's  (1976)  conceptual  graph  model  would  represent  a 
relation  HIRE,  with  attributes  MANAGER,  EMPLOYEE,  and  DATE,  as  follows, 


MANAGER 


>   AGT 


►   HIRE 


>    PTNT 


EMPLOYEE 


■>  AT  ►    DATE 


172  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  VII 

and  the  query  Who  is  the  manager  of  Lee  ?  as  follows, 


PERSON:    ?  ►   AGT 


HIRE 


PTNT 


PERSON:    LEE 


Special  algorithms  were  specified  for  answering  queries  by  matching  the  graph 
encoding  the  query  against  the  graph  representing  the  data  model.  This 
provided  the  system  with  powerful  capabilities  for  question  answering,  includ- 
ing the  use  of  inferencing,  the  ability  to  use  a  procedure  instead  of  the 
database,  and  the  ability  to  answer  queries  phrased  in  a  high-level  form. 

TAXIS  (Mylopolous,  Bernstein,  and  Wong,  1980)  is  a  language  for  the 
design  of  information  systems  such  as  databases.  It  covers  both  the  description 
of  the  structure  of  the  database  and  the  formal  specification  of  the  procedures 
for  operating  on  the  data.  TAXIS  uses  the  semantic-net  representation  for- 
malism and  also  implements  the  principles  of  data  abstraction  and  exception 
handling  from  programming-language  research. 

The  semantic  data  model,  SDM  (Hammer  and  McLeod,  1978),  allows  more 
precise  specification  of  semantic  information  than  in  a  traditional  data  model. 
In  particular,  the  relationships  between  the  entities  in  the  domain  could 
be  characterized  as  relationships  of  restriction,  abstraction,  and  aggregation. 
The  SDM  was  intended  to  facilitate  representation  of  information  about  the 
domain  of  application,  as  well  as  about  the  database. 

Logic  as  a  conceptual  framework.  First-order  logic  offers  a  stan- 
dard notation  with  an  explicit  semantics  and  mechanizable  inference  methods, 
which  accounts  for  its  popularity  in  AI  applications  (Article  III.C1,  in  Vol.  I). 
Logic  also  provides  a  clear  standard  within  which  different  ideas  can  be 
expressed  and  compared.  A  recent  trend  has  been  to  use  logic  to  express 
certain  aspects  of  a  database.  Reiter  (1978)  points  out  that  a  typical  database 
is  merely  a  collection  of  well-formed  formulas,  containing  only  ground  literals 
(formulas  containing  constants  but  no  variables),  augmented  with  types  and 
various  other  restrictions.  This  characterization  indicates  a  number  of  restric- 
tions present  in  DBMSs  as  compared  to  AI  systems;  two  such  restrictions  will 
be  described  here. 

First,  current  databases  are  incapable  of  representing  many  kinds  of 
quantified  information  (e.g.,  facts  about  the  existence  of  an  unspecified  entry, 
like  There  is  an  employee  who  works  in  Montreal),  and  disjunctive  information 
(e.g.,  Either  John  or  Peter  is  a  teacher).  These  sorts  of  statements  can  be 
handled  in  the  query  language,  but  not  represented  in  the  database. 

Second,  databases  typically  do  not  contain  extensive  capabilities  for  infer- 
ence. An  example  of  deductive  inference  would  be  the  use  of  a  fact  such  as 
John  works  in  the  sales  department  and  a  general  rule  such  as  All  employees 
in  the  sales  department  work  on  commission  to  infer  the  fact  John  works 
on  commission.  Certain  forms  of  deduction  are  performed  by  means  of  con- 
straints and  views,  but  general  inferencing  capabilities  do  not  exist  in  current 
DBMSs.  There  have  been  a  number  of  proposals  to  incorporate  deduction 
into  databases,  for  purposes  such  as  query  processing  (Shaw,   1980;  Reiter, 


D4  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Database  Management  173 

1978;  Minker,  1978;  Chang,  1978;  Kellogg,  Klahr,  and  Travis,  1978)  and  query 
optimization  (King,  1981;  Furakawa,  1977). 

References 

The  entertaining  survey  article  on  the  state  of  natural-language  processing 
by  Hendrix  and  Sacerdoti  (1981)  discusses  the  issues  in  natural-language  front 
ends  for  data  bases.  More  advanced  discussions  of  AI  applications  in  database 
management  systems  can  be  found  in  the  articles  in  the  collection  edited  by 
Gallaire  and  Minker  (1978). 


Chapter  VIII 

Applications-oriented  AI  Research: 

Medicine 


CHAPTER  VIII:     APPLICATIONS-ORIENTED 
AI  RESEARCH:  MEDICINE 


A.  Overview  /  111 

B.  Medical  Systems  /  184 


MYCIN  /  184 

CASNET  /  193 

INTERNIST  /  191 

Present  Illness  Program  /  202 

Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  /  206 

IRIS  /  212 

EXPERT  /  211 


A.     OVERVIEW 


THIS  CHAPTER  reviews  the  research  on  AI  "consultation"  systems  designed 
as  aids  to  medical  decision  making.  (We  do  not  cover  the  other  major  AI  appli- 
cation in  medicine,  namely,  the  use  of  AI  techniques  in  x-ray  and  ultrasound 
image  analysis;  see  Preston,  1976,  for  a  discussion  of  this  application.)  The 
motivation  for  the  development  of  expert  computer-based  medical  consulta- 
tion systems  is  twofold.  First,  there  are  obvious  benefits  to  society  from 
providing  reliable  and  thorough  diagnostic  services — perhaps  even  at  a  reduced 
cost.  It  has  been  observed  (Ledley  and  Lusted,  1959)  that  most  of  the  errors 
made  by  clinicians  are  errors  of  omission.  That  is,  in  trying  to  identify 
the  disease  that  a  patient  is  suffering  from,  the  physician  does  not  consider 
all  possibilities,  thereby  missing  the  correct  diagnosis.  Assuming  that  ade- 
quate patient  data  are  available  to  it,  a  computer  program  can  be  designed 
to  consider  exhaustively  the  diseases  in  its  domain.  Furthermore,  there  are 
some  tasks  that  computers  can  perform  more  rapidly  and  accurately  than 
the  clinician  can,  such  as  calculating  doses  of  medicines,  particularly  in  cases 
where  dosage  is  critical  and  many  factors  must  be  taken  into  account  in  the 
calculation  (as  in  digitalis  therapy;  see  Article  VIII. B5).  There  are  also  some 
tasks  that  physicians  are  notoriously  poor  at  and  that  are  routine  enough  for 
the  computer  to  do,  such  as  the  prescription  of  antimicrobial  therapy. 

The  second  motivation  for  development  of  these  systems  is  found  in 
current  interests  in  computer  science.  Clinical  medicine  has  been  a  fertile  area 
for  the  study  of  cognitive  processes,  and  diagnosis  as  a  cognitive  process  has 
been  studied  extensively  (e.g.,  Jacquez,  1964).  It  involves  a  highly  developed 
medical  taxonomy;  a  large,  relatively  well-organized  knowledge  base;  and  a 
number  of  human  experts  in  the  domain  whose  performance  is  significantly 
better  on  difficult  problems  than  that  of  the  average  practitioner  (i.e.,  there 
is  identifiable  expertise).  Furthermore,  the  kind  of  problem  solving  that 
takes  place  in  the  domain  is  repetitive.  These  attributes  reflect  some  of 
the  prerequisites  for  applications  of  the  developing  subfield  of  AI  known  as 
knowledge  engineering — taking  AI  beyond  the  stage  of  "toy"  problems  to 
confront  large,  real- world  problems  (see  Article  VILA). 

The  development  of  computer-based  consultation  systems  brings  with  it 
many  formidable  social,  psychological,  and  ethical  problems  that  must  be 
addressed  by  the  builders  of  the  systems.  These  problems  include  validating 
the  systems,  exporting  them  to  hospitals  and  clinics,  getting  physicians  and 
patients  to  accept  them,  and  deciding  the  responsibility  for  clinical  decisions 
made  with  the  help  of  these  systems. 


177 


178 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine 


VIII 


Medical  Decision  Making 

There  are  three  principal  parts  to  medical  decision  making:  data  gather- 
ing, diagnosis,  and  treatment  recommendation.  Data  gathering  consists  of 
obtaining  the  patient's  history  and  clinical  and  laboratory  data.  The  clinical 
data  include  the  symptoms,  which  are  the  subjective  sensations  reported  by 
the  patient  (such  as  headache  and  chest  pain),  and  the  signs,  which  are  objec- 
tive and  observable  by  the  physician  (Feinstein,  1967).  Laboratory  results 
generally  are  referred  to  as  findings.  Manifestation  refers  to  any  symptom, 
sign,  or  finding.  Diagnosis,  then,  is  the  process  of  using  these  data  to  deter- 
mine the  illness.  The  three  phases  of  medical  decision  making  are  not  inde- 
pendent; disease  hypotheses  are  used  to  direct  further  information-gathering, 
while  treatment  recommendation  depends  on  the  diagnosis  and  generally 
requires  more  information  gathering.  Often,  the  decision  to  do  a  test  includes 
a  physician's  estimate  of  the  cost,  in  terms  of  both  money  and  danger  to 
the  patient,  which  is  weighed  against  the  value  of  the  information  gained. 
Gathering  information,  diagnosing  the  disease,  and  deciding  on  a  treatment 
regimen  constitute  a  consultation.  Figure  A-l  illustrates  this  process  in  rela- 
tion to  the  course  of  the  disease. 

Etiology  refers  to  the  original  causes  of  the  disease;  pathogenesis,  to  the 
way  in  which  the  disease  developed  from  its  causes.  Ideally,  a  diagnosis 
involves  determining  the  etiology.  A  treatment  is  then  formulated  for  the 
identified  diseases  and  their  causes.  Often,  however,  medical  knowledge  is 
incomplete,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  the  causes  of  a  disease.  In 
these  cases,  treatments  must  be  based  on  the  empirical  associations  of  disease 
characteristics  and  how  they  are  known  to  respond  to  treatment. 

There  are  some  parts  of  consultations  that  computers  cannot  do,  such  as 
the  physical  examination.  The  physician  gains  much  information  from  general 
appearance,  facial  expressions,  and  so  forth,  which  are  inaccessible  to  the 
computer.  Arid,  of  course,  the  computer  cannot  talk  with  the  patient  to  get 

Untreated 


Etiology 


Patho- 
genesis 


Current 
Illness 


Past 


Prognosis 


Treated 


Future 


Now 


Figure  A-l.     Consultation  process  depicting  a  time-specific  interpretation  of 
a  medical  problem. 


A  Overview  179 

information,  explain  therapy,  or  administer  therapy.  The  design  of  computer 
consultation  systems  must,  therefore,  take  these  factors  into  account  and  offer 
mechanisms  for  acquiring  some  of  this  information  indirectly. 

The  History  of  Computers  in  Medicine 

The  use  of  computers  in  medical  decision  making  began  in  the  early  1960s 
with  the  implementation  of  programs  that  performed  well-known  statistical 
analyses.  These  programs  focused  on  the  diagnosis  part  of  the  consultation: 
They  accepted  a  set  of  findings  and  selected  one  disease  from  a  fixed  set, 
using  methods  such  as  pattern  recognition  through  discriminant  functions, 
Bayesian  decision  theory,  and  decision-tree  techniques  (Croft,  1972;  Nordyke, 
Kulikowski,  and  Kulikowski,  1971).  Somewhat  more  complex  programs  per- 
formed sequential  diagnosis.  Here,  when  sufficient  information  is  not  available 
for  a  reliable  diagnosis,  the  next  test  to  be  given  the  patient  (to  get  more 
information)  is  determined  by  a  strategy  that  selects  the  best  test  based  on 
three  factors:  the  cost  of  the  test,  the  danger  to  the  patient,  and  the  amount 
of  discriminating  information  the  test  would  supply. 

The  appeal  of  statistical  methods  is  that  the  decisions  based  on  such 
methods  are  optimal  according  to  specified  criteria.  Unfortunately,  these 
statistical  systems  proved  unsatisfactory  as  medical  decision-making  aids.  The 
mathematics  they  were  based  on  assumed  that  the  patient  had  only  one  disease 
and  that  the  data  were  not  erroneous.  More  fundamentally,  certain  assump- 
tions and  simplifications  concerning  the  independence  and  mutual  exclusivity 
of  various  disease  states,  required  to  make  the  statistical  techniques  practi- 
cal, were  found  to  be  unjustified.  Furthermore,  many  prior  and  conditional 
probabilities  needed  for  complete  analysis  were  simply  not  available. 

Since  the  early  1970s,  AI  techniques  have  been  applied  increasingly  to 
medical  decision  making.  However,  some  of  the  classical  AI  problem-solving 
and  knowledge-representation  techniques  (see  Chaps.  II  and  III,  in  Vol.  i)  were 
not  directly  applicable.  Consider,  for  example,  a  simple  application  of  state- 
space  search  to  the  determination  of  treatment.  If  one  assumes  that  the  initial 
state  is  the  diseased  patient,  that  the  final  state  is  the  healthy  patient,  and 
that  the  operators  for  changing  states  are  the  various  drugs,  physical  therapies, 
surgical  procedures,  and  so  forth,  it  would  appear  that  simple  search  methods 
would  find  a  path  between  the  initial  and  final  states.  But  there  are  two 
fundamental  problems  with  this  simpleminded  approach.  First,  the  initial 
state,  the  disease  of  the  patient,  is  rarely  known  with  certainty.  Second,  the 
application  of  an  operator — that  is,  a  treatment — is  not  guaranteed  to  result 
in  an  expected  state.  To  deal  with  these  problems,  methods  for  representing 
inexact  knowledge  and  for  performing  plausible  reasoning  have  been  developed 
in  each  of  the  consultation  systems  described  in  this  chapter. 

Medical  diagnosis  can  be  viewed  as  a  problem  of  hypothesis  formation 
(see  Article  VIII. B4).     The  diagnosis  task  involves  using  clinical  findings  to 


180  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

form  a  consistent  set  of  disease  hypotheses  (not  to  select  one  disease  from 
a  fixed  set  of  possible  diseases).  These  hypotheses  are  typically  related  to 
each  other  in  various  ways.  Each  of  the  experimental  medical  consultation 
systems  described  in  this  chapter  demonstrates  a  different  approach  to  this 
hypothesis- formation  problem. 

The  State  of  the  Art 

The  state  of  the  art  in  computer-based  medical  decision  making  is  repre- 
sented by  the  programs  described  in  the  following  articles.  These  experimen- 
tal programs  are  MYCIN  (Shortliffe,  1976),  CASNET  (Weiss  et  al.,  1978), 
INTERNIST  (Pople,  1975),  PIP  (Szolovits  and  Pauker,  1978),  the  Digitalis 
Therapy  Advisor  (Silverman,  1975;  Swartout,  1977b),  IRIS  (Trigoboff  and 
Kulikowski,  1977),  and  EXPERT  (Weiss  and  Kulikowski,  1979).  There  are 
several  other  experimental  programs  under  development,  including: 

1.  PUFF,  a  pulmonary-function  program  (Kunz  et  al.,  1978); 

2.  HODGKINS,  a  system  for  performing  diagnostic  planning  for  Hodgkins 
disease  (Safrans,  Desforges,  and  Tsichlis,  1976); 

3.  HEADMED,  a  psychopharmacology  advisor  (Heiser,  1978); 

4.  VM,  an  intensive-care  monitor  (Fagan,  1979); 

5.  RX  (Blum  and  Wiederhold,  1978);  and 

6.  ONCOCIN,  a  program  for  monitoring  the  treatment  of  oncology  out- 
patients on  experimental  treatment  regimens  (Shortliffe  et  al.,  1981). 

The  major  issues  addressed  during  the  development  of  all  these  programs 
concerning  their  construction  and  their  acceptance  by  the  medical  community 
are  discussed  in  the  remainder  of  this  article. 

Representation  of  knowledge.  Two  distinct  types  of  medical  knowl- 
edge must  be  represented  in  these  programs:  (a)  general  knowledge  of  diseases, 
including  manifestations,  causal  mechanisms,  and  diagnostic  procedures,  and 
(b)  specific  knowledge  about  the  patient,  including  the  current  medical  history 
and  therapies.  The  usual  representation  formalisms  of  AI — semantic  nets, 
production  rules,  frames,  and  predicate  calculus  (all  discussed  in  Chap.  Ill,  in 
Vol.  I) — are  not  directly  applicable  because  of  the  inexact  nature  of  medical 
knowledge.  In  all  the  consultation  systems  that  have  been  developed,  these 
representations  have  been  augmented  to  incorporate  some  way  of  expressing 
strength  of  belief  or  strength  of  association. 

Medical  knowledge  is  represented  in  MYCIN,  for  example,  as  a  set  of 
production  rules  augmented  by  certainty  factors;  these  factors  express  the 
strength  of  belief  in  the  conclusion  of  a  rule,  given  that  all  of  the  premises 
are  true.  (Extensive  revisions  of  the  MYCIN  knowledge  base  are  discussed 
in  Article  DC.C6  on  GUIDON.)  CASNET  uses  a  causal-network  representation 


A  Overview  181 

(a  semantic  network  with  one  relation,  CAUSES)  in  which  each  CAUSES  link  is 
qualified  by  a  number  representing  the  strength  of  causality.  In  INTERNIST, 
a  taxonomy  of  diseases  is  stored  as  a  huge  tree  with  each  node  representing 
a  disease.  Associated  with  each  disease  node  is  a  list  of  manifestations,  with 
numerical  weights  reflecting  the  strength  of  association  between  the  disease 
and  the  manifestation.  In  PIP,  the  frame  formalism  is  augmented  by  numbers 
that  reflect  both  the  strength  of  belief  in  a  slot  filler  and  the  degree  to 
which  the  frame  itself  applies  to  this  patient.  IRIS,  in  which  the  semantic-net 
and  production-rule  formalisms  have  been  combined,  provides  a  facility  for 
incorporating  an  arbitrary  representation  of  strength  of  belief. 

Clinical  reasoning.  Clinical  reasoning  involves  weighing  different  pieces 
of  evidence  for  particular  hypotheses.  Each  system  has  a  different  approach, 
but  most  employ  the  technique  of  thresholding;  if  the  numerical  score  of  a 
hypothesis  exceeds  a  certain  preset  threshold  (defined  by  the  expert  physician 
who  builds  the  knowledge  base),  the  hypothesis  is  believed  to  be  true.  The 
clinical  reasoning  of  MYCIN,  for  instance,  uses  a  production-rule-based  infer- 
ence mechanism  (see  Article  III.C4)  to  determine  parameters  (e.g.,  the  patient's 
infections  and  the  causative  organisms).  The  premises  of  a  rule  are  consid- 
ered true  if  the  combined  value  of  the  associated  certainty  factors  exceeds 
a  predefined  threshold.  If  several  rules  contribute  to  a  conclusion  about  a 
parameter,  their  certainty  factors  are  functionally  combined  to  form  a  com- 
posite certainty  factor  for  this  conclusion.  These  confidence- factor-combining 
functions  can  be  shown  to  be  related  to  probability  theory. 

In  CASNET,  a  status  measure  is  associated  with  each  state  in  the  causal 
network.  Weights  are  propagated  in  both  forward  and  backward  directions 
depending  on  disease  causality.  A  state  is  considered  confirmed  if  its  status 
exceeds  a  specified  threshold. 

In  INTERNIST,  disease  hypotheses  are  scored  by  a  procedure  that  takes 
account  of  the  strength  of  association  among  (a)  the  manifestations  exhibited 
by  the  patient  and  the  disease,  (b)  the  manifestations  associated  with  the 
disease  that  are  not  present  in  the  patient,  and  (c)  the  confirmed  diseases 
causally  related  to  this  disease.  Disease  hypotheses  are  ranked,  and  the  top- 
ranked  diseases  are  investigated  further.  When  the  difference  between  the 
scores  of  the  top  two  disease  hypotheses  reaches  a  criterion,  the  top-ranking 
disease  is  confirmed. 

PIP  combines  two  methods  of  reasoning:  categorical  and  probabilistic. 
Categorical  decisions  are  based  on  logical  criteria  rather  than  on  numerical 
values.  The  probabilistic  reasoning  involves  scoring  the  disease.  The  applica- 
bility of  a  disease  frame  to  a  particular  patient  can  be  confirmed  on  either 
logical  or  probabilistic  criteria. 

In  IRIS,  an  attempt  is  made  to  confirm  nodes  of  a  semantic  net  as  being 
true  for  the  patient.  Information  is  passed  between  the  nodes  of  the  semantic 
net  via  sets  of  production  rules  associated  with  the  links.  These  production 
rules  can  encode  both  logical  and  probabilistic  decisions. 


182  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

Explanation  and  justification.  The  explanation  and  justification  of  a 
system's  line  of  reasoning  are  important  factors  for  the  acceptance  of  consul- 
tation systems  by  physicians.  Explanation  shows  the  user  the  line  of  reasoning 
in  a  particular  diagnosis;  justification  is  concerned  with  the  medical  accuracy 
and  the  reliability  of  the  knowledge  and  the  reasoning  strategies  used. 

Only  two  research  projects  currently  address  the  issue  of  explanation. 
MYCIN  explains  a  diagnosis  by  printing  out  an  English  version  of  the  chain 
of  rules  used.  More  complex  explanation  facilities  are  provided  by  Davis's 
TEIRESIAS  system  (see  Article  VII. B),  an  explanation  and  knowledge- 
acquisition  system  developed  in  the  context  of  MYCIN. 

The  OWL  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  provides  English  explanations  of  its 
reasoning  that  are  generated  directly  from  the  OWL  code.  The  detail  of  the 
explanation  can  be  controlled  by  the  program  (Swartout,  1981).  Both  the 
INTERNIST  and  CASNET  systems  are  able  to  summarize  the  consultation  by 
displaying  the  scores  of  the  hypotheses  and  the  status  measures  of  states  in 
the  causal  network;  however,  they  are  unable  to  explain  the  methods  by  which 
they  arrived  at  these  scores.  CENTAUR  (Aikins,  1980),  a  reconfiguration  of  the 
PUFF  system  designed  in  part  to  provide  better  explanations,  can  summarize 
its  hypothesis-directed  reasoning. 

The  issue  of  justification  is  a  complex  one.  Both  CASNET  and  MYCIN 
can  cite  references  to  the  research  literature  in  support  of  diagnoses  and 
treatment  recommendations.  One  aspect  of  justification  is  the  accuracy  and 
reliability  of  the  expert's  knowledge  and  whether  this  knowledge  has  been 
accurately  captured  in  the  representation  formalism.  Often,  medical  experts 
have  differing  opinions,  and  it  is  not  clear  whether  a  consensus  should  be 
sought  or  whether  the  different  opinions  should  all  be  represented.  Another 
aspect  of  justification  is  relating  the  program's  reasoning  steps  to  deeper 
causal  models,  that  is,  justifying  the  associations  represented  in  the  system's 
knowledge  base.  Little  work  has  been  done  on  this  problem. 

Validation.  Just  as  the  effectiveness  of  the  various  instruments  and 
drugs  used  by  physicians  must  be  validated,  so  the  accuracy,  utility,  and 
dependability  of  consultation  programs  must  eventually  be  assessed.  CASNET 
and  MYCIN  have  undergone  extensive  clinical  trials  and  have  been  rated, 
in  experimental  evaluations,  as  performing  at  human-expert  levels  in  their 
respective  domains  (Yu,  Buchanan,  et  al.,  1979;  Yu,  Fagan,  et  al.,  1979). 

Acquisition  of  knowledge.  Knowledge  acquisition  is  the  transfer  of  the 
expert's  knowledge  to  a  program.  Currently,  the  only  successful  way  of  doing 
this  is  through  a  computer-scientist  intermediary,  although  eventually  experts 
should  be  able  to  communicate  directly  with  the  consultation  program. 

Concluding  Remarks 

Despite  the  extensive  work  that  has  been  done,  none  of  these  systems  is 
in  routine  clinical  use,  except  for  PUFF,  mentioned  above.  Constructed  with 


A  Overview  183 

EMYCIN  (a  system  for  building  expert  systems  in  any  domain,  with  MYCIN'S 
representation  and  control  structure),  PUFF  employs  a  set  of  about  55  rules 
on  pulmonary  dysfunction.  The  program  offers  treatment  recommendations 
that  can  be  overridden  by  the  physician. 

The  main  reason  that  other  expert  systems  have  not  been  put  to  use  in 
medical  practice  is  that  they  have  yet  to  satisfy  the  indispensability  criterion: 
They  are  not  indispensable  to  the  practice  of  medicine,  and  physicians  perform 
adequately  without  them.  For  AI  programs  to  make  a  significant  impact 
on  health  care,  at  least  in  the  short  term,  it  appears  that  PUFF's  example 
should  be  followed.  Thus,  the  ingredients  for  a  successful  application  in 
medicine  appear  to  be  (a)  a  careful  choice  of  the  medical  problem  and  (b)  the 
cooperation  of  interested  experts.  The  domain  must  be  narrow  and  rela- 
tively self-contained,  the  computer  should  provide  substantive  assistance  to 
the  physician,  and  the  task  should  be  one  that  the  physician  either  cannot  do 
or  is  willing  to  let  a  computer  do. 

To  summarize,  the  main  focuses  of  AI  research  activity  in  medical  decision- 
making aids  today  are:  knowledge  engineering,  for  acquiring  knowledge  from 
experts;  knowledge  representation,  for  building  and  maintaining  the  large 
medical  knowledge  bases;  strategy  design,  for  reasoning  with  the  medical 
knowledge;  and  explanation  capabilities  as  part  of  program  designs,  for  pre- 
senting their  reasoning  to  users. 

References 

Shortliffe,  Buchanan,  and  Feigenbaum  (1979)  is  an  up-to-date  overview  of 
medical  computing,  including  AI  applications  in  this  area.  Feigenbaum  (1977) 
gives  a  short  review  of  this  research.  Most  of  the  work  on  medical  systems  is 
discussed  in  detail  in  the  AIM  Workshop  proceedings  (AIM,  1975-81).  Work 
on  some  of  the  most  important  systems  is  described  in  a  special  issue  of  the 
Journal  of  Artificial  Intelligence  (Sridharan,  1978).  The  article  by  Szolovits 
in  that  issue  is  an  excellent  overview  of  AI  applications  in  medicine. 


B.     MEDICAL  SYSTEMS 
Bl.     MYCIN 


THE  MYCIN  system  (Shortliffe,  1976)  was  designed  to  provide  consultative 
advice  on  diagnosis  and  therapy  for  infectious  diseases.  Such  advice  is  often 
required  in  hospital  care  because  the  attending  physician  may  not  be  an 
expert  on  infectious  diseases  that  show  themselves  during  hospitalization — for 
example,  an  infection  that  develops  in  a  cardiology  patient  after  heart  surgery. 
Time  considerations  compound  the  problem.  A  specimen  (blood,  urine,  etc.) 
from  a  patient  can  show  some  evidence  of  bacterial  growth  within  12  hours, 
but  generally  it  takes  24  to  48  hours  (or  more)  for  positive  identification.  The 
physician  must,  therefore,  often  decide  in  the  absence  of  complete  information 
whether  or  not  to  start  treatment  and  what  drugs  to  use  if  treatment  is 
required.  Both  of  these  may  be  difficult  questions. 

The  MYCIN  protocol  that  follows  shows  the  initial  and  final  parts  of  a 
sample  interaction  between  a  physician  and  the  system.  MYCIN,  in  effect, 
interviews  the  doctor  about  the  patient,  collecting  information  from  which  it 
infers  the  diagnosis  and  selects  an  appropriate  therapy. 

PATIENT- 1 


1)  Patient's  name:    (first-last) 

**  Fred  Smith 

MYCIN  collects  some  background  data  about  the  patient.  The  physician 's 
response  follows  the  double  asterisks. 

2)  Sex: 
**  Male 

3)  Age: 

**   55 

4)  Have  you  been  able  to  obtain  positive  cultures  from  a  site 
at  which  Fred  Smith  has  an  infection? 

**  Yes 

INFECTION-1 


5)  What  is  the  infection? 
**  Primary-bacteremia 


184 


Bl  MYCIN  185 

6)  Please  give  the  date  and  approximate  time  when  signs  or 
symptoms  of  the  primary-bacteremia  (inf ection-1)  first  appeared, 
(mo/da/yr) 

**  May  5,  1980 

The  most  recent  positive  culture  associated  with  the 
primary-bacteremia  (inf ection-1)  will  be  referred  to  as: 

CULTURE- 1 


7)  From  what  site  was  the  specimen  for  culture-1  taken? 
**  Blood 

8)  Please  give  the  date  and  time  when  this  blood  culture 
(culture-1)  was  obtained.   (mo/da/yr) 

**  May  9,  1980 

The  first  significant  organism  from  this  blood  culture 
(culture-1)  will  be  referred  to  as: 

ORGANISM-1 


9)  Enter  the  identity  of  organism-1 : 

**  Unknown 

Typically,  the  identity  of  the  organism  is  not  known  and,  hence,  must  be 
inferred  by  MYCIN  from  various  other  pieces  of  laboratory  and  clinical 
information.  MYCIN  proceeds  to  ask  questions  that  could  help  to  deter- 
mine the  identity  of  the  organism. 

10)  Is  organism-1  a  rod,  or  coccus  (etc.): 
**  Rod 

11)  The  gram  stain  of  organism-1: 
**  Gramneg 

12)  Have  there  been  positive  cultures  from  sites  which  are  NOT 
associated  with  infections  about  which  you  are  seeking  advice? 

**  No 

13)  Did  organism-1  grow  aerobically? 
**  Yes  (.8) 

14)  Did  organism-1  grow  anaerobically? 
**  Yes 

15)  What  is  the  suspected  portal  of  entry  of  organism-1  into 
this  sterile  site? 

**  GI  (.6) 


186  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

More  questions  follow,  to  gather  sufficient  information  for  inferring  pos- 
sible identities  of  the  infecting  organisms. 

My  therapy  recommendation  will  be  based  on  the  following 
probable  infection (s)  and  potential  causative  organism (s) : 

INFECTION- 1  is  PR I MARY- BACTEREMIA 

<Item  1>  The  identity  of  organism-1  may  be  PSEUDOMONAS-AERUGINOSA 

<Item  2>  The  identity  of  organism-1  may  be  KLEBSIELLA-PNEUMONIAE 

<Item  3>  The  identity  of  organism-1  may  be  E.COLI 

<Item  4>  The  identity  of  organism-1  may  be  BACTEROIDES-FRAGILIS 

<Item  5>  The  identity  of  organism-1  may  be  ENTEROBACTER 

<Item  6>  The  identity  of  organism-1  may  be  PROTEUS-NON-MIRABILIS 

46)  On  a  scale  of  0  to  4,  where  higher  numbers  indicate 
increasing  severity,  how  would  you  rate  Fred  Smith's  degree 
of  sickness? 

**  3 

47)  Does  Fred  Smith  have  a  clinically  significant  allergic 
reaction  to  any  antimicrobial  agent? 

**  No 

48)  Fred  Smith's  weight  in  kilograms  (or  <number>  pounds) : 
**  70 

Note  that  two  drugs  cover  for  six  potential  organisms. 

[Rec  1]  My  preferred  therapy  recommendation  is  as  follows: 

In  order  to  cover  for  Items  <1  2  3  5  6>: 
Give:  GENTAMICIN 

Dose:  119  mg  (1.7  mg/kg)  q8h  IV  [or  IM]  for  10  days 
Comments:  Modify  dose  in  renal  failure 

In  order  to  cover  for  Item  <4>: 
Give:  CLINDAMYCIN 

Dose:  595  mg  (8.5  mg/kg)  q6h  IV  [or  IM]  for  14  days 
Comments:  If  diarrhea  or  other  GI  symptoms  develop, 

patient  should  be  evaluated  for  possible 

pseudomembranous  colitis . 

Do  you  wish  to  see  the  next-choice  therapy? 

Alternative  choices  are  available. 

**  Yes 

Which,  if  any,  of  the  above  drugs  do  you  wish  eliminated 
from  consideration? 

**  Clindamycin 


Bl  MYCIN  187 

[Rec  2]  Next  best  therapy  recommendation: 

In  order  to  cover  for  Items  <2  3  4  5  6>: 
Give:  CHLORAMPHENICOL 

Dose:  1  gm  (15  mg/kg)  q6h  IV  for  14  days 
Comments:  Monitor  patient's  white  count 

In  order  to  cover  for  Item  <1>: 
Give:  GENTAMICIN 

Dose:  119  mg  (1.7  mg/kg)  q8h  IV  [or  IM]  for  10  days 
Comments :  Modify  dose  in  renal  failure 


MYCIN'S  Knowledge  Base 

The  medical  knowledge  in  MYCIN  is  encoded  as  production  rules  of  the 
sort  shown  in  Figure  Bl-1  (see  Article  III.C4,  in  Vol.  I,  on  production-system 
knowledge  representation).  The  rules  are  stored  internally  in  the  LISP  form 
shown,  from  which  the  English  version  is  generated.  Each  rule  is  a  single 
"chunk"  of  domain-specific  information  indicating  an  action  (in  this  case,  a 
conclusion)  that  is  justified  if  the  conditions  specified  in  the  premise  are  ful- 
filled. Since  the  rule  employs  a  vocabulary  of  concepts  common  to  the  domain, 
it  forms,  by  itself,  a  comprehensible  statement  of  some  piece  of  domain  knowl- 
edge. As  will  become  clear,  this  characteristic  is  useful  in  many  ways. 

Each  rule  is  highly  stylized — with  an  IF . .  .  THEN  format  and  a  specified 
set  of  admissible  primitives.  In  fact,  the  internal  form,  as  illustrated,  is  exe- 
cutable LISP  code.  Furthermore,  this  tightly  structured  form  makes  it  possible 
for  a  program  to  be  designed  to  examine  the  rules  as  well  as  execute  them. 


RULE  050 

PREMISE:   (  AND  (SAME  CNTXT  INFECT  PRIMARY-BACTEREMIA) 

(MEMBF  CNTXT  SITE  STERILESITES) 

(SAME  CNTXT  PORTAL  GI)  ) 
ACTION:    (CONCLUDE  CNTXT  IDENT  BACTEROIDES  TALLY  .7) 

MYCIN'S  English  translation: 

IF        1)  the  infection  is  primary-bacteremia,  and 

2)  the  site  of  the  culture  is  one  of  the  sterile  sites,  and 

3)  the  suspected  portal  of  entry  of  the  organism  is 
the  gastrointestinal  tract, 

THEN      there  is  suggestive  evidence  (.7)  that  the  identity  of  the 
organism  is  bacteroides. 


Figure  Bl-1.  A  MYCIN  production  rule. 


188  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

For  example,  the  rules  can  be  translated  into  a  readable  English  format,  as  in 
Figure  Bl-1.  This  translation  capability  has  been  used  in  MYCIN  to  explain 
the  program's  inferences  to  the  expert.  (The  importance  of  the  system's 
ability  to  explain  a  line  of  reasoning  leading  to  a  conclusion  and  to  justify 
why  the  program  is  asking  a  particular  question  in  a  given  case  is  discussed 
in  Articles  VILA,  VII.B,  and  VIILA.)  The  current  knowledge  base  contains  450 
such  rules  that  allow  MYCIN  to  diagnose  and  prescribe  therapy  for  bacteremia 
(infections  of  the  blood)  and  meningitis. 

The  premise  of  each  rule  is  a  Boolean  combination  of  one  or  more  clauses, 
each  of  which  is  constructed  from  a  predicate  function  with  an  associative 
triple — (attribute,  object,  value) — as  its  argument.  Thus,  each  premise  clause 
typically  has  the  following  four  components: 

(predicate  function)  (object)  (attribute)  (value)  . 

For  example,  the  second  clause  in  rule  50,  above,  is: 

The  site  of  the  culture  is  one  of  the  sterile  sites; 

or,  in  LISP: 

(MEMBF  CNTXT  SITE  STERILESITES) 

I  I  I  I 

Predicate         Object         Attribute  Value    . 

MEMBF  is  a  predicate,  and  the  triple  says  that  the  site  of  the  current  object 
(an  organism,  in  this  case)  is  a  member  of  the  class  of  sterile  sites.  A  stan- 
dardized set  of  some  24  domain-independent  predicate  functions  (e.g.,  SAME, 
KNOWN,  DEFINITE)  and  a  range  of  domain-specific  attributes  (e.g.,  IDENTITY, 
SITE),  objects  (e.g.,  ORGANISM,  CULTURE),  and  associated  values  (e.g.,  E.COLI, 
BLOOD)  form  the  vocabulary  of  conceptual  primitives  for  constructing  rules. 
A  rule  premise  is  always  a  conjunction  of  clauses,  but  it  may  contain 
arbitrarily  complex  conjunctions  or  disjunctions  nested  within  each  clause. 
(Instead  of  writing  rules  whose  premise  would  be  a  disjunction  of  clauses,  a 
separate  rule  is  written  for  each  clause.)  The  action  part  indicates  one  or 
more  conclusions  that  can  be  drawn  if  the  premises  are  satisfied,  making  the 
rules  purely  inferential. 

Certainty  Factors 

Note  that  the  rules  are  judgmental;  that  is,  they  make  inexact  inferences 
on  a  confidence  scale  of  —1.0  to  1.0,  where  —1.0  represents  complete  confidence 
that  a  proposition  is  false  and  1.0  represents  complete  confidence  that  it  is 
true.  In  the  case  of  the  rule  in  Figure  Bl-1,  the  evidence  cited  in  the  premise 
is  enough  to  assert  the  conclusion  shown  with  a  mild  degree  of  confidence:  .7. 
This  number  is  called  the  certainty  or  confidence  factor  (CF)  and  embodies  a 
model  of  confirmation  described  by  Shortliffe  (1976). 


Bl  MYCIN  189 

MYCIN  uses  CFs  rather  than  other,  more  standard  statistical  measures  to 
decide  among  alternatives  during  a  consultation  session.  Standard  statistical 
measures  were  rejected  in  favor  of  CFs  because  experience  with  clinicians  had 
shown  that  clinicians  do  not  use  the  information  comparable  to  implemented 
standard  statistical  methods.  However,  the  concept  of  CFs  did  appear  to 
fit  the  clinicians'  reasoning  patterns — their  judgments  of  how  they  weighted 
factors,  strong  or  weak,  in  decision  making. 

The  CFs  are  a  measurement  of  the  association  between  the  premise  and 
action  clauses  of  each  rule.  When  a  production  rule  succeeds  because  its 
premise  clauses  are  true  in  the  current  context,  the  CFs  of  the  component 
clauses  that  indicate  how  strongly  each  clause  is  believed  are  combined,  and 
the  resulting  CF  is  used  to  modify  the  CF  specified  in  the  action  clauses.  Thus, 
if  the  premise  was  only  weakly  believed  (low,  positive  total  CF),  any  conclu- 
sions that  the  rule  might  make  would  be  modified  (reduced)  to  reflect  this 
weak  belief  that  the  patient  was  in  a  particular  situation.  In  questions  13  and 
15  in  the  preceding  transcript,  the  user  shows  lack  of  complete  confidence. 
Also,  since  the  conclusion  of  one  rule  may  be  the  premise  of  another,  reasoning 
from  premises  with  less  than  complete  confidence  factors  is  commonplace. 

Medical  facts  about  the  patient  are  represented  as  4-tuples  made  up  of  an 
associative  triple  and  its  current  CF.  Positive  CFs  indicate  that  the  evidence 
confirms  the  hypothesis;  negative  CFs  indicate  disconfirming  evidence.  The 
following  are  examples  of  such  4-tuples: 

(IDENT  ORGANISM-2  KLEBSIELLA  .25) 
(IDENT  ORGANISM-2  E.COLI  .73) 
(SENSITIVS  ORGANISM-1  PENICILLIN  -1.0) 
(IMMUNOSUPPRESSED  PATIENT-1  YES  1.0) 

MYCIN'S  model  of  inexact  reasoning  permits  the  coexistence  of  several 
plausible  values  for  a  single  attribute,  if  this  is  suggested  by  the  evidence. 
For  example,  after  attempting  to  deduce  the  identity  (IDENT)  of  an  organism, 
MYCIN  may  have  concluded  (correctly)  that  there  is  evidence  of  both  E.coli 
and  Klebsiella. 

To  summarize,  there  are  two  major  forms  of  knowledge  representation 
in  use  in  the  performance  program:  (a)  the  attributes,  objects,  and  values, 
which  form  a  vocabulary  of  domain-specific  conceptual  primitives,  and  (b)  the 
inference  rules  expressed  in  terms  of  these  primitives. 

Reasoning:  The  Inference  Engine 

The  mechanism  used  to  draw  conclusions  based  on  the  rules  in  the  knowl- 
edge base  and  the  data  for  the  current  case  is  the  system's  reasoning  process, 
or  inference  engine.  In  MYCIN,  rules  are  invoked  in  a  simple  backward- 
chaining  fashion  that  results  in  an  exhaustive  depth-first  search  of  an  AND/OR 
goal  tree  (see  Article  II. B2,  in  Vol.  i).  For  example,  assume  that  the  program  is 
attempting  to  determine  the  identity  of  an  infecting  organism.  It  retrieves  all 


190  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIE 

the  rules  that  make  a  conclusion  about  the  topic  (i.e.,  that  mention  the  identity 
of  bacteria  in  their  action  clause)  and  invokes  each  one  in  turn,  evaluating 
each  premise  clause  to  see  if  the  conditions  specified  have  been  met.  For  the 
sample  rule  in  Figure  Bl-1,  this  process  would  begin  with  the  first  clause, 
determining  whether  the  type  of  the  infection  is  primary  bacteremia.  Since 
the  type  of  the  infection  is  unknown,  it  is  set  up  as  a  subgoal  and  the  process 
recurs — the  system  then  looks  for  rules  that  conclude  about  this  new  topic, 
the  type  of  the  infection. 

The  subgoal  that  is  set  up  is  a  generalized  form  of  the  original  goal. 
In  other  words,  the  subgoal  is  always  of  the  form  Determine  the  value  of 
(attribute)  rather  than  Determine  whether  the  (attribute)  is  equal  to  (value). 
Thus,  for  the  first  clause  in  rule  50  (the  infection  is  primary-bacteremia),  the 
subgoal  set  up  is  Determine  the  type  of  infection.  By  setting  up  the  generalized 
goal  of  collecting  all  evidence  about  an  attribute,  the  performance  program 
effectively  exhausts  each  subject  as  it  is  encountered  and  thus  tends  to  group 
together  all  questions  about  a  given  topic.  This  feature  results  in  a  system 
that  displays  a  much  more  focused,  methodical  approach  to  the  task,  which  is 
a  distinct  advantage  when  human-engineering  considerations  are  important. 
The  cost  is  the  effort  of  deducing  or  collecting  information  that  is  not  strictly 
necessary.  However,  since  this  unnecessary  effort  occurs  rarely — only  when 
the  (attribute)  can  be  deduced  with  certainty  to  be  the  (value)  named  in  the 
original  goal — it  has  not  proved  to  be  a  problem  in  practice. 

The  search  is  thus  depth  first  (because  each  premise  condition  is  thor- 
oughly explored  in  turn),  the  tree  that  is  sprouted  is  an  AND/OR  goal  tree 
(because  rules  may  have  OR  conditions  in  their  premise),  and  the  search  is 
exhaustive  (all  of  the  rules  that  are  applicable  are  "fired"  and  their  conclusions 
are  rank-ordered  by  certainty  factors).  Since  the  rules  are  inexact — leading  to 
conclusions  of  less  than  total  certainty — it  is  a  wisely  conservative  strategy  to 
continue  to  collect  all  evidence  about  the  subgoal  from  other  applicable  rules 
even  if  one  rule  succeeds;  MYCIN  considers  all  the  possibilities  every  time. 

If,  after  trying  all  relevant  rules  to  resolve  a  subgoal,  the  total  weight 
of  the  evidence  about  a  hypothesis  falls  between  —.2  and  .2  (an  empirically 
determined  threshold  value),  the  answer  is  regarded  as  still  unknown.  This 
result  would  occur  if  no  rules  were  applicable  (because  their  premises  did  not 
match  the  available  data),  if  the  applicable  rules  were  too  weak,  if  the  effects 
of  several  rules  offset  each  other,  or  if  there  were  no  rules  for  this  subgoal  at 
all.  In  any  of  these  cases,  when  the  system  is  unable  to  deduce  the  answer,  it 
asks  the  user  for  the  value  of  the  subgoal  (using  a  phrase  that  is  stored  along 
with  the  attribute  itself). 

This  strategy,  of  always  attempting  to  deduce  the  value  of  a  subgoal  and 
asking  the  user  only  when  deduction  fails,  ensures  a  minimum  of  questions. 
It  could  also  mean,  however,  that  work  might  be  expended  searching  for  a 
subgoal,  arriving  perhaps  at  a  less  than  definite  answer  when  the  user  might 
already  know  the  answer  with  certainty.    To  prevent  this  inefficiency,  some 


Bl  MYCIN  191 

of  the  attributes  have  been  labeled  "laboratory  data"  to  indicate  that  they 
represent  information  available  as  results  of  quantitative  tests.  In  these  cases, 
the  deduce-then-ask  procedure  is  reversed,  and  the  system  attempts  to  deduce 
the  answer  only  if  the  user  cannot  supply  it.  Given  the  desire  to  minimize 
both  tree  search  and  the  number  of  questions  asked,  there  is  no  guaranteed 
optimal  solution  to  the  problem  of  deciding  when  to  ask  for  information  and 
when  to  try  to  infer  it,  but  the  distinction  described  here  has  worked  well  and 
seems  to  embody  an  appropriate  criterion. 

Two  other  additions  to  straightforward  tree  search  increase  the  infer- 
ence engine's  efficiency.  First,  before  the  entire  list  of  rules  for  a  subgoal  is 
retrieved,  the  program  attempts  to  find  a  sequence  of  rules  that  would  estab- 
lish the  goal  with  certainty,  based  only  on  what  is  currently  known.  Since  this 
is  a  search  for  a  sequence  of  rules  with  CF  =  1,  the  result  is  termed  a  unity 
path.  In  addition  to  efficiency,  this  process  offers  the  advantage  of  allowing  the 
program  to  make  commonsense  deductions  with  a  minimum  of  effort  (rules 
with  CF  =  1  are  largely  definitional).  Because  there  are  few  such  rules  in  the 
system,  the  search  is  typically  very  brief. 

Second,  the  inference  engine  performs  a  partial  evaluation  of  rule  premises. 
Since  many  attributes  are  found  in  several  rules,  the  value  of  one  clause 
(perhaps  the  last)  in  a  premise  may  already  have  been  established  while  the 
rest  are  still  unknown.  If  this  clause  alone  would  make  the  premise  false,  there 
is  clearly  no  reason  to  do  all  the  search  necessary  to  establish  the  others.  Each 
premise  is  thus  previewed  by  evaluating  it  on  the  basis  of  currently  available 
information.  The  result  is  a  Boolean  combination  of  TRUEs,  FALSEs,  and 
UNKNOWNS,  and  straightforward  simplification  (e.g.,  F  X  U  =  F)  indicates 
whether  the  rule  is  guaranteed  to  fail. 

Therapy  Selection 

After  MYCIN  determines  the  significant  infections  and  the  organisms  that 
cause  them,  it  proceeds  to  recommend  an  antimicrobial  regimen  if  this  is 
appropriate.  The  MYCIN  therapy  selector  (Clancey,  1978)  uses  a  descrip- 
tion of  the  patient's  infections,  the  causal  organisms,  a  ranking  of  drugs 
by  sensitivity,  and  a  set  of  drug-preference  categories  (such  as  Propose  two 
drugs:  one  second-choice  drug  and  one  third- choice  drug)  to  recommend  a 
drug  regimen.  The  algorithm  will  also  modify  dosages  in  the  case  of  renal 
failure  in  the  patient.  The  program  can  provide  detailed  explanations  of  how 
it  made  a  regimen  choice  and  can  accept  and  critique  a  regimen  proposed  by 
the  physician. 

Acquisition  and  Use  of  New  Knowledge 

The  representation  of  knowledge  as  production  rules  and  the  ability  to 
explain  specific  rules  allow  MYCIN  to  interact  with  an  expert  clinician  in  a 


192  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

manner  that  permits  the  system  to  acquire  and  apply  new  knowledge.  Davis's 
TEIRESIAS  system  (see  Article  VII.B)  works  in  conjunction  with  MYCIN  and 
allows  the  expert  to  inspect  faulty  reasoning  chains  and  then  add  and  modify 
any  rules  or  clinical  parameters  required  to  augment  and  repair  the  medical 
knowledge  of  MYCIN. 

When  the  expert  is  dissatisfied  with  the  system's  performance  on  a  par- 
ticular case,  MYCIN  is  able  to  explain  how  it  made  the  erroneous  conclusions 
and  to  guide  the  expert  while  he  (or  she)  is  determining  the  source  of  the 
reasoning  "bug."  To  correct  the  reasoning,  the  expert  may  elect  to  enter  new 
rules  or  alter  existing  ones.  He  enters  his  requests  through  a  "nearly  natural 
language"  interface.  These  requests  to  add  or  modify  a  rule  are  parsed  by 
the  system  and  used  to  create  a  new  rule  in  MYCIN'S  internal  (LISP)  format, 
which  is  then  translated  back  into  English  (as  in  Fig.  Bl-1)  and  presented  to 
the  user  for  inspection.  This  interaction  helps  minimize  any  misunderstanding 
between  the  clinician  and  MYCIN. 

Once  this  new  rule  is  accepted  and  understood  by  the  system,  the  next 
consultation  will  make  use  of  it  and  alter  its  recommendations  accordingly. 
This  ability  permits  the  system  to  interact  directly  with  the  domain  experts 
without  the  intervention  of  a  programmer. 

Concluding  Remarks 

Formal  evaluations  of  the  MYCIN  system  have  been  made  that  indicate 
that  MYCIN  compares  favorably  with  experts  in  infectious  disease  in  diagnos- 
ing and  selecting  therapy  for  patients  with  bacteremia  and  meningitis  (Yu, 
Buchanan,  et  al.,  1979;  Yu,  Fagan,  et  al.,  1979).  At  present,  however,  the  sys- 
tem is  not  used  on  the  wards,  primarily  because  of  its  incomplete  knowledge 
of  the  full  spectrum  of  infectious  diseases. 

MYCIN  was  one  of  the  first  of  a  new  breed  of  computer  systems — systems 
that  step  out  of  the  toy  worlds  of  AI  into  the  real  world.  These  systems  must 
deal  with  many  of  the  social  and  psychological  problems  of  man-machine 
interactions.  Issues  such  as  modularity  and  representation  of  knowledge, 
reasoning  in  specific  domains,  explanation  of  a  system's  logic,  and  the  ability 
to  accumulate  and  use  new  information  must  be  considered,  with  attention 
given  both  to  programming  and  to  interfacing  problems.  MYCIN  has  been 
designed  with  these  issues  in  mind  and  has  consequently  shown  promise  as  a 
real-world  aid  to  the  clinician. 

References 

See  Shortliffe  (1976)  and  Davis  (1976). 


B2.     CASNET 


THE  Causal  ASsociational  NETwork  (CASNET)  program  (Weiss,  Kulikowski, 
and  Safir,  1977)  is  a  computer  system  developed  at  Rutgers  University  for 
performing  medical  diagnosis.  The  major  application  of  CASNET  has  been  in 
the  domain  of  glaucoma.  The  system  represents  a  disease  not  as  a  static  state 
but  as  a  dynamic  process  that  can  be  modeled  as  a  network  of  causally  linked 
pathophysiological  states.  The  system  diagnoses  a  patient  by  determining 
the  pattern  of  pathophysiological  causal  pathways  present  in  the  patient  and 
identifying  this  pattern  with  a  disease  category.  Once  the  disease  category  is 
explicitly  identified,  the  most  appropriate  treatments  can  be  prescribed.  The 
causal  model  also  makes  possible  a  prediction  of  the  likely  course  of  a  disease 
both  if  treated  and  if  untreated. 

Representation  of  Medical  Knowledge 

A  CASNET  model  consists  of  three  planes  of  knowledge,  parts  of  which 
are  shown  in  Figure  B2-1.  The  plane  of  pathophysiological  states  is  the  heart 
of  the  model.  The  nodes  in  this  plane  represent  elementary  hypotheses  about 
the  disease  process,  and  arcs  here  represent  a  causal  connection  between  two 
elementary  hypotheses;  for  example,  INCREASED  INTRAOCULAR  PRESSURE 
. . .  CAUSES  . . .  CUPPING  OF  THE  OPTIC  DISK.  Associated  with  each  link  is 
a  forward  weight  or  confidence  factor,  a  number  on  a  scale  of  1  through  5, 
where  1  corresponds  to  "rarely  causes"  and  5  to  "(almost)  always  causes."  The 
determination  of  these  weights  and  their  utility  in  confirming  or  disconfirming 
the  presence  of  a  pathophysiological  state  are  discussed  later  in  this  article. 

The  plane  of  observations  contains  nodes  representing  evidence  gathered 
from  the  patient — signs,  symptoms,  and  laboratory  tests.  During  a  consul- 
tation, some  or  all  of  these  nodes  will  be  instantiated.  Nodes  in  this  plane 
are  linked  to  nodes  in  the  pathophysiological  plane.  The  links  have  associated 
confidences,  again  on  a  scale  of  1  through  5,  reflecting  the  degree  to  which  the 
particular  test,  symptom,  or  sign  supports  the  associated  state.  For  example, 
a  scotoma  (a  perimetry  measurement)  strongly  indicates  VISUAL  FIELD  LOSS, 
so  it  has  a  confidence  value  of  5.  The  same  test,  however,  could  have  a  different 
confidence  value  depending  on  the  results;  for  example,  15  mm  of  Hg  could  be 
considered  evidence  for  INCREASED  INTRAOCULAR  PRESSURE,  but  a  result  of 
30  would  be  definite  evidence  and  would  carry  a  greater  confidence  value.  The 
confidence  values  with  which  observations  are  linked  to  pathophysiological 
states  are  predetermined  by  the  designers  of  CASNET. 

In  general,  there  is  usually  more  than  one  test  for  a  particular  state,  and 
the  same  test  might  indicate  more  than  one  state.    Each  test  also  has  an 


193 


194 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine 


vm 


Disease 
Categories 


r7i  Secondary 


Pathophysiological 
States 


Observations 


SYMPTOMS 


Associational 
Links 


Gonioscopy         /  T     ~~~~----/ 

Synechias  /  /  •— ^. 

g*i  Tonometry:  /  "*%, 

l*3  (OP  =  45  mm  Hg       W\  Perimetry:  \ 

^  Arcuate  Scotoma  \ 


Blurred  """^^-^^^         rk  Ophtha!mo$copy: 
Vision     /  -C^Cfl^O.7  II3I3 

^"'  rzaDilated    \  ^"^^  ^«~ 

C        SIGNS    "^PuP't         /  "~"  "~ 


Figure  B2-1.   Three-level  description  of  a  disease  process  (Weiss  et  al.,  1978). 


associated  cost  that  reflects  both  monetary  cost  and  danger  to  the  patient. 
Some  states  may  not  have  a  corresponding  test,  since  such  a  test  may  not  exist 
or  may  be  judged  too  difficult  or  costly  to  use  for  a  particular  pathology. 

The  third  plane  contains  the  classification  tables  for  the  disease.  A  classi- 
fication table  defines  a  disease  as  a  set  of  confirmed  and  denied  pathophysio- 


B2  CASNET  195 

logical  states.  It  also  contains  a  set  of  treatment  statements  for  that  disease. 
For  example,  the  classification  table  in  Figure  B2-2  indicates  that  if  a  patient 
is  found  to  have  ANGLE  CLOSURE  and  INCREASED  INTRAOCULAR  PRESSURE 
but  neither  CUPPING  nor  VISUAL  FIELD  LOSS,  then  he  (or  she)  has  ANGLE 
CLOSURE  GLAUCOMA;  if  he  has  ANGLE  CLOSURE,  INCREASED  INTRAOCULAR 
PRESSURE,  CUPPING,  and  VISUAL  FIELD  LOSS,  then  he  has  CHRONIC  ANGLE 
CLOSURE  GLAUCOMA.  The  concept  represented  in  the  classification  tables 
is  that  a  disease  is  dynamic  with  respect  to  time  and  that  confirmed  states 
farther  down  a  pathway  represent  more  advanced  stages  of  the  disease.  The 
states  in  a  classification  table  will  generally  be  on  the  same  pathway.  A  starting 
state  is  a  state  with  no  causes  in  the  network  (also  called  a  basic  disease 
mechanism).  Inadequate  understanding  of  disease  mechanisms  or  incomplete 
models  sometimes  lead  to  classification  tables  containing  states  from  more 
than  one  pathway. 

Reasoning 

Figure  B2-2  illustrates  how  CASNET  defines  a  disease  as  a  conjunction  of 
causally  related  pathophysiological  states.  Diagnosis  in  CASNET  is  a  matter 
of  finding  one  or  more  causal  pathways  between  these  states.  Reasoning  in 
CASNET  is  designed  to  maximize  the  likelihood  of  finding  these  pathways, 
given  a  set  of  signs,  symptoms,  and  test  results. 

A  diagnostic  session  begins  with  the  program's  asking  the  user  (physician) 
a  series  of  questions  about  the  patient.  The  physican  answers  with  values 
for  any  tests,  signs,  and  symptoms,  or  he  answers  UNKNOWN.  These  values, 
together  with  the  confidences  associated  with  the  tests  and  the  weights  asso- 
ciated with  the  causal  arcs,  are  used  to  compute  a  status,  or  confidence  factor, 
for  each  node  in  the  causal  net. 

The  STATUS  of  a  state  is  affected  both  by  the  results  of  its  associated  tests 
and  by  the  STATUS  values  of  the  states  around  it.  For  example,  if  A  causes 
B  and  B  is  confirmed  by  observation,  then  there  is  strong  evidence  for  A. 
A  general  algorithm  is  used  to  propagate  these  weights  on  a  state,  both  in 
the  forward  direction  (i.e.,  along  the  direction  of  the  causal  link)  and  in  the 
backward  direction.  A  state  is  marked  confirmed  if  its  STATUS  is  greater  than 
a  preset  threshold,  and  it  is  marked  denied  if  its  STATUS  is  less  than  a  second 


STATE 

DISEASES 

TREATMENTS 

ANGLE  CLOSURE 

INCR  IOP 

ANGLE  CLOSURE  GLAUCOMA 

TREATMNT1 

CUPPING 

VFL 

CHRONIC  ANGLE  CLOSURE  GLAUCOMA 

TR1,  TR2 

Figure  B2-2.     A  classification  table. 


196  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

threshold;  otherwise,  it  is  undetermined.  The  program  employs  a  strategy  for 
selecting  the  next  question  that  is  based  on  the  cost  of  the  test  and  on  the 
likelihood  that  it  will  lead  to  the  confirmation  or  denial  of  a  state. 

After  all  available  symptoms  and  findings  have  been  entered  and  after 
the  STATUS  values  have  been  computed,  the  classification  tables  are  used  to 
determine  diagnoses  and  treatments.  The  tables  are  selected  to  cover  all 
confirmed  nodes.  The  strategy  for  selecting  the  tables  is  to  find  the  starting 
states  for  which  causal  pathways  can  be  generated  that  reach  the  largest 
number  of  confirmed  states  without  traversing  a  denied  state.  This  procedure 
is  repeated  until  all  of  the  confirmed  states  are  covered. 

The  treatment  statements  of  the  selected  classification  tables  are  then 
used  to  select  a  therapy  for  the  indicated  diseases.  Like  a  state,  a  treat- 
ment has  an  associated  STATUS  that  is  interpreted  as  its  confidence  in  its 
success  as  a  treatment.  The  treatment  with  the  highest  STATUS  is  selected. 
This  assessment  is  repeated  for  all  selected  classification  tables.  A  final  algo- 
rithm decides  whether  some  treatments  are  subsumed  by  others,  and  then  the 
final  treatment  recommendations  are  printed.  If  desired,  a  short  summary  of 
research  justifying  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  can  also  be  printed.  The  cur- 
rent glaucoma  model  contains  about  150  states,  350  tests,  and  50  classification 
tables. 

Summary 

CASNET  adopts  a  strictly  bottom-up  approach  to  the  problem  of  diag- 
nosis, working  from  the  tests,  through  the  causal  pathways,  to  a  diagnosis. 
The  separation  of  medical  knowledge  (encoded  in  the  causal  network)  from 
reasoning  strategies  (embodied  in  the  program)  will  make  the  expansion  of 
the  disease  model,  when  new  research  discoveries  are  made,  a  simple  matter. 
The  program  is  continually  being  tested  and  updated  by  a  computer-based 
network  of  collaborators. 

The  model  also  provides  a  convenient  way  of  following  the  progress  of 
a  patient's  disease  over  multiple  visits — the  causal  net  can  be  used  to  view 
the  disease  progression,  both  forward  and  backward,  along  the  pathways. 
Although  CASNET  has  been  used  primarily  for  glaucoma,  the  representational 
scheme  and  decision-making  procedures  are  applicable  to  other  diseases  that 
are  understood  well  enough  to  make  the  process  of  disease  known.  The  pro- 
gram's performance  has  been  evaluated  by  opthalmologists  and  is  considered 
close  to  expert  level. 

References 

See  Weiss  et  al.  (1978). 


B3.     INTERNIST 


INTERNIST  is  a  consultation  program  in  the  domain  of  internal  medicine 
developed  jointly  by  H.  Pople,  a  computer  scientist,  and  J.  Myers,  a  specialist 
in  internal  medicine,  both  at  the  University  of  Pittsburgh.  The  program  is 
presented  with  a  list  of  manifestations  of  disease  in  a  patient  (e.g.,  symptoms, 
physical  signs,  laboratory  data,  and  history),  and  it  attempts  to  form  a 
diagnosis.  The  diagnosis  consists  of  a  list  of  diseases  that  would  account 
for  the  manifestations.  Using  information  presented  during  the  course  of  the 
consultation,  the  program  is  able  to  discriminate  between  competing  disease 
hypotheses.  The  current  version  of  the  program  only  formulates  diagnoses  and 
does  not  recommend  treatments. 

One  of  the  major  goals  of  the  INTERNIST  project  has  been  to  model  the 
way  clinicians  do  diagnostic  reasoning.  The  program  has  been  used  to  explore 
the  way  that  certain  symptoms  evoke  particular  disease  hypotheses  in  the 
minds  of  clinicians,  how  hypothesized  diseases  give  rise  to  expectations  of  other 
symptoms,  how  clinicians  focus  on  particular  disease  areas  and  temporarily 
ignore  certain  other  symptoms  that  they  judge  irrelevant,  and  how  they  decide 
between  competing  disease  hypotheses. 

From  the  standpoint  of  computer  science,  INTERNIST  is  solving  a  theory- 
formation  or  hypothesis-formation  problem  (see  Chap.  XTV,  in  Vol.  III).  Deter- 
mining a  satisfactory  diagnosis  involves  inferring  a  set  of  hypotheses  to  explain 
the  patient  data.  In  INTERNIST,  the  data  are  manifestations  and  the  hypoth- 
eses are  diseases. 

Diagnosis  in  internal  medicine  is  complicated  because  a  patient  may  suffer 
from  a  number  of  diseases  simultaneously.  Although  some  diseases  are  more 
likely  to  be  associated  than  others,  the  possible  combinations  are  too  numerous 
to  encode  a  priori.  (Pople,  1977,  suggests  that  a  conservative  estimate  of  this 
number  is  1040.)  Clearly,  diagnosis  of  a  set  of  diseases  present  in  a  patient  is 
nontrivial.  INTERNIST-I  accomplished  this  diagnosis  by  establishing  sequen- 
tially the  diseases  that  best  fit  the  data.  INTERNIST-II  is  an  improvement 
over  its  predecessor  in  that  it  establishes  the  set  of  diseases  in  parallel  and 
therefore  avoids  some  of  the  annoying  artifacts  of  sequential  processing,  such 
as  considering  a  number  of  incorrect  diagnoses  before  "focusing  in"  on  the 
correct  one. 

For  INTERNIST-I,  a  problem  is  defined  as  a  set  of  mutually  exclusive 
disease  hypotheses.  If  a  patient  has  a  number  of  diseases,  INTERNIST-I 
must  solve  that  number  of  problems.  In  brief,  INTERNIST-I  finds  a  set  of 
diseases  that  account  for  some  or  all  of  a  set  of  symptoms.  Then  it  selects  one 
disease  from  the  set  on  the  basis  of  a  scoring  schema,  which  is  the  solution 
for  one  of  the  problems.  Then  it  finds  another  set  of  diseases  that  account  for 
some  or  all  of  any  remaining  symptoms  and  again  selects  the  most  likely  of 

197 


198 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine 


VIII 


these  alternatives.  It  continues  in  this  manner  until  all  symptoms  have  been 
accounted  for. 


Representation  of  Medical  Knowledge 

INTERNIST'S  knowledge  of  diseases  is  organized  into  a  disease  tree,  or 
taxonomy,  using  the  "form-of"  relation  (see  Fig.  B3-1).  For  example,  hepato- 
cellular disease  is  a  form  of  liver  disease.  The  top-level  classification  in  this 
tree  is  by  organs — heart  disease,  lung  disease,  liver  disease,  and  so  on.  A 
disease  node's  offspring  are  refinements  of  that  disease,  terminal  nodes  being 
individual  diseases.  A  nonterminal  node  and  its  subtree  are  referred  to  as  a 
disease  area,  while  a  terminal  node  is  referred  to  as  a  disease  entity.  The 
disease  hierarchy  is  predetermined  and  fixed  in  the  system. 

Diseases  and  their  manifestations  are  related  in  two  major  ways:  (a)  a 
manifestation  can  evoke  a  disease  and  (b)  a  disease  can  manifest  certain  signs 
and  symptoms.  These  relations  can  be  thought  of  as  probabilities:  p(D  \  M) 
(the  conditional  probability  of  D  given  M)  and  p(M  \  D),  respectively.  The 
strength  of  these  relations  is  given  by  a  number  on  a  scale  of  0  through  5, 
where  0  means  that  no  conclusions  can  be  drawn  about  the  disease  and  the 
manifestation  and  5  means  that  the  manifestation  is  always  associated  with 
the  disease.  Each  disease  in  the  tree  is  associated  with  its  relevant  manifes- 
tations. Several  other  relationships  are  superimposed  on  the  disease  tree  to 
capture  causal,  temporal,  and  other  association  patterns  among  diseases. 


Liver-disease 


Hepato- 
cellular 
Disease 


All-diseases 


Lung-disease 


Form-of 


Heart-disease 


Form-of 


Form-of 


Hepato-       Hepato- 
cellular      cellular 
Injury        Infection 


Figure  B3-1.     INTERNIST'S  disease  tree. 


B3  INTERNIST  199 

The  disease  tree  and  its  associated  manifestations  are  constructed  and 
maintained  separately  from  the  diagnosis  program.  All  known  EVOKE  and 
MANIFEST  relations  are  entered  for  the  terminal  nodes  (diseases)  of  the  tree. 
A  list  of  manifestations  is  then  computed  for  each  nonterminal  node  of  the  tree 
by  taking  the  intersection  of  the  manifestation  lists  of  that  node's  offspring. 
In  this  way,  the  manifestations  "percolate"  up  through  the  tree  to  the  most 
general  disease  with  which  they  are  associated  and  are  stored  only  with 
this  node.  This  means  that  manifestations  associated  with  a  nonterminal 
disease  node  are,  by  implication,  also  associated  with  every  node  (terminal  or 
nonterminal)  beneath  it  in  the  tree.  As  well  as  providing  storage  economy, 
this  information  is  used  during  the  consultation  for  selecting  disease  areas 
on  which  to  focus.  For  example,  jaundice  (yellowing  of  the  skin)  will  be 
associated  with  some  nonterminal  disease  (e.g.,  hepatitis)  under  liver  diseases, 
and  its  presence  in  a  patient  will  cause  the  consultation  program  to  investigate 
diseases  in  that  disease  area. 

Various  properties  are  associated  with  each  manifestation.  The  most 
important  ones  are  TYPE  and  IMPORT.  The  TYPE  property  is  a  measure  of 
how  expensive  it  is  to  test  for  a  manifestation,  in  terms  of  both  financial  cost 
and  physical  risk  to  the  patient.  TYPE  is  used  to  order  the  questions  asked 
by  the  consultation  program:  Questions  about  less  expensive  manifestations 
are  asked  first.  The  IMPORT  of  a  manifestation  is  a  measure  of  how  easily 
it  can  be  ignored  in  a  diagnosis.  The  manifestation  "Shellfish  ingestion"  can 
easily  be  ignored,  but  a  liver  biopsy  showing  caseating  granulomas  must  be 
explained. 

Reasoning 

At  the  beginning  of  a  consultation,  a  list  of  manifestations  is  entered.  As 
each  manifestation  is  entered,  it  evokes  one  or  more  nodes  of  the  disease  tree. 
A  model  is  created  for  each  evoked  disease  node.  The  model  consists  of  four 
lists: 

1.  Observed  manifestations  that  this  disease  cannot  explain  (this  list  is 
called  the  shelf); 

2.  Observed  manifestations  that  are  consistent  with  the  disease; 

3.  Manifestations  that  should  be  present  if  this  disease  is  the  correct  diag- 
nosis but  that  have  not  been  observed  in  the  patient; 

4.  Manifestations  consistent  with  this  disease  but  that  have  not  yet  been 
observed  in  the  patient. 

After  the  initial  entry  of  manifestations,  the  disease  tree  consists  of  nodes 
that  have  been  "lit  up"  (evoked)  and  those  that  have  not.  A  diagnosis 
corresponds  to  a  set  of  lit  terminal  nodes  that  account  for  all  of  the  symptoms. 
In  general,  at  this  stage  very  few  of  the  terminal  nodes  will  be  lit  up,  so  the 


200  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VTH 

program  must  ask  for  further  information.  To  get  this  further  information, 
the  program  will  focus  on  a  disease  area  and  formulate  a  problem. 

Each  disease  model  is  scored,  receiving  a  positive  score  for  each  manifes- 
tation it  explains  and  a  negative  score  for  each  manifestation  that  it  cannot 
explain.  Both  are  weighted  by  IMPORT.  It  receives  a  bonus  if  it  is  linked 
causally  to  a  disease  that  has  already  been  confirmed.  The  disease  models 
are  partitioned  into  two  sets:  (a)  the  top-ranked  model  and  the  diseases  that 
are  mutually  exclusive  to  it  (alternatives)  and  (b)  the  diseases  that  are  com- 
plementary to  the  top-ranked  model.  For  example,  if  the  top-ranked  node  is 
hepatocellular  injury,  then  other  evoked  liver  diseases  will  be  alternatives  to 
it,  while  lung  or  heart  diseases  will  be  complementary. 

Having  formulated  a  problem  by  partitioning  the  disease  models,  the  sys- 
tem follows  one  of  several  strategies,  depending  on  the  number  of  candidate 
diseases  in  the  problem  set.  If  there  are  many  (more  than  four)  alternative 
hypotheses,  it  attempts  to  rule  out  as  many  as  possible.  Questions  about 
manifestations  that  strongly  indicate  a  disease  (high  p(M  \  D))  are  selected 
first.  If  these  manifestations  are  not  present,  this  disease  can  be  ruled  out. 
If  there  are  between  two  and  four  possibilities,  the  program  attempts  to  dis- 
criminate between  them.  Then  questions  about  manifestations  that  strongly 
indicate  one  disease,  D\  (high  p(M  \  D\)),  and  weakly  indicate  another  disease, 
Z>2  (low  p(M  |  D2)) >  are  selected.  These  questions  are  used  to  discriminate 
between  the  two  diseases.  If  there  is  only  one  candidate,  questions  that  have 
a  good  chance  of  confirming  this  disease  are  asked.  Sometimes,  if  there  are 
not  enough  data,  it  will  not  be  possible  to  confirm  one  of  the  terminal  nodes, 
and  a  more  general  diagnosis  is  given  (e.g.,  "liver  disease"). 

After  a  disease  is  confirmed,  its  manifestations  are  marked  "accounted 
for,"  bonus  scores  are  given  to  previously  manifested  diseases  that  are  causally 
linked  to  this  one,  and  focus  shifts  to  the  new  top-ranked  disease  and  the 
formulation  of  a  new  problem. 

INTERNIST-II 

There  was  a  major  problem  with  INTERNIST-I:  In  complex  cases,  the 
program  had  a  tendency  to  begin  the  analysis  by  focusing  first  on  totally 
inappropriate  areas.  While  the  final  diagnosis  was  usually  correct,  the  initial 
meandering  was  annoying  to  clinicians.  The  cause  of  the  problem  was  traced 
to  the  sequential  method  of  problem  formulation.  In  INTERNIST-II,  the 
simultaneous  formulation  of  several  problems  is  being  investigated. 

Representation  of  medical  knowledge.  INTERNIST-II  uses  the  same 
knowledge  base  as  INTERNIST-I,  but  it  is  augmented  by  a  set  of  constrictor 
relations.  These  are  manifestations  that  do  not  evoke  a  particular  disease  but, 
rather,  a  general  area  of  infirmity.  For  example,  jaundice  alerts  clinicians  to 
the  presence  of  liver  disease.  It  does  not  discriminate  between  liver  diseases, 
but  it  does  delimit  this  disease  area.  Formally,  a  disease  area  constrained  by 


B3  INTERNIST  201 

a  constrictor  manifestation  is  a  subtree  of  the  disease  tree,  in  this  case,  the 
subtree  of  liver  diseases. 

Reasoning.  A  problem  for  INTERNIST-I  is  to  find  a  set  of  terminal  nodes 
on  the  disease  tree  that  accounts  for  a  set  of  manifestations.  It  then  chooses 
one  node  from  the  set  and  formulates  another  problem.  INTERNIST-II  does 
not  start  a  diagnosis  by  formulating  a  set  of  terminal  nodes,  because  the 
number  of  combinations  of  terminal  disease-nodes  that  may  account  for  a  set 
of  manifestations  is  enormous.  Instead,  INTERNIST-II  partitions  the  disease 
tree  into  disease  areas,  which  collectively  account  for  all  the  manifestations. 
Constrictor  manifestations  are  used  to  make  the  partitions.  If  a  patient 
manifests  more  than  one  constrictor,  the  disease  tree  will  be  partitioned  into 
more  than  one  disease  area.  The  conjunction  of  all  the  disease  areas  is  called 
the  root  structure  and  is  formally  a  set  of  subtrees  of  the  disease  tree.  A 
root  structure  accounts  for  all  the  patient's  manifestations.  The  problem  for 
INTERNIST-II  is  to  decide  which  terminal  nodes  (actual  diseases)  within  the 
root  structure  best  account  for  the  manifestations.  This  is  accomplished  by 
partitioning  the  root  structure  into  smaller  subtrees  exactly  as  the  disease 
tree  was  partitioned  into  the  root  structure,  namely,  by  using  manifestations 
that  strongly  suggest  a  disease  area  (this  time,  however,  the  disease  area  is 
smaller).  The  process  of  partitioning  the  root  structure  into  smaller  areas 
continues  until  all  the  manifestations  are  accounted  for. 

This  is  a  summary  account  of  the  operation  of  INTERNIST-IL  In  actu- 
ality, it  is  more  complicated  (see  Pople,  1977,  for  a  complete  explication). 
The  main  point  of  INTERNIST-II  is  that  it  diagnoses  a  patient's  diseases  by 
dividing  the  disease  tree  into  smaller  and  smaller  subtrees,  until  it  achieves  a 
set  of  terminal  nodes  that  accounts  for  all  the  manifestations. 

Summary 

The  two  INTERNIST  programs  have  successfully  combined  a  bottom- 
up  and  top-down  approach  to  medical  diagnosis.  The  patient  data  evoke 
certain  disease  hypotheses  (bottom-up)  that  are  then  used  to  predict  (top- 
down)  other  manifestations  that  should  be  present  if  the  hypothesis  is  to  be 
confirmed.  The  system  is  purely  associational.  It  does  not  attempt  to  model 
any  disease  processes  but  considers  a  disease  as  a  static  category  and  diagnosis 
as  the  task  of  assigning  a  patient  to  one  or  more  categories.  INTERNIST-I 
has  a  large  knowledge  base,  currently  containing  over  500  of  the  diseases  of 
internal  medicine  (about  75%  complete).  It  has  displayed  expert  performance 
in  complex  cases  involving  multiple  diseases.  Pople  and  Myers  expect  that  the 
system  will  eventually  be  in  clinical  use. 

References 

See  Pople  (1975,  1977). 


B4.     Present  Illness  Program 


The  Present  Illness  Program  (pip)  is  being  developed  at  m.i.t.  (see 
Pauker  et  al.,  1976;  Szolovits  and  Pauker,  1976,  1978).  One  application  of 
it  thus  far  has  been  to  take  present  illnesses  of  patients  with  renal  (kidney) 
disease.  Taking  a  present  illness  is  different  from  performing  a  complete 
diagnosis — it  is  the  typical  consultation  a  patient  has  with  a  general  prac- 
titioner. The  patient  usually  presents  a  chief  complaint  that  becomes  the 
initial  focus  of  the  consultation,  and  diagnosis  is  based  on  only  very  low 
cost  sources  of  information  (such  as  patient  history,  physical  examination, 
and  routine  laboratory  tests).  High-cost  or  high-risk  procedures  that  may  be 
necessary  for  a  complete  diagnosis  are  not  used. 

The  medical  knowledge  in  PIP  is  represented  as  a  network  of  frames  (see 
Article  III.C7,  in  Vol.  i).  The  frames  are  centered  around  diseases,  clinical 
states,  and  physiological  states  (hereafter  called  the  patient  situation)  and 
contain  data  such  as  typical  findings,  relationships  to  other  patient  situations, 
and  rules  for  judging  how  well  a  set  of  findings  exhibited  by  a  patient  matches 
the  situation  described  by  the  frame.  Matching  is  the  key  strategy  in  the 
diagnosis,  which  involves  comparing  findings  to  those  indicated  in  the  disease 
frames  and  then  selecting  a  set  of  frames  that  covers  all  of  the  findings.  There 
are,  at  present,  36  frames  for  dealing  with  renal  disease. 

Currently,  the  program  does  not  make  treatment  recommendations.  The 
system  was  originally  written  in  CONNIYER  (see  Article  VI. C2),  but  that 
version  was  too  slow  and  it  has  been  recoded  to  run  in  MACLISP. 

Representation  of  Medical  Knowledge 

The  general  medical  knowledge  in  PIP,  as  mentioned  above,  is  knowledge 
about  diseases,  the  patient  situation  (findings,  results  of  the  physical  examina- 
tion, and  reported  symptoms),  and  the  relationships  between  these  entities. 
This  medical  knowledge  is  organized  as  a  frame  system.  Shown  in  Figure  B4-1 
is  part  of  a  typical  frame. 

The  slots  in  the  frame  are  grouped  into  categories  as  shown.  The  typi- 
cal findings  are  those  that  are  expected  in  a  patient  having  this  disorder. 
However,  patients  with  the  disorder  need  not  exhibit  all  of  the  typical  findings. 
The  job  of  the  matching  algorithm  is  to  compute  the  "goodness  of  fit"  between 
the  findings  and  a  frame.  Some  of  the  typical  findings  have  the  special  status 
TRIGGER,  and  they  are  key  elements  of  the  clinical  decision-making  strategy. 
A  TRIGGER  is  a  finding  that  is  so  strongly  related  to  a  disorder  that  the 
presence  of  the  finding  in  the  patient  makes  the  PIP  system  attend  to  the 
disorder  frame  as  an  active  hypothesis.  For  example,  FACIAL  EDEMA  is  listed 


202 


B4  Present  Illness  Program  203 

in  Figure  B4-1  as  a  TRIGGER  for  ACUTE  GLOMERULONEPHRITIS,  meaning 
that  PIP  will  consider  this  disease  as  an  active  hypothesis  if  a  patient  displays 
facial  edema. 

The  logical  decision  criteria  are  rules  that  permit  the  confirmation  or 
rejection  of  a  hypothesis  on  the  basis  of  a  small  number  of  key  findings. 
Findings  that  are  strongly  correlated  with  a  disease  will  be  listed  in  the  slot 
IS-SUFFICIENT.  If  any  of  these  findings  are  reported,  they  will  be  sufficient  to 
confirm  the  presence  of  the  disease. 

The  relations  between  frames  reflect  the  ways  in  which  disorders  are 
related  in  medicine.  Sometimes  disease  mechanisms  are  well  understood  and  it 
is  possible  to  say  that  one  disorder  CAUSES  another  or  is  a  COMPLICATION-OF 
another.  If  mechanisms  are  poorly  understood,  the  disorders  may  simply  be 
ASSOCIATED.  The  latter  frames  are  complementary;  they  represent  disorders 


ACUTE-GLOMERULONEPHRITIS 

Typical  Findings 

TRIGGERS  (EDEMA  with  L0CATI0N=FACIAL  ...   ) 

FINDINGS  (ANOREXIA  ...   ) 

Logical  Decision  Criteria 

IS-SUFFICIENT        (None) 
MUST-HAVE  (None) 

MUST-NOT-HAVE        (None) 

Complementary  Relations  to  Other  Frames 

CAUSED-BY  (STREPT0C0CCAL-INFECTI0N,  ...   ) 

CAUSE-OF  (SODIUM-RETENTION,  ...   ) 

COMPLICATED-BY       (ACUTE-RENAL-FAILURE,  ...   ) 
COMPLICATION-OF      (CELLULITIS) 

Differential  Diagnosis 

CHRONIC-HYPERTENSION  implies  CHRONIC-GLOMERULONEPHRITIS 
RECURRING-EDEMA  implies  NEPHROTIC-SYNDROME 

Scoring 

(((PATIENT  WITH  AGE=CHILD)  -►  0.8) 

((PATIENT  WITH  AGE=MIDDLE-AGED)  ■♦  -0.5) 

...) 
(((EDEMA  with  SEVERITY  =  not  MASSIVE)  ■>  0.1) 

((EDEMA  with  SEVERITY  =  MASSIVE)  +   -1.0) 

...) 


Figure  B4-1.     Part  of  the  frame  for  acute  glomerulonephritis  (kidney  stones). 


204  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VTQ 

that  the  patient  might  have  in  addition  to  the  initial  disorder.  In  contrast,  the 
differential  diagnosis  slots  indicate  mutually  exclusive  disorders — the  patient 
may  have  one  of  them  and  not  the  disorder  represented  by  the  current  frame. 
The  final  slot  indicates  how  the  findings  are  scored  for  the  disorder  rep- 
resented by  the  frame.  This  score  indicates  the  goodness  of  fit  of  this  disorder 
to  the  findings.  The  statements  comprising  this  slot  are  sets  of  clauses  that 
are  evaluated  in  turn.  Within  a  clause,  evaluation  terminates  when  one  of  the 
conditions  in  the  clause  is  true;  its  score  will  be  used.  The  local  score  for  a 
frame  is  the  sum  of  the  values  of  the  clauses,  normalized  by  the  maximum 
total  score  possible.  Thus,  1  denotes  complete  agreement,  while  arbitrarily 
large  negative  numbers  denote  complete  disagreement. 

Reasoning 

The  clinical  reasoning  strategy  used  by  PIP  is  based  on  the  manipulations 
of  hypotheses  and  findings.  Knowledge  about  findings  is  stored  separately 
from  the  frame  system,  since  a  finding  can  be  applicable  to  many  frames.  A 
hypothesis  is  an  instantiation  of  a  disorder  frame.  There  are  three  kinds  of 
hypotheses:  confirmed,  active,  and  semiactive.  Hypotheses  with  ratings  (as 
computed  by  the  scoring  process)  that  are  higher  than  a  preset  threshold  are 
considered  confirmed  hypotheses.  Active  hypotheses  are  those  with  at  least 
one  confirmed  TRIGGER  finding,  and  they  contend  for  the  focus  of  attention. 
Semiactive  hypotheses  are  the  immediate  neighbors  of  the  active  hypotheses  in 
the  frame  system.  They  correspond  to  hypotheses  that,  although  not  strong 
enough  to  be  investigated,  are  "at  the  back  of  the  consulting  physician's 
mind." 

The  consultation  begins  with  the  physician  telling  the  system  the  main 
symptoms  and  signs  of  a  patient.  The  program  then  takes  the  initiative  and 
tries  to  determine  the  validity  of  any  active  hypotheses  by  selecting  and  asking 
appropriate  questions. 

The  program  works  through  the  following  cycle: 

1 .  Acquire  a  new  finding.  This  task  is  accomplished  by  asking  a  sequence  of 
questions  that  characterizes  the  finding  according  to  its  possible  descrip- 
tions. 

2.  Process  the  finding.  All  of  the  frames  in  which  this  finding  is  relevant  are 
located. 

3.  Update  the  list  of  active  hypotheses.  Several  actions  can  be  taken  at  this 
point:  Remove  an  active  hypothesis  if  the  finding  matches  a  MUST-NOT- 
HAVE  rule;  confirm  a  hypothesis  if  the  premise  of  an  IS-SUFFICIENT 
rule  is  now  true;  activate  a  hypothesis  if  the  new  finding  is  one  of  the 
hypothesis  TRIGGERS  or  if  the  finding  allows  the  premise  of  a  differential 
diagnosis  link  to  succeed;  or  revise  the  score  of  the  hypothesis  if  the 
finding  matches  a  scoring  rule.  If  a  new  hypothesis  is  activated,  then  all 
of  its  immediate  relatives  are  made  semiactive. 


B4  Present  Illness  Program  205 

4.  Select  the  next  finding  to  query.  The  highest  rated  hypothesis  becomes 
the  focus  of  attention,  and  a  question  is  generated  for  the  next  unex- 
plored rinding.  If  there  are  no  hypotheses,  a  question  about  a  finding 
for  the  highest  rated,  causally  related  frame  is  asked.  Questioning  ter- 
minates when  there  are  no  more  active  hypotheses  or  causal  relatives 
with  findings  to  be  determined. 

If  the  logical  decision  criteria  are  insufficient  to  confirm  or  deny  a  hypoth- 
esis, the  score  of  the  hypothesis  is  computed  by  combining  (a)  the  value  of 
a  function  that  measures  the  fit  of  observed  findings  and  typical  (expected) 
findings  for  the  frame  (called  the  matching  score)  and  (b)  the  value  of  a 
function  that  is  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  findings  accounted  for  by  the 
hypothesis  to  the  total  number  of  findings  (the  binding  score).  The  matching 
score,  in  turn,  consists  of  two  parts,  a  local  score  for  the  frame  (described 
above)  and  a  score  propagated  from  causally  related  frames. 

Summary 

Like  INTERNIST  (see  Article  VIII.B3)  and  unlike  MYCIN  (Article  VIII.Bl), 
PIP  is  intended  to  simulate  the  clinical  reasoning  of  physicians  (see,  however, 
the  work  on  NEOMYCIN  discussed  in  Article  DC.C6).  The  way  in  which  the 
general  medical  knowledge  has  been  represented  as  a  system  of  hypothesized- 
disorder  frames  and  clinical  findings  reflects  this  intent,  as  do  the  strategies 
used  to  select  questions  for  confirming  a  hypothesis. 

The  system  employs  two  types  of  reasoning,  categorical  and  probabilistic. 
Decisions,  about  the  applicability  of  a  hypothesis  are  determined  using  the  logi- 
cal decision  criteria  (the  IS-SUFFICIENT,  MUST-HAVE,  and  MUST-NOT-HAVE 
rules)  that  a  physician  applies.  When  these  are  insufficient,  the  probabilistic 
methods  (the  computation  of  matching  scores  and  binding  scores)  are  used. 
Both  kinds  of  reasoning  feature  a  combination  of  local  and  global  decision 
strategies.  Local  strategies  decide  how  well  the  findings  fit  a  particular  frame, 
while  global  strategies  determine  how  well  a  set  of  frames  fits  the  findings. 

There  are  several  difficulties  with  the  program.  One  problem  is  that  the 
questioning  can  be  erratic,  since  the  top-ranked  hypotheses  tend  to  alternate 
rapidly.  This  oscillation  is  unlike  a  physician's  line  of  reasoning,  which  tends 
to  concentrate  on  questions  that  resolve  one  hypothesis  at  a  time.  There  is 
also  the  problem  of  when  to  stop  the  questioning.  The  current  approach  is  to 
stop  questioning  only  when  all  questions  about  all  possibly  relevant  hypotheses 
have  been  exhausted.  This  strategy  seems  too  conservative;  many  irrelevant 
questions  tend  to  get  asked. 

References 

See  Pauker  et  al.  (1976)  and  Szolovits  and  Pauker  (1976,  1978). 


B5.     Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor 


THERE  has  been  considerable  work  by  the  Clinical  Decision  Making  Research 
Group  at  M.I.T.  to  develop  a  system  that  advises  physicians  on  the  administra- 
tion of  the  drug  digitalis  (Gorry,  Silverman,  and  Pauker,  1978;  Silverman, 
1975;  Swartout,  1977a,  1977b).  These  programs  are  not  concerned  with 
diagnosing  the  need  for  the  drug  in  a  patient;  rather,  they  determine  an 
appropriate  treatment  regimen  and  its  subsequent  management  for  patients 
known  to  require  digitalis.  This  system  differs  from  most  other  medical  AI 
systems  in  that  it  concentrates  primarily  on  the  problem  of  continuing  patient 
management  and  integrates  both  quantitative  and  qualitative  models.  (One 
other  system  emphasizing  continuing  patient  management,  in  the  context  of 
monitoring  respiratory  function  in  the  intensive-care  ward,  is  the  VM  system 
described  by  Fagan,  1979.) 

Digitalis  is  administered  to  slow  and  stabilize  the  cardiac  rhythm  of 
patients  who  are  experiencing  or  are  likely  to  experience  various  arrhythmias 
and  to  strengthen  the  heartbeat  of  patients  who  are  in  heart  failure.  Digitalis 
is  difficult  to  administer  properly  for  several  reasons.  One  is  that  the  difference 
between  the  amount  of  drug  required  for  the  desired  therapeutic  results  and 
the  amount  resulting  in  toxic  manifestations  is  small.  Some  of  the  early 
toxic  manifestations  can  easily  be  mistaken  for  therapeutic  manifestations. 
Moreover,  the  appropriate  amount  of  digitalis  varies  from  patient  to  patient, 
depending  on  the  changing  disease  state  of  the  patient  and  the  patient's  recent 
history  of  digitalis  administration.  Finally,  digitalis  is  widely  administered, 
even  by  physicians  with  little  training  in  cardiology. 

The  therapeutic  effect  of  digitalis  is  achieved  by  maintaining  an  appro- 
priate amount  of  the  drug  in  the  heart.  However,  since  digitalis  is  distributed 
throughout  the  body  and  the  digitalis  in  the  heart  cannot  be  measured,  the 
typical  distribution  among  the  heart,  the  bloodstream,  and  the  rest  of  the 
body  must  be  used  to  estimate  the  amount  in  the  heart.  The  digitalis  leaves  the 
body  primarily  through  the  kidneys  (in  the  case  of  digoxin,  the  most  common 
digitalis  preparation)  and  also  through  the  liver,  with  the  amount  excreted 
being  proportional  to  the  amount  in  the  bloodstream.  The  normal  strategy  in 
administering  digitalis  is  to  give  the  patient  a  relatively  large  amount  of  the 
drug  over  a  period  of  one  to  four  days  to  reach  a  drug  level  sufficient  for  the 
desired  therapeutic  result  in  the  heart  and  then  to  give  a  smaller  daily  dose 
to  replace  the  digitalis  that  is  excreted. 

Various  mathematical  models  have  been  in  existence  for  some  time  that 
provide  an  approximation  of  the  relation  of  digitalis  history,  body  weight, 
renal  function,  and  level  of  digitalis  in  the  body  (e.g.,  Jelliffe,  1967).  Based  on 
these  pharmacokinetic  models,  computational  aids  for  administering  digitalis 


206 


B5  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  207 

have  been  constructed  (with  and  without  the  additional  information  provided 
by  serum  drug  levels).  Unfortunately,  such  aids  provide  information  only  on 
how  much  drug  is  in  the  body,  while  physicians  are  really  interested  in  the 
amount  needed  to  achieve  the  desired  therapeutic  results  without  toxicity. 
To  make  use  of  such  an  aid,  physicians  must  be  able  to  make  the  difficult 
transformation  between  their  clinical  goals  (e.g.,  slowed  heart  rate,  decreased 
arrhythmias,  increased  cardiac  output)  and  the  drug-level  information  offered 
by  these  clinical  aids.  They  must  take  into  account  all  of  the  clinical  aspects 
of  giving  the  drug,  such  as  recognizing  toxic  signs,  adjusting  for  factors  that 
make  the  patient  sensitive  to  digitalis,  and  determining  the  level  of  digitalis 
necessary  to  compensate  for  the  patient's  disease  state. 

The  research  group  at  M.I.T.,  comprised  of  G.  Gorry,  W.  Long,  S.  Pauker, 
H.  Silverman,  W.  Swartout,  and  P.  Szolovits,  has  been  developing  a  program 
directed  at  the  continuing  n  anagement  of  each  specific  patient's  digitalis 
therapy,  guided  by  the  response  of  the  patient  to  the  drug  and  the  changing 
disease  state.  The  important  points  about  this  program  are  the  following: 

1.  It  combines  qualitative  models  of  the  patient's  needs  and  responses  with 
the  quantitative  model  of  digitalis  pharmacokinetics  to  make  recommen- 
dations directed  at  the  same  goal  as  the  physician's. 

2.  It  tailors  these  models  to  the  specific  conditions  that  exist  in  the  patient, 
taking  into  account  such  factors  as  increased  likelihood  of  toxicity  or 
damage  in  some  states  (e.g.,  a  low  serum-potassium  level  or  an  acute 
myocardial  infarction),  increased  requirement  for  digitalis  (e.g.,  in  atrial 
fibrillation),  and  malabsorption  syndromes. 

3.  It  utilizes  an  adaptive  feedback  process  to  reach  and  maintain  a  good 
state  of  therapeutic  management  of  the  patient. 

4.  It  requires  only  the  kind  of  information  that  a  cardiologist  would  require 
to  make  the  same  decisions. 

5.  It  utilizes  concepts  and  reasoning  that  a  physician  would  understand  and 
relate  to. 

The  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  interacts  with  the  physician  to  select  and 
parameterize  the  models  appropriate  to  the  patient.  This  interaction  involves 
asking  about  the  current  disease  state  and  all  of  the  factors  that  might 
influence  the  way  that  digitalis  should  be  administered.  The  program  then 
proposes  a  dosage  schedule  to  achieve  the  desired  goals  and  asks  the  physician 
to  interact  with  the  program  again  after  a  suitable  time  has  elapsed,  for  an 
assessment  of  the  patient's  progress.  At  a  follow-up  session,  the  program 
assesses  the  changes  in  the  state  of  the  patient,  looking  for  therapeutic  effects, 
possible  signs  of  toxicity,  changes  in  potential  sensitivities,  and  signs  of  pos- 
sible noncompliance  or  malabsorption  of  the  drug.  These  follow-up  sessions 
continue  until  this  feedback  process  adjusts  the  dosage  schedule  to  the  par- 
ticular characteristics  of  the  patient. 


208  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

The  Patient- specific  Model 

The  following  is  an  annotated  transcript  of  the  first  session  for  a  patient 
being  treated  for  atrial  fibrillation  (a  type  of  fast,  irregular  rhythm  of  the  heart 
muscle).  This  transcript  begins  after  the  name,  time,  age,  weight,  height,  and 
sex  have  been  recorded.  (The  physician's  responses  are  preceded  by  **.) 

What  is   the  cardiac  rhythm? 

The  possibilities  are: 

1 .  Normal   sinus  rhythm 

2 .  Paced-rhythm 

3.  Atrial  fibrillation 

4.  Atrial  flutter 

5.  Pat 

6.  Pat  with  block 

7.  Nonparoxysmal  junctional  tachycardia 

Enter  single  value 
**  3 

Is  there  regularization  of  ventricular  rhythm? 

The  possibilities  are: 

1 .  Present 

2 .  Absent 

Enter  single  value 

**  2 

Regularization  of  the  rhythm  would  imply  that  the  rhythm  is  probably 
actually  nonparoxysmal  junctional  tachycardia,  which  is  not  treatable  with 
digitalis  and  is  usually  a  sign  of  digitalis  toxicity. 

What  is  the  ventricular  rate? 
Enter  numerical  value 

**  138 

What  is  the  status  of  PVCs? 

The  possibilities  are: 

1 .  Present 

2.  Absent 

Enter  single  value 
**  1 


B5  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  209 

Is  the  patient  really  having  PVCs  or  aberrantly  conducted 
supraventricular  beats  (Ashman  beats)? 

The  possibilities  are: 

1.  PVCs 

2.  Ashman  beats 

Enter  single  value 
**  2 

//  they  were  actually  PVCs,  they  should  be  closely  watched  because  an 
increase  in  the  number  of  PVCs  is  an  early  sign  of  digitalis  toxicity.  At 
this  point,  the  program  assesses  the  present  status  of  digitalis  use,  assesses 
the  renal  function,  and  starts  checking  for  possible  increased  sensitivity 
to  digitalis. 

What  is  the  level  of  serum  potassium?  Units:  MEQ  per  liter 
Enter  numerical  value 

**  3.4 

Is  the  patient  being  given  or  about  to  be  given  diuretics? 

The  possibilities  are: 

1 .  Given 

2.  Not  given 

Enter  single  value 
**  2 

Most  diuretics  would  further  deplete  the  potassium. 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  patients  with  low  serum  potassium 
levels  are  more  prone  to  develop  dig  toxicity.   Please  watch 
this  patient  carefully  and  administer  potassium  supplements. 

The  program  continues  to  query  the  user  about  cardiomyopathy,  possible 
acute  myocardial  infarctions  (heart  attacks),  oxygen  level,  thyroid  condi- 
tion, and  upcoming  procedures  (cardioversion,  catheterization,  and  sur- 
gery), omitted  here.  In  this  case,  the  user  indicates  that  cardiac  surgery 
is  anticipated  in  two  days,  requiring  that  the  digitalis  level  be  fairly  low 
at  the  time  of  surgery.  After  asking  all  of  these  questions,  the  program 
prints  the  parameters  it  will  use  in  making  its  recommendations. 

Parameters  used  to  make  recommendations : 
Reduction  factor  due  to  hypokalemia  ■*  0.800 
Total  alteration  sensitivity  factor  +  0.800 


210  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

The  program  will  aim  for  four-fifths  of  what  it  normally  would,  because 
of  the  low  potassium  level. 

Body  store  goal  -*■   0.551  mg 

This  is  the  desired  average  amount  of  digitalis  in  the  body.  It  is  computed 
from  the  basic  requirements  of  the  disease  state  (atrial  fibrillation  requires 
more  digitalis  than  heart  failure),  the  patient 's  weight,  and  the  patient 's 
sensitivity  (and,  in  later  sessions,  the  response)  to  the  previous  level  of 
digitalis. 

Projected  average  amount  on  board  *  0.000  mg 
Projected  current  amount  on  board  *  0.000  mg 
Body  stores   shift  ■»  0.637  mg 

This  amount  would  have  to  be  given  now  for  the  average  over  the  next  24 
hours  to  be  .551  mg. 

Remaining  time  to  reach  goal  +24.0  hrs . 
Half   life  +55.8  hours   2.3  days 
Daily  loss  at  equilibrium  *  0.164  mg 

Once  the  goal  is  reached,  this  amount  per  day  will  be  required  to  maintain 
that  level. 

Absorption  factor  ■»•  0.75 

Unless  the  program  discovers  otherwise,  it  is  assumed  that  15%  of  an  oral 
dose  reaches  the  bloodstream.  Next,  the  program  asks  how  often  digitalis 
is  to  be  administered  and,  being  told  'twice  daily, "  provides  the  following 
dosage  recommendations: 


The  dosage  recommendations  are: 

Date 

Time 

Oral 

IV 

11/10/79 

9:00 

.5  mg 

0.4375 

mg 

(or 

1.75 

cc) 

Report  back 

after  the 

first  dose 

The  effects  of  the  first  dose  will  be  assessed  and  adjustments  made  in  the 
schedule. 


21:00 

.25  mg 

0.125  mg  (or  0.5  cc) 

9:00 

.0625  mg 

0.0625  mg  (or  0.25  cc) 

11/11/79 
Hold  the  digitalis  for  the  cardiac-surgery. 

When  the  physician  consults  the  program  again  about  this  patient  (ideally  just 
before  the  second  dose  is  scheduled),  the  program  will  assess  the  therapeutic 


B5  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  211 

results.  Since  the  patient  is  being  treated  for  atrial  fibrillation,  the  primary 
therapeutic  result  the  program  will  look  for  is  a  decrease  in  the  heart  rate. 
The  program  judges  the  therapeutic  results  to  be  in  one  of  three  categories: 
none,  partial,  or  complete.  A  decrease  in  the  heart  rate  is  considered  a  partial 
therapeutic  result.  If  the  heart  rate  has  dropped  into  the  range  60  to  100  or 
the  rhythm  has  been  converted  to  the  normal  sinus  rhythm,  the  program  will 
consider  the  therapeutic  effect  to  be  complete.  Similarly,  the  program  checks 
the  possible  signs  of  toxicity  and  judges  the  level  of  toxicity  to  be  none,  partial, 
or  definite.  The  nine  possible  combinations  of  therapeutic  and  toxic  states 
provide  a  basis  for  adjusting  the  therapy.  The  goal  of  this  feedback  process  is 
to  maintain  the  highest  level  of  therapeutic  effect  with  the  minimum  dosage 
without  letting  the  patient  become  significantly  toxic. 

Status  of  the  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor 

The  original  program  was  evaluated  by  comparing  its  recommendations  to 
the  actual  treatment  given  to  19  patients.  The  program  did  quite  well,  antic- 
ipating the  toxic  episodes  without  falsely  suspecting  any.  In  1977,  William 
Swartout  added  an  explanation  capability  to  the  program,  which  explains 
the  actions  of  the  program  by  examining  the  actual  code.  In  1978,  the 
program  underwent  an  extensive  evaluation  involving  the  case  histories  of  50 
patients  from  the  Veterans  Administration  Hospital  in  Houston.  The  results 
of  this  evaluation  were  judged  by  a  panel  of  five  experts.  On  the  average, 
they  had  a  preference  for  the  recommendations  of  the  attending  physician 
over  those  of  the  program  when  there  was  a  difference,  but  the  program's 
recommendations  were  judged  to  be  the  same  or  better  in  60%  to  70%  of 
the  cases  (see  Long,  1980).  More  recently,  new  qualitative  and  quantitative 
models  are  being  developed  for  the  program  to  account  more  accurately  for 
the  various  phenomena  involved  in  adjusting  the  therapy. 

References 

See  Gorry,  Silverman,  and  Pauker  (1978)  and  Silverman  (1975).  The 
explanation  capability  is  described  by  Swartout  (1977a,  1981). 


B6.     IRIS 


THE  DESIGN  GOALS  for  IRIS  (Trigoboff  and  Kulikowski,  1977;  Trigoboff, 
1978)  are  different  from  those  for  the  other  consultation  systems  constructed 
to  be  expert  clinical  decision-making  systems  in  a  particular  medical  domain. 
IRIS  was  designed  to  be  a  tool  for  building  and  experimenting  with  such 
systems.  Developed  at  Rutgers  University  and  written  in  INTERLISP,  it  was 
intended  to  permit  easy  experimentation  with  alternative  representations  of 
general  medical  knowledge,  clinical  strategies,  and  modes  of  interaction  and 
to  be  used  by  a  computer  specialist  in  collaboration  with  a  domain  expert.  A 
consultation  system  for  glaucoma  has  been  developed  with  IRIS. 

The  IRIS  system  employs  a  combination  of  two  well-established  knowledge- 
representation  formalisms,  namely,  semantic  nets  and  production  rules  (see 
Articles  III.C3  and  III.C4,  in  Vol.  I).  The  semantic  net  consists  of  nodes  repre- 
senting patient  information  and  uses  a  large  and  extendable  set  of  link  types 
to  build  associations  in  this  medical  knowledge  base.  A  set  of  production 
rules  associated  with  each  link  of  the  network  controls  the  transmission  of 
information  between  the  nodes  of  the  semantic  network.  This  process,  called 
propagation,  is  the  basis  of  any  clinical  strategy  implemented  in  IRIS. 

Representation  of  Medical  Knowledge 

Like  the  other  medical  consultation  systems,  IRIS  makes  a  very  sharp  dis- 
tinction between  general  medical  knowledge  and  patient-specific  knowledge. 
The  general  medical  knowledge  is  represented  partly  as  a  semantic  net  and 
partly  as  production  rules.  The  nodes  of  the  net  represent  clinical  concepts 
such  as  pathophysiological  states,  diseases,  symptoms,  findings,  and  treat- 
ments. Examples  of  nodes  in  the  glaucoma  application  are  OPEN  ANGLE 
GLAUCOMA,  SCOTOMA,  and  PILOCARPINE  THERAPY.  The  links  represent  rela- 
tions between  the  nodes — for  example,  CAUSES,  TREATMENT-FOR,  SYMPTOM- 
OF,  and  ASSOCIATED- WITH. 

The  patient-specific  knowledge  gathered  during  a  consultation  is  repre- 
sented as  a  set  of  knowledge  structures  called  Information  SPECifications 
(iSPECs),  which  are  associated  with  nodes  of  the  semantic  net  and  are  created, 
deleted,  and  modified  during  the  course  of  the  consultation.  An  ISPEC  is  an 
assertion  about  the  patient  and  is  essentially  a  frame  (see  Article  III.C7,  in 
Vol.  i)  with  the  following  slots: 

1.  NODE.  This  slot  is  the  name  of  the  associated  node  in  the  semantic  net. 
The  node  represents  the  concept  being  asserted  about  this  patient. 

2.  SIDE.  This  slot  indicates  the  half  of  the  body  to  which  this  ISPEC  refers. 
Its  possible  values  are  LEFT,  RIGHT,  and  NIL.  Some  nodes  in  the  net  will 

212 


B6  IRIS  213 

be  applicable  to  a  left  organ  and  a  right  organ  (e.g.,  eye),  while  others  are 
not  (e.g.,  headache,  diabetes).  The  use  of  SIDE  provides  an  economical 
representation,  since  many  nodes  might  otherwise  be  duplicated  in  the 
net. 

3.  MB.  This  slot  is  a  "measure  of  belief"  reflecting  the  degree  of  certainty 
in  the  assertion  represented  by  the  ISPEC.  Any  numerical  method  of 
representing  degrees  of  belief  can  be  implemented  here.  In  the  glaucoma 
application,  the  confidence  factor  mechanism  of  MYCIN  (Article  VIII. Bl) 
has  been  implemented.  The  MB  is  a  pair  of  numbers:  SB  (strength  of 
belief)  and  SD  (strength  of  disbelief).  The  actual  MB  is  the  difference  of 
these  two  numbers  and  ranges  from  total  belief  to  total  disbelief. 

4.  TIME.  The  time  slot  is  a  list  of  two  dates,  the  date  the  ISPEC  became 
true  of  the  patient  and  the  date  the  ISPEC  ceased  to  be  true.  The  system 
can  also  work  with  a  "coarser"  view  of  time:  PAST,  PASTOR-PRESENT, 
and  FUTURE.  This  time  representation  is  part  of  the  mechanism  for 
dealing  with  multiple  visits  and  for  following  a  patient  through  a  course 
of  therapy. 

5.  MODIFIERS.  These  are  further  specifications  and  qualifications  of  the 
basic  ISPEC.  Examples  of  modifiers  are  VALUE,  DEGREE,  COLOR,  and 
WIDTH.  These  modifiers  do  not  appear  in  all  ISPECs,  but  only  in  those  to 
which  they  are  applicable.  These  modifiers  allow  further  patient-specific 
specifications  of  the  concept  in  the  semantic  net.  For  example,  severely 
increased  intraocular  pressure  is  represented  as  an  ISPEC  for  INCREASED 
INTRAOCULAR  PRESSURE  with  a  modifier,  DEGREE:  SEVERE. 

6.  TYPE.  The  type  slot  of  an  ISPEC  determines  how  it  is  interpreted.  An 
arbitrary  number  of  types  is  possible.  Currently  implemented  TYPEs  are 
NIL  (the  standard  and  default),  FAMILYHISTORY,  PATIENTHISTORY, 
and  several  others  that  are  used  by  the  diagnosis  strategy — CHOSEN, 
COVERED-BY,  SUBSUMED-BY,  and  TREATED-BY 

The  statement  The  pressure  is  10  in  the  right  eye  is  equivalent  to  the  ISPEC: 


NODE 

= 

INTRAOCULAR  PRESSURE 

SIDE 

= 

RIGHT 

MB 

= 

(1,0) 

TIME 

= 

PRESENT 

MODS 

= 

VALUE:  10 

TYPE 

= 

NIL 

Reasoning 

IRIS  makes  no  commitment  to  any  particular  strategy  of  question  selec- 
tion. Currently,  a  questionnaire  strategy  has  been  implemented.  At  the  begin- 
ning of  a  consultation,  the  program  runs  through  a  set  of  questions  and  the 
user  answers  them. 


214  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

In  the  applications  of  IRIS  in  which  consultation  and  diagnosis  are  the 
goal,  ISPECs  are  associated  first  with  the  set  of  symptoms  displayed  by  the 
patient.  In  IRIS's  knowledge  base,  symptom  nodes  are  linked  to  disease  nodes, 
among  other  things.  Thus,  a  set  of  disease  nodes  can  be  "activated"  by 
the  symptoms;  a  disease  node  is  said  to  explain  the  symptom  nodes  that 
characterize  it.  (See  also  the  discussion  of  manifestations  evoking  disease 
nodes  in  INTERNIST'S  knowledge  base,  Article  VIII.B3.)  Disease  nodes  are 
also  linked  to  treatment  nodes,  and  when  IRIS  has  determined  which  disease 
holds  for  a  patient,  it  will  activate  the  appropriate  (linked)  treatment  nodes. 

The  process  of  nodes  evoking  each  other  in  IRIS  is  called  propagation  of 
ISPECs,  because  an  ISPEC  is  associated  with  a  symptom,  disease,  or  treatment 
node  relevant  to  a  patient.  When  symptoms  evoke  a  disease  or  when  a  disease 
evokes  a  treatment,  an  ISPEC  is  created.  This  propagation  of  information 
and  generation  of  inferences  between  any  linked  nodes  in  the  semantic  net  is 
controlled  by  a  set  of  production  rules  associated  with  the  link.  If  the  ISPECs 
associated  with  the  node  at  the  tail  of  the  link  satisfy  the  precondition  pattern 
of  a  rule,  the  actions  specified  by  the  rule  will  be  performed  at  the  node  at  the 
head  of  the  link.  Typical  actions  include  the  creation  or  deletion  of  ISPECs 
and  the  modification  of  MBs.  Thus,  IRIS  uses  a  forward- chaining  reasoning 
process. 

An  important  propagation  pattern  is  that  of  the  propagation  cone.  Con- 
sider the  rule: 

If  SYMPTOMi   and  SYMPT0M2  and  SYMPTOM3  then  DISEASEi    . 

In  the  semantic  net,  the  nodes  in  this  rule  would  be  represented  as  follows: 

DISEASE, 

CHAR 

SYM,       SYM2       SYM3 

Clearly,  an  ISPEC  should  propagate  only  to  DISEASEi  if  all  three  symptoms  are 
present.  In  the  case  depicted  above,  propagation  should  be  from  the  base  of 
the  cone  to  the  apex.  This  propagation  pattern  is  achieved  by  associating  the 
same  decision  table  with  all  three  CHARACTERIZES  links  (essentially  "ANDing" 
SYMi,  SYM2,  and  SYM3  into  one  production  to  ensure  that  all  symptoms 
are  present  before  a  disease  node  is  evoked).  In  some  cases,  the  direction 
of  propagation  will  be  from  apex  to  base,  for  example,  when  propagating 
COVERED-BY  ISPECs  from  a  treatment  node  to  each  of  the  diseases  it  treats. 
The  production  rules  are  encoded  as  decision  tables  to  make  their  execu- 
tion more  efficient.  Consider  the  following  set  of  production  rules: 


if  A  and  B  then  D 

if  B  and    (not  C)    then   (not  E) 

if  A  and  B  and    (not  C)    then  F 


B6 


IRIS 


215 


In  evaluating  these  rules,  A  and  C  are  evaluated  twice  and  B  is  evaluated 
three  times.  A  decision  table  encoding  these  three  rules  is: 


R1 

R2 

R3 

A 

+ 

+ 

B 

+ 

+ 

+ 

C 

- 

- 

■> 

5-           ■ 

5-         -3 

r            * 

D 

+ 

E 

- 

F 

+ 

A  column  of  the  decision  table  corresponds  to  a  rule.  A  condition  is  evaluated 
only  once,  and  the  result  is  used  in  each  applicable  column. 

The  IRIS  claim  is  that  any  clinical  strategy  can  be  implemented  with  the 
available  medical  primitives.  In  fact,  the  propagation  of  weights  in  CASNET, 
therapy  selection  in  MYCIN,  and  the  formation  of  composite  hypotheses  in 
INTERNIST-II  were  implemented  with  very  little  effort  (Trigoboff,  1978). 


Clinical  Strategy  of  IRIS  for  Glaucoma  Diagnosis 

The  clinical  strategy  for  the  glaucoma  application  is  implemented  via  six 
special  nodes  in  the  semantic  net:  CHOSEN-DIAGNOSIS,  CHOSEN-TREATMENT, 
POSSIBLE-DIAGNOSIS,  POSSIBLE-TREATMENT,  UNEXPLAINED-SYMPTOM,  and 
UNTREATED-PATHOLOGY.  The  goal  of  the  consultation  is  (a)  to  have  one 
or  more  ISPECs  associated  with  the  nodes  CHOSEN-DIAGNOSIS  and  CHOSEN- 
TREATMENT  and  (b)  to  have  all  ISPECs  associated  with  UNEXPLAINED- 
SYMPTOMS  and  UNTREATED-PATHOLOGY  be  TYPE=COVERED-BY  As  the 
findings  are  entered,  they  propagate  ISPECs  to  the  node  UNEXPLAINED- 
SYMPTOMS.  Propagation  across  SYMPTOM-OF  links  will  result  in  ISPECs  with 
varying  CFs  (certainty  factors)  associated  with  a  number  of  disease  nodes. 

Any  disease  with  a  sufficiently  high  CF  will  propagate  an  ISPEC  to  the  node 
POSSIBLE-DIAGNOSIS.  After  all  data  have  been  entered,  the  diseases  associ- 
ated with  POSSIBLE-DIAGNOSIS  are  then  investigated  in  turn.  Each  diagnosis 
temporarily  receives  TYPE=CHOSEN,  and  TYPE=COVERED-BY  propagates  to 
each  symptom  explained  by  this  disease.  The  number  of  explained  symptoms 
is  used  as  a  measure  of  the  explanatory  power  of  a  disease.  This  process,  of 


216  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

temporary  assignment,  is  repeated  for  each  possible  diagnosis,  and  the  disease 
that  explains  the  most  symptoms  is  given  a  permanent  TYPE=CHOSEN.  If 
there  are  any  unexplained  symptoms,  the  process  is  repeated.  A  similar 
strategy  using  the  nodes  POSSIBLE-TREATMENT,  CHOSEN-TREATMENT,  and 
UNTREATED-PATHOLOGY  is  applied  to  select  treatments. 

Summary 

IRIS  has  been  explained  in  the  context  of  its  glaucoma  application,  but 
it  was  designed  to  represent  medical  knowledge  from  any  domain  and  to 
implement  a  variety  of  clinical  strategies.  (Recall  that  aspects  of  CASNET, 
MYCIN,  and  INTERNIST-II  have  been  implemented  in  IRIS.)  This  generality 
is  feasible  because  the  representation  of  knowledge  is  itself  very  general  (aug- 
mented semantic  nets).  In  principle,  knowledge  from  any  domain — medical 
or  nonmedical — can  be  represented. 

A  second  characteristic  of  IRIS  that  makes  it  very  general  is  the  separa- 
tion of  clinical  strategy,  both  conceptually  and  operationally,  from  medical 
knowledge.  Note  that  to  implement  the  consultation  strategy,  IRIS  needed  to 
know  about  only  six  nodes  in  the  knowledge  base:  chosen  diagnosis,  chosen 
treatment,  possible  diagnosis,  possible  treatment,  unexplained  symptom,  and 
untreated  pathology.  These  six  concepts  are  inherent  to  the  clinical  strategy 
of  consultation;  every  other  node  in  the  knowledge  base  is  conceptually  and 
operationally  independent  of  the  implementation  of  the  clinical  strategy. 

References 

See  Trigoboff  and  Kulikowski  (1977)  and  Trigoboff  (1978). 


B7.     EXPERT 


THE  EXPERT  system  developed  at  Rutgers  University  is  a  general  facility  for 
helping  investigators  design  and  test  consultation  models  (Weiss  and  Kulikow- 
ski,  1979).  It  was  designed  independently  of  any  specific  application  but  has 
been  influenced  by  the  experiences  of  the  Rutgers  Resource  Group  in  building 
consultation  models  in  medicine,  including  rheumatology,  ophthalmology,  and 
endocrinology.  Experimental  models  have  been  developed  in  other  areas,  such 
as  chemistry,  oil-well  log  analysis,  laboratory-instrument  interpretation,  and 
automobile  repair. 

The  consultation  problems  best  suited  for  EXPERT  are  classification  prob- 
lems, which  have  a  predetermined  list  of  possible  conclusions  from  which  the 
program  may  choose.  PROSPECTOR  and  EMYCIN  are  similar  knowledge- 
based  systems  that  specialize  in  forms  of  classification  problems. 

Some  of  the  major  themes  in  the  design  of  EXPERT  include: 

1.  A  relatively  simple  language  and  notation  for  representing  expert  knowl- 
edge. The  representation  is  consistent  with  the  traditional  two-level  view 
of  a  diagnostic  problem:  (a)  selecting  appropriate  hypotheses  or  conclu- 
sions by  (b)  interpreting  a  set  of  findings  or  observations. 

2.  An  emphasis  on  categorical  reasoning  instead  of  on  suboptimal  scoring 
functions. 

3.  Efficient  operation  through  compilation  and  ordering  of  rules. 

4.  An  emphasis  on  decision  methods  that  tend  to  yield  predictable  and  cor- 
rectable results.  This  may  in  some  cases  require  that  the  expert  provide 
more  explicit  statements  of  correlations  among  findings  and  a  greater 
number  of  decision  rules  than  would  otherwise  be  called  for.  Since  the 
interaction  between  rules  and  the  associated  classification  strategies  is 
usually  predictable,  it  is  not  difficult  to  trace  the  changes  in  program 
behavior  that  will  result  from  modifying  individual  rules.  A  novel  fea- 
ture of  EXPERT  is  that  it  detects  automatically  just  such  changes  in  the 
reasoning  about  cases  stored  in  its  database.  This  is  an  important  tool 
for  incrementally  generating  and  testing  a  consultation  model. 

The  process  of  creating  and  running  an  EXPERT  model  is  similar  to  writ- 
ing and  running  a  computer  program.  A  standard  text  editor  is  used  to  create 
a  file  that  will  contain  statements  to  describe  a  model  in  a  special-purpose 
programming  language.  The  model  is  checked  for  syntactic  errors  and  trans- 
lated into  an  efficient  internal  representation  by  the  compiler  program.  The 
model  may  then  be  executed,  and  cases  may  be  entered  for  consultation. 
The  system  is  programmed  in  FORTRAN  and  is  therefore  relatively  efficient 


217 


218  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIE 

and  transferable  between  machines.    There  are  versions  available  for  both 
DEC  and  IBM  equipment. 

EXPERT  has  many  facilities  that  have  proved  useful  for  designing  consul- 
tation models,  such  as  explanations  of  the  program's  interpretations  and  the 
capability  to  accept  volunteered  information  from  the  user.  All  consultation 
facilities  of  EXPERT  are  fully  sequential;  for  example,  one  may  ask  for  the 
system's  interpretation  at  any  point  in  a  consultation  session.  Extensive  work 
has  been  done  on  interfacing  EXPERT  models  to  databases  of  stored  cases. 
Many  utilities  are  available  for  the  empirical  analysis  of  cases,  including  a 
complete  database  system  for  searching  through  cases  for  patterns  of  both 
model  interpretations  and  user-entered  data. 

Representation  of  Medical  Knowledge 

An  EXPERT  consultation  model  consists  of  three  sections:  hypotheses, 
findings,  and  decision  rules.  Findings  are  the  facts  about  a  patient  elicited  dur- 
ing a  consultation — the  history,  symptoms,  signs,  and  laboratory  test  results. 
Findings  are  reported  in  the  form  of  true,  false,  unavailable,  or  numerical 
responses  to  questions  from  EXPERT.  Hypotheses  are  the  conclusions  that 
may  be  inferred  by  the  system.  They  include  diagnostic  and  prognostic 
decision  categories  and  therapy  recommendations,  as  well  as  intermediate 
hypotheses  about  pathophysiological  states,  expected  causes  of  illness,  or  typi- 
cal aggregates  of  findings.  A  measure  of  uncertainty  is  usually  associated  with 
a  hypothesis. 

Within  the  three  sections  of  the  model,  several  subsections  are  possible. 
The  representation  used  in  building  a  model  divides  the  sections  as  follows 
(two  asterisks  indicate  one  of  the  major  sections,  a  single  asterisk  indicates  a 
subsection,  and  brackets  indicate  optional  statements): 

♦♦HYPOTHESES 

♦TAXONOMY 

[♦CAUSAL  AND  INTERMEDIATE  HYPOTHESES] 
[♦TREATMENTS] 
♦♦FINDINGS 
♦♦RULES 
[♦FF  RULES] 

♦FH  RULES 

The  major  hypotheses  are  structured  into  a  taxonomic  classification 
scheme.  Contained  within  the  *TAXONOMY  subsection  shown  above  are  the 
possible  diagnostic  and  prognostic  conclusions  and  the  useful  set-subset  rela- 
tionships between  general  diagnostic  categories  and  intermediate  interpreta- 
tions. As  an  example,  we  show  part  of  a  thyroid-disease  classification: 


B7  EXPERT  219 


♦TAXONOMY 

EU 

.Euthyroid  (.75) 

THO 

.Thyroid  Dysfunction  (.25) 

HYPER 

..Hyperthyroidism  (.05) 

HYPO 

..Hypothyroidism  (.20) 

NOP 

.No  Pathology  (.70) 

GRAY 

.Graves'  Disease  (.25) 

The  mnemonic  (EU,  THO,  etc.)  for  each  hypothesis  becomes  a  shorthand  for 
specifying  its  place  in  the  production  rules.  The  optional  weight  (e.g.,  .75) 
associated  with  some  hypotheses  indicates  their  frequency  of  occurrence  rela- 
tive to  the  higher  level  hypotheses  in  which  they  are  included.  The  indentation 
(shown  by  dots)  indicates  the  set-subset  relationship  among  hypotheses. 

Findings  are  represented  as  attributes  that  can  be  present,  absent,  or 
undetermined  in  the  patient  or  as  a  numerical  variable  that,  when  measured, 
adopts  a  value  within  a  prespecified  range.  In  those  cases  in  which  uncertainty 
is  associated  with  an  observation,  the  uncertainty  must  be  described  explicitly 
in  terms  of  additional  modifying  findings.  For  example,  the  accuracy  of  a  test 
result  can  be  requested  and  decision  rules  then  written  to  modify  inferences 
about  the  original  test.  To  acquire  information  about  a  patient,  several 
question  types — multiple  choice,  checklist,  numerical,  and  yes-no — may  be 
employed. 

There  are  three  types  of  rules  for  describing  logical  relationships  among 
findings  and  hypotheses: 

1.  FF — finding-to-finding  rules, 

2.  FH — finding-to-hypothesis  rules, 

3.  HH — hypothesis-to-hypothesis  rules. 

The  FF  rules  specify  truth  values  of  findings  that  can  be  deduced  directly  from 
an  already  established  finding.  They  are  processed  in  the  fixed  order  specified 
by  the  model  designer  and  are  used  to  establish  local  control  over  the  sequence 
of  questions  in  a  fashion  consistent  with  medical  practice.  FH  rules  are  logical 
combinations  of  findings  that  indicate  confidence  in  the  confirmation  or  denial 
of  hypotheses.  The  general  format  for  FH  rules  is: 

Xi  &X2...Xi-+  H(MNE,  CF) ,  -1  <  MNE  <  1  , 

where 

Xi  =  F(mne,  tval) 

=  [n  :  F(MNEi,  TVAL),  F(MNE2,  TVAL). .  .]  . 

If  the  logical  combination  of  findings  on  the  left  side  of  the  rule  is  satisfied,  the 
hypothesis,  MNE,  is  assigned  a  confidence  value,  CF.   The  selector  argument, 


220  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VIII 

n  in  [n  :  F(MNEl5  TVAL), ...],  indicates  that  if  n  of  the  listed  findings  are 
satisfied,  the  bracketed  condition  is  evaluated  as  true.  An  example  of  an  FH 
rule  is: 

F(RHP,  t)  &  F(FFT,  t)  ->  //(HYPER,   .5) , 

which  can  be  stated  as: 

IF:        RHP  is  true    (rapid  heart  palpitation)    and 

FFT  is  true    (fine  finger  tremor) 
THEN:    Conclude  hyperthyroidism  with  a  confidence  of    .5. 

The  HH  rules  allow  the  model  builder  to  specify  inferences  among  hypoth- 
eses and  treatment  selections  that  follow  from  other  (diagnostic  and  prog- 
nostic) hypotheses.  Since  such  higher  level  inferences  may  be  sometimes 
modified  by  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  finding,  the  left-hand  side  of  HH 
rules  may  also  contain  assertions  about  findings.  In  addition,  each  HH  rule 
must  have  a  context  defined  in  terms  of  a  set  of  findings  or  hypotheses,  which 
makes  possible  the  application  of  efficient  rule-evaluation  strategies  over  the 
compiled  model.  The  context  specifies  a  set  of  necessary  conditions  among 
the  findings  to  permit  evaluation  of  the  HH  rule.  HH  rules  are  evaluated  in  the 
order  of  specification  in  the  model.  Hypotheses  are  specified  with  a  range  of 
confidence  that  must  be  satisfied  for  the  HH  rule  to  be  invoked.  The  HH  rules 
are  implemented  in  a  table  of  the  following  form: 

♦HH  rules 

♦If  there  are  eye  and  thyroid  dysfunctions 

F(EEN0,  F)  and  (HXTH,  T) 

♦Then  consider  Graves'  disease: 

F(ETH0,  T)  and  H(EYE,  .5:1.)  ■»  H(GRAV,  .9) 

♦End 

Reasoning  Strategies 

When  an  assertion  about  a  finding  is  made  to  the  system,  the  rules  in 
which  this  result  appears  are  evaluated.  The  results  are  usually  received  in 
batches,  as  in  the  form  of  responses  to  a  multiple-choice  or  checklist  question. 
The  rules  are  evaluated  in  the  following  order  to  produce  weights  that  rank 
the  hypotheses: 

1.  FF  rules  are  evaluated.  They  take  simple  responses  of  true,  false,  or 
unknown  and  merely  enlarge  the  set  of  new  results  of  findings.  They 
are  handled  in  the  same  way  as  results  received  directly  in  response  to 
questions. 

2.  FH  rules  are  then  evaluated.  Only  those  FH  rules  in  which  new  results 
of  findings  appear  need  be  evaluated.  FH  rules  have  the  property  that, 
when  the  left-hand  side  of  a  rule  is  evaluated  as  true  or  false,  it  remains 


B7  EXPERT  221 

true  or  false  for  the  remainder  of  the  consultation  session,  unless  an 
erroneous  response  is  received. 

3.  Finally,  HH  rules  are  evaluated.  The  IF  part  of  each  HH  rule  table  is 
evaluated  at  the  same  time  as  the  FH  rules.  Only  HH  rules  found  in  tables 
that  have  their  IF  part  evaluated  as  true  are  considered.  All  such  HH 
rules  must  be  reevaluated  sequentially.  The  premises  and  consequents  of 
HH  rules  may  include  hypotheses  and  associated  intervals  of  confidence. 
Unlike  findings  that  remain  true  or  false,  these  intervals  can  change  not 
only  directly  from  results  of  findings,  but  also  indirectly  from  other  rules 
(both  FH  and  HH)  that  affect  the  confidence  measure  of  a  hypothesis.  HH 
rules  are  evaluated  in  the  order  of  their  appearance  in  the  model.  There 
is  no  backward  chaining,  because  the  order  of  evaluation  is  determined 
beforehand  by  the  model  builder.  Self-referencing  rules  are  therefore 
acceptable.  Because  HH  rules  and  tables  are  evaluated  in  sequence,  by 
their  order  of  appearance  in  the  model  file,  it  is  important  to  order  the 
HH  rules  carefully.  An  HH  rule  implying  a  hypothesis,  Hi,  that  is  later 
needed  to  establish  another  hypothesis,  Hi,  should  appear  in  the  model 
file  before  Hi  is  referenced  in  the  left  side  of  another  HH  rule.  The 
confidence  ranges  in  the  HH  rules  are  those  that  have  been  directly  set 
by  other  FH  or  HH  rules.  They  are  not  the  adjusted  weights  implied  by 
the  taxonomy. 

The  preceding  procedures  result  in  the  assignment  of  the  confidence  mea- 
sures, CF{,  that  can  be  determined  directly  from  the  rules  of  evidence  and 
hypothesis  weight  propagation:  the  FH  and  HH  rules.  When  more  than  one 
rule  is  applicable,  the  maximum  absolute  value  of  confidence  is  used.  Another 
procedure  is  invoked  that  is  helpful  both  in  question  selection  and  as  a  simple 
heuristic  to  adjust  weights  slightly.  Each  hypothesis  that  has  some  positive 
evidence,  in  the  form  of  a  satisfied  rule  or  a  partially  satisfied  rule  (with 
unknown  truth  value),  is  marked.  The  count  of  such  rules  that  apply  to  each 
hypothesis  is  kept.  This  corresponds  approximately  to  the  number  of  positive 
indicators  of  a  hypothesis. 

A  different  set  of  weights  is  derived  from  the  taxonomy  and  causal  network 
structure.  Forward  weights  are  propagated  from  predecessor  to  successor,  and 
inverse  weights  are  propagated  from  successor  to  predecessor.  A  taxonomy 
contains  implied  relationships  between  hypotheses  that  can  be  treated  in  a 
manner  similar  to  causal  connections.  The  procedures  for  generating  weights 
are  similar  to  those  used  in  CASNET.  After  all  FH  and  HH  rules  have  been 
evaluated,  the  measures  of  confidence,  CF;,  may  be  modified  or  propagated 
according  to  their  taxonomic  or  causal  relationships. 

A  final  weight  is  derived  from  both  the  rule-based  and  the  taxonomic- 
causal-net  weights.  It  is  taken  as  the  maximum  absolute  value  from  all 
the  indicated  directions  (with  the  appropriate  sign).  A  small  bonus  may  be 
awarded  to  the  final  weights. 

The  general  procedure  for  sequential  test  selection  may  be  specified  as 
follows: 


222  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine  VTH 

1.  Consider  those  rules  (FH  or  HH)  such  that: 

a.  they  set  confidence  measures  for  marked  hypotheses — they  are 
related  to  current  evidence; 

b.  the  confidence  of  the  rule  is  greater  than  the  current  confidence 
in  Hj,  so  that  it  provides  useful  additional  information. 

2.  Select  an  unasked  finding  Fi,  belonging  to  the  set  of  rules  found  in  part  1, 
such  that: 

a.  the  cost  is  minimal; 

b.  the  current  weight  W(H)  is  greatest,  indicating  that  the  finding 
pertains  to  the  most  likely  hypothesis; 

c.  the  potential  CF(H)  is  greatest  for  Fi,  so  that  this  finding  Fi  is 
one  that  can  yield  greater  confidence  in  Hj  than  another  Fk. 

Applications 

Several  applications  of  the  EXPERT  system  are  in  progress.  Consultation 
models  are  being  developed  in  rheumatology,  ophthalmology,  and  endocrinol- 
ogy (thyroid  diseases).  A  consultation  system  in  rheumatic  diseases  appears 
to  have  strong  potential  for  acceptance  by  the  medical  community.  There  is 
a  shortage  of  rheumatologists  in  the  United  States,  and  keeping  up  to  date 
on  the  interpretation  of  many  new  immunological  tests  can  be  difficult  for 
nonspecialist  physicians.  In  collaboration  with  investigators  at  the  University 
of  Missouri,  the  EXPERT  formalism  is  being  used  to  develop  a  prototype  con- 
sultation system  for  rheumatic  diseases  (Lindberg  et  al.,  1980).  Initially,  the 
set  of  problems  considered  has  been  confined  to  fewer  than  10  important,  yet 
complex,  diagnostic  categories.  The  model  is  currently  being  expanded  to 
cover  additional  problem  areas. 

References 

See  Weiss,  Kulikowski,  and  Safir  (1977),  Weiss  et  al.,  (1978),  and  Weiss, 
Kulikowski,  and  Galen  (1981). 


Chapter  IX 

Applications-oriented  AI  Research: 

Education 


CHAPTER  DC:     APPLICATIONS-ORIENTED 
AI  RESEARCH:  EDUCATION 


A.  Overview  /  225 

B.  ICAI  Systems  Design  /  229 

C.  Intelligent  CAI  Systems  /  236 

1.  SCHOLAR  /  236 

2.  WHY/ 242 

3.  SOPHIE  /  247 

4.  WEST  /  254 

5.  WUMPUS  /  261 

6.  GUIDON  /  267 
7  BUGGY  /  279 

8.  EXCHECK  /  283 

D.  Other  Applications  of  AI  to  Education  /  291 


A.     OVERVIEW 


EDUCATIONAL  APPLICATIONS  of  computer  technology  have  been  under 
development  since  the  early  1960s.  These  applications  have  included  schedul- 
ing courses,  managing  teaching  aids,  and  grading  tests.  The  predominant 
application,  however,  has  been  to  use  the  computer  as  a  device  that  interacts 
directly  with  the  student,  rather  than  as  an  assistant  to  the  human  teacher. 
For  this,  there  have  been  three  general  approaches. 

The  "ad  lib,"  or  environmental,  approach  is  typified  by  Seymour  Papert's 
LOGO  Laboratory  (Papert,  1980;  Abelson  and  diSessa,  1981),  which  allowed 
the  student  more  or  less  free-style  use  of  the  machine.  In  this  case,  the  student 
is  involved  in  programming.  It  is  conjectured  that  learning  problem-solving 
methods  takes  place  as  a  side  effect  of  working  with  tools  that  are  designed  to 
suggest  good  problem-solving  strategies  to  the  student.  The  second  approach 
uses  games  and  simulations  as  instructional  tools.  Once  again,  the  student  is 
involved  in  an  activity — for  example,  doing  simulated  genetics  experiments — 
for  which  learning  is  an  expected  side  effect.  The  third  computer  application 
in  education  is  computer-assisted  instruction  (CAI).  Unlike  the  first  two 
approaches,  CAI  makes  an  explicit  attempt  to  instigate  and  control  learning 
(Howe,  1973),  although  this  may  take  place  while  the  student  is  involved  in 
some  activity  like  a  simulation  or  a  game.  Applications  of  AI  techniques  to  this 
third  use  of  computer  technology  in  education  are  the  focus  of  the  systems 
described  in  this  chapter  (see  Article  LX.D  for  a  description  of  work  by  AI 
researchers  in  a  more  environmental  vein). 

The  goal  of  CAI  research  is  to  build  instructional  programs  that  incor- 
porate well-prepared  course  material  in  lessons  that  are  optimized  for  each 
student.  Early  programs  were  either  electronic  "page-turners,"  which  printed 
prepared  text,  or  drill-and-practice  monitors,  which  printed  problems  and 
responded  to  the  student's  solutions  using  prestored  answers  and  remedial 
comments.  In  the  Intelligent  CAI  (ICAI)  programs  of  the  1970s,  course  material 
was  represented  independently  of  teaching  procedures,  so  that  problems  and 
remedial  comments  could  be  generated  differently  for  each  student.  Research 
today  focuses  on  the  design  of  programs  that  can  offer  instruction  in  a  manner 
that  is  sensitive  to  the  student's  strengths,  weaknesses,  and  preferred  style  of 
learning.  The  role  of  AI  in  computer-based  instructional  applications  is  seen 
as  making  possible  a  new  kind  of  learning  environment. 

This  article  surveys  how  AI  techniques  have  been  applied  in  research 
attempting  to  create  intelligent  computer-based  tutors.  In  the  next  article, 
some  design  issues  are  discussed  and  typical  components  of  ICAI  systems  are 
described.  Subsequent  articles  describe  some  important  applications  of  AI 
techniques  in  instructional  programs. 

225 


226  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Frame- oriented  CAI  Systems 

The  first  instructional  programs  took  many  forms,  but  all  adhered  to 
essentially  the  same  pedagogical  philosophy.  The  student  was  usually  given 
some  instructional  text  (sometimes  "on  line,"  sometimes  not)  and  asked  a 
question  that  required  a  brief  answer.  After  he  (or  she)  responded,  the  student 
was  told  whether  his  answer  was  right  or  wrong.  His  response  was  sometimes 
used  to  determine  his  "path"  through  the  curriculum,  that  is,  the  sequence  of 
problems  he  was  given  (see  Atkinson  and  Wilson,  1969;  Barr  and  Atkinson, 
1975).  When  the  student  made  an  error,  the  program  branched  to  remedial 
material. 

The  courseware  author  attempts  to  anticipate  every  wrong  response,  pre- 
specifying  branches  to  appropriate  remedial  material  based  on  his  ideas  about 
what  the  underlying  misconceptions  might  be  that  would  cause  each  wrong 
response.  Branching  on  the  basis  of  response  was  the  first  step  toward  indi- 
vidualization of  instruction  (Crowder,  1962).  This  style  of  CAI  has  been 
dubbed  ad-hoc,  frame-oriented  (AFO)  CAI  by  Carbonell  (1970b)  to  stress 
its  dependence  on  author-specified  units  of  information.  (The  term  frame 
as  it  is  used  in  this  context  predates  the  more  recent  usage  in  AI  research 
on  knowledge-representation — see  Article  III.C7,  in  Volume  I — and  refers  to 
a  page  or  unit  of  text.)  Design  of  ad-hoc  frames  was  originally  based  on 
Skinnerian  stimulus-response  principles.  The  branching  strategies  of  some 
AFO  programs  have  become  quite  involved,  incorporating  the  best  learning 
theory  that  mathematical  psychology  has  produced  (Atkinson,  1972;  Fletcher, 
1975;  Kimball,  1973).  Some  of  these  systems  have  been  used  successfully  and 
are  available  commercially. 

Intelligent  CAI 

In  spite  of  the  widespread  use  of  ad-hoc,  frame-oriented  CAI  in  diverse 
educational  applications,  many  researchers  believe  that  most  AFO  courses  are 
not  the  best  use  of  computer  technology: 

In  most  CAI  systems  of  the  AFO  type,  the  computer  does  little  more  than 
what  a  programmed  textbook  can  do,  and  one  may  wonder  why  the  machine 
is  used  at  all. . . .  When  teaching  sequences  are  extremely  simple,  perhaps 
trivial,  one  should  consider  doing  away  with  the  computer,  and  using  other 
devices  or  techniques  more  related  to  the  task.  (Carbonell,  1970b,  pp.  32, 
193) 

In  this  pioneering  paper,  Carbonell  goes  on  to  define  a  second  type  of  CAI 
that  is  known  today  as  knowledge- based  or  Intelligent  CAI.  ICAI  systems  and 
the  earlier  CAI  systems  both  have  representations  of  the  subject  matter  they 
teach,  but  ICAI  systems  also  carry  on  a  dialogue  with  the  student  and  use  the 
student's  mistakes  to  diagnose  his  misunderstandings. 


A  Overview  227 

Early  uses  of  AI  techniques  in  CAI  were  called  generative  CAI  (Wexler, 
1970),  since  they  stressed  the  ability  to  generate  problems  from  a  large  data- 
base representing  the  subject  they  taught.  (See  Koffman  and  Blount,  1975, 
for  a  review  of  some  early  generative  CAI  programs  and  an  example  of  the 
possibilities  and  limitations  of  this  style  of  courseware.)  However,  the  kind  of 
courseware  that  Carbonell  was  describing  in  his  paper  was  to  be  more  than  just 
a  problem  generator — it  was  to  be  a  computer  tutor  that  had  the  inductive 
powers  of  its  human  counterparts.  ICAI  programs  offer  what  Brown  (1977) 
calls  a  reactive  learning  environment,  in  which  the  student  is  actively  engaged 
with  the  instructional  system  and  his  interests  and  misunderstandings  drive 
the  tutorial  dialogue.  This  goal  was  expressed  by  other  researchers  trying  to 
write  CAI  programs  that  extended  the  medium  beyond  the  limits  of  frame 
selection  (Koffman  and  Blount,  1975): 

Often  it  is  not  sufficient  to  tell  a  student  he  is  wrong  and  indicate  the 
correct  solution  method.  An  intelligent  CAI  system  should  be  able  to  make 
hypotheses  based  on  a  student's  error  history  as  to  where  the  real  source  of 
his  difficulty  lies.  (p.  218) 

The  Use  of  AI  Techniques  in  ICAI 

The  realization  of  the  computer-based  tutor  has  involved  increasingly 
complicated  computer  programs  and  has  prompted  CAI  researchers  to  apply 
AI  techniques.  AI  work  in  natural-language  understanding,  knowledge  repre- 
sentation, and  methods  of  inference,  as  well  as  specific  AI  applications  such  as 
algebraic  simplification,  symbolic  integration,  medical  diagnosis,  and  theorem 
proving,  have  been  applied  by  various  researchers  toward  making  CAI  pro- 
grams increasingly  intelligent  and  effective.  Early  research  on  ICAI  systems 
focused  on  representation  of  the  subject  matter.  Benchmark  efforts  include 
SCHOLAR,  the  geography  tutor  of  Carbonell  and  Collins  (see  Article  DC.Cl); 
SOPHIE,  the  electronics  troubleshooting  tutor  of  Brown  and  Burton 
(Article  EX.C3);  and  EXCHECK,  the  logic  and  set  theory  tutor  by  Suppes  and 
his  associates  (Article  DC.C8).  The  high  level  of  domain  expertise  in  these 
programs  permits  them  to  be  responsive  in  a  wide  range  of  problem-solving 
interactions. 

These  ICAI  programs  are  quite  different  from  even  the  most  complicated 
frame-oriented,  branching  program: 

The  traditional  approaches  to  this  problem  using  decision  theory  and  sto- 
chastic learning  models  have  reached  a  dead  end  due  to  their  oversimplified 
representation  of  learning. ...  It  appears  within  reach  of  AI  methodology  to 
develop  CAI  systems  that  act  more  like  human  teachers.  (Laubsch,  1975, 
pp.  124-125) 

However,  an  AI  system  that  is  expert  in  a  particular  domain  is  not  neces- 
sarily an  expert  teacher  of  the  material — "ICAI  systems  cannot  be  AI  systems 
warmed  over"  (Brown,  1977,  p.  255).  A  good  teacher  must  understand  what 


228  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  EX 

the  student  is  doing,  not  just  what  he  is  supposed  to  do.  AI  programs  often 
employ  very  powerful  problem-solving  methods  that  do  not  resemble  those 
of  humans.  In  some  cases,  CAI  researchers  borrowed  AI  techniques  for  rep- 
resenting subject-domain  expertise  but  had  to  modify  them,  often  making 
the  inference  routines  less  powerful,  in  order  to  force  them  to  follow  human 
reasoning  patterns,  to  make  the  line  of  reasoning  more  understandable  to  the 
student,  and  to  model  his  problem-solving  progress  more  closely  (Goldberg, 
1973;  Smith,  1976).  Even  AI  representations  designed  to  replicate  human 
reasoning  steps  at  some  level  of  detail,  such  as  production  rules,  may  be 
inadequate  for  use  in  teaching  if  important  organizational  and  strategic  con- 
cepts are  not  represented  explicitly  (Clancey  and  Letsinger,  1981;  see  also  the 
discussion  of  NEOMYCIN  in  Article  DC.C6  on  GUIDON). 

In  the  mid-1970s,  a  second  phase  in  the  development  of  ICAI  tutors  was 
characterized  by  the  inclusion  of  additional  expertise  in  the  systems  regarding 
(a)  the  student's  learning  behavior  and  (b)  tutoring  strategies  (Brown  and 
Goldstein,  1977).  AI  techniques  were  used  to  construct  models  of  the  learner 
that  represent  his  knowledge  in  terms  of  issues  (see  Article  DC.C4)  or  skills 
(Barr  and  Atkinson,  1977)  that  should  be  learned.  This  model  then  controls 
tutoring  strategies  for  presenting  the  material.  Finally,  some  ICAI  programs 
are  now  using  AI  techniques  to  represent  explicitly  these  tutoring  strategies, 
gaining  the  advantages  of  flexibility  and  modularity  of  representation  and 
control  (Burton  and  Brown,  1979a;  Goldstein,  1977;  Clancey,  1979b). 

References 

The  best  general  review  of  research  in  ICAI  is  Brown  and  Goldstein  (1977). 
Several  papers  are  collected  in  a  special  issue  of  the  International  Journal  of 
Man-Machine  Studies,  Volume  11  (1979),  an  expanded  version  of  which  is  to 
be  published  as  a  book  (Sleeman  and  Brown,  in  press). 


B.     ICAI  SYSTEMS  DESIGN 


THE  MAIN  COMPONENTS  of  an  Intelligent  CAI  (ICAI)  system  are  problem- 
solving  expertise,  the  knowledge  that  the  system  tries  to  impart  to  the  student; 
the  student  model,  indicating  what  the  student  does  and  does  not  know;  and 
tutoring  strategies,  which  specify  how  the  system  presents  material  to  the 
student.  (See  Self,  1974,  for  an  excellent  discussion  of  the  differences  and 
interrelations  of  the  types  of  knowledge  needed  in  an  ICAI  program.)  Not 
all  of  these  components  are  fully  developed  in  every  system.  Because  of  the 
size  and  complexity  of  ICAI  programs,  most  researchers  tend  to  concentrate 
their  efforts  on  the  development  of  a  single  part  of  what  would  constitute  a 
fully  usable  system.  The  issues  that  have  been  discussed  in  the  design  of  each 
component  are  described  briefly  below. 

The  Expertise  Module 

The  "expert"  component  of  an  ICAI  system  is  charged  with  the  task  of 
generating  problems  and  evaluating  the  correctness  of  the  student's  solutions. 
The  CAI  system's  knowledge  of  the  subject  matter  was  originally  envisioned  as 
a  huge,  static  database  that  incorporated  all  the  facts  to  be  taught.  This  idea 
was  implicit  in  the  early  drill-and-practice  programs  and  was  made  explicit  in 
generative  CAI  (see  Article  DC.A).  Representation  of  subject-matter  expertise 
in  this  way,  for  example,  with  semantic  nets  (see  Article  III.3,  in  Vol.  i),  has  been 
useful  for  generating  and  answering  questions  involving  causal  or  relational 
reasoning  (Carbonell  and  Collins,  1973;  Laubsch,  1975;  see  also  Articles  EX.C1 
and  DC.C2  on  the  SCHOLAR  and  WHY  systems). 

Recent  systems  have  employed  procedural  representation  of  domain  knowl- 
edge, for  example,  in  the  form  of  methods  for  taking  measurements  and  mak- 
ing deductions  (see  Article  III.C2,  in  Vol.  i).  This  knowledge  is  represented  as 
procedural  experts  that  correspond  to  subskills  that  a  student  must  learn  in 
order  to  acquire  the  complete  skill  being  taught  (Brown,  Burton,  and  Bell, 
1975).  Production  rules  (Article  III.C4,  in  Vol.  i)  have  been  used  to  construct 
modular  representations  of  skills  and  problem-solving  methods  (Goldstein, 
1977;  Clancey,  1979b).  Problem- solving  grammars  have  been  explored  as  a 
representation  of  the  expertise  involved  in  writing  computer  programs  (Miller 
and  Goldstein,  1977).  In  addition,  Brown  and  Burton  (1978)  have  pointed 
out  that  multiple  representations  are  sometimes  useful  for  answering  student 
questions  and  for  evaluating  partial  solutions  to  a  problem  (e.g.,  a  semantic  net 
of  facts  about  an  electronic  circuit  and  procedures  simulating  the  functional 
behavior  of  the  circuit).    Stevens  and  Collins  (1978)  considered  an  evolving 


229 


230  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

series  of  simulation  models  for  reasoning  metaphorically  about  the  behavior 
of  causal  systems. 

It  should  be  noted  that  not  all  ICAI  systems  can  actually  solve  the  prob- 
lems they  pose  to  a  student.  For  example,  BIP,  the  BASIC  Instructional 
Program  (Barr,  Beard,  and  Atkinson,  1975),  cannot  write  or  analyze  com- 
puter programs:  BIP  uses  sample  input/output  pairs  (supplied  by  the  course 
authors)  to  test  the  student's  programs.  Similarly,  the  procedural  experts  in 
SOPHIE-I  could  not  debug  an  electronic  circuit  (see  Article  DCC3).  In  con- 
trast, the  production-rule  representation  of  domain  knowledge  in  WUMPUS 
and  GUIDON  allows  these  programs  to  solve  problems  independently,  as  well 
as  to  criticize  student  solutions  (see  Articles  EX.C5  and  DC.C6).  Being  able  to 
solve  the  problems,  ideally  in  any  of  several  possible  ways,  is  necessary  if  the 
ICAI  program  is  to  make  fine-grained  suggestions  about  the  completion  of 
partial  solutions. 

The  expert  component  of  an  ICAI  system  is  called  an  articulate  expert 
(Goldstein,  1977)  if  it  can  explain  each  problem-solving  decision  in  terms  that 
correspond  (at  some  level  of  abstraction)  to  those  of  a  human  problem-solver. 
In  contrast,  typical  expert  AI  programs  have  data  structures  and  processing 
algorithms  that  do  not  necessarily  mimic  the  reasoning  steps  of  humans  and 
are  therefore  considered  "opaque"  to  the  user.  For  example,  the  electronic- 
circuit  simulator  underlying  SOPHIE-I,  which  is  used  to  check  the  consistency 
of  a  student's  hypotheses  about  failed  circuit  elements  and  to  answer  some  of 
his  (or  her)  questions,  is  an  opaque  expert  on  the  functioning  of  the  circuit.  It 
is  a  complete,  accurate,  and  efficient  model  of  the  circuit,  but  its  mechanisms 
are  never  revealed  to  the  student,  since  they  are  certainly  not  the  mechanisms 
that  he  is  expected  to  acquire.  In  WEST,  on  the  other  hand,  while  a  complete, 
efficient,  opaque  expert  is  used  to  determine  the  range  of  possible  moves  that 
the  student  could  have  made  with  a  given  roll  of  the  dice,  a  different,  artic- 
ulate expert,  which  models  only  pieces  of  the  game-playing  expertise,  helps 
determine  possible  causes  for  less  than  optimal  moves  by  the  student. 

ICAI  systems  are  distinguished  from  earlier  CAJ  approaches  by  the  separa- 
tion of  teaching  strategies  from  the  subject  expertise  to  be  taught.  However, 
the  separation  of  subject-area  knowledge  from  instructional  planning  requires 
a  structure  for  organizing  the  expertise  that  captures  the  difficulty  of  various 
problems  and  the  interrelationships  of  course  material.  Modeling  a  student's 
understanding  of  a  subject  is  closely  related  conceptually  to  figuring  out  a 
representation  for  the  subject  itself  or  for  the  language  used  to  discuss  it. 

Trees  and  lattices  showing  prerequisite  interactions  have  been  used  to 
organize  the  introduction  of  new  knowledge  or  topics  (Koffman  and  Blount, 
1975).  In  BIP,  this  lattice  took  the  form  of  a  curriculum  net  that  related  the 
skills  to  be  taught  to  sample  programming  tasks  that  exercised  each  skill  (Barr, 
Beard,  and  Atkinson,  1976).  Goldstein  (1979)  called  the  lattice  a  syllabus 
in  the  WUMPUS  research  and  emphasized  the  developmental  path  that  a 


B  ICAI  Systems  Design  231 

learner  takes  in  acquiring  new  skills.  For  arithmetic  skills  needed  in  WEST, 
Burton  and  Brown  (1976)  employ  curriculum  units  called  issues  at  several 
levels,  for  example,  the  use  of  arithmetic  operators,  strategies  for  winning 
the  game,  and  meta-level  considerations  for  improving  performance.  Burton 
and  Brown  suggest  that  when  the  skills  are  "structurally  independent,"  the 
order  of  their  presentation  is  not  particularly  crucial.  This  representation  is 
useful  for  modeling  the  student's  knowledge  and  coaching  him  on  different 
levels  of  abstraction.  Stevens,  Collins,  and  Goldin  (1978)  have  argued  further 
that  a  good  human  tutor  does  not  merely  traverse  a  predetermined  network 
of  knowledge  in  selecting  material  to  present.  Rather,  it  is  the  process  of  the 
tutor's  ferreting  out  student  misconceptions  that  drives  the  dialogue. 

The  Student-model  Module 

The  modeling  module  represents  the  student's  understanding  of  the  mate- 
rial to  be  taught.  Much  recent  ICAI  research  has  focused  on  this  component. 
The  purpose  of  modeling  the  student  is  to  make  hypotheses  about  his  miscon- 
ceptions and  suboptimal  performance  strategies  so  that  the  tutoring  module 
can  point  them  out,  indicate  why  they  are  wrong,  and  suggest  corrections. 
It  is  advantageous  for  the  system  to  be  able  to  recognize  alternative  ways 
of  solving  problems,  including  the  incorrect  methods  that  the  student  might 
use  as  a  result  of  systematic  misconceptions  about  the  problem  or  inefficient 
strategies. 

Some  early  frame-oriented  CAI  systems  employed  mathematical  stochastic 
learning  models,  but  this  approach  failed  because  it  modeled  only  the  prob- 
ability that  a  student  would  give  a  specific  response  to  a  stimulus.  In  general, 
knowing  the  probability  of  a  response  has  little  diagnostic  power  (Laubsch, 
1975) — it  is  not  the  same  as  knowing  what  a  student  understands. 

Typical  uses  of  AI  techniques  for  modeling  student  knowledge  include 

(a)  simple  pattern  recognition  applied  to  the  student's  response  history  and 

(b)  flags  in  the  subject-matter  semantic  net  or  in  the  rule  base  representing 
areas  that  the  student  has  mastered.  In  these  ICAI  systems,  a  student  model 
is  formed  by  comparing  the  student's  behavior  to  that  of  the  computer-based 
"expert"  in  the  same  environment.  The  modeling  component  marks  each  skill 
according  to  whether  evidence  indicates  that  the  student  knows  the  material 
or  not.  Carr  and  Goldstein  (1977)  have  termed  this  component  an  overlay 
model — the  student's  understanding  is  represented  completely  in  terms  of  the 
expertise  component  of  the  program  (see  Article  EK.C5). 

Another  approach  is  to  model  the  student's  knowledge  not  as  a  subset  of 
the  expert's  knowledge,  but  rather  as  a  perturbation  of  or  deviation  from  the 
expert's  knowledge — a  "bug."  (See,  e.g.,  the  SOPHIE  and  BUGGY  systems — 
Articles  DC.C3  and  EX.C7.)  There  is  a  major  difference  between  the  overlay 
and  bug  approaches  to  modeling:    In  the  bug  approach,   it  is  not  simply 


232  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

assumed  that  the  student  reasons  as  the  expert  does,  except  for  knowing  less; 
the  student's  reasoning  can,  in  fact,  be  substantially  different  from  expert 
reasoning. 

Other  information  that  might  be  accumulated  in  the  student  model 
includes  the  student's  preferred  modes  for  interacting  with  the  program,  a 
rough  characterization  of  his  level  of  ability,  a  consideration  of  what  he  seems 
to  forget  over  time,  and  an  indication  of  what  his  goals  and  plans  seem  to  be 
for  learning  the  subject  matter. 

Major  sources  of  evidence  for  maintaining  the  student  model  can  be  char- 
acterized as:  (a)  implicit,  from  student  problem-solving  behavior;  (b)  explicit, 
from  direct  questions  asked  of  the  student;  (c)  historical,  from  assumptions 
based  on  the  student's  experience;  and  (d)  structural,  from  assumptions  based 
on  some  measure  of  the  difficulty  of  the  subject  material  (Goldstein,  1977). 
Historical  evidence  is  usually  determined  by  asking  the  student  to  rate  his 
level  of  expertise  on  a  scale  from  beginner  to  expert.  Early  programs,  like 
SCHOLAR,  used  only  explicit  evidence.  Recent  programs  have  concentrated 
on  inferring  implicit  evidence  from  the  student's  problem-solving  behavior. 
This  approach  is  complicated  in  that  it  is  limited  by  the  program's  ability 
to  recognize  and  describe  the  strategies  applied  by  the  student.  Specifically, 
when  the  expert  program  indicates  that  an  inference  chain  is  required  for 
a  correct  result  and  the  student's  observable  behavior  is  wrong,  how  is  the 
modeling  program  to  know  which  of  the  intermediate  steps  are  unknown  or 
wrongly  applied  by  the  student?  This  is  the  apportionment  of  credit  or  blame 
problem;  it  has  been  an  important  focus  of  WEST  research  (Article  DCC4). 

In  his  work  on  the  MACSYMA  Advisor,  Michael  Genesereth  (1979)  built 
a  system  that  interprets  the  MACSYMA  user's  activity  in  terms  of  a  problem- 
solving  grammar  (Miller  and  Goldstein,  1977b).  MACSYMA  is  a  powerful 
and  complex  computer-based  tool  for  mathematical  problem  solving  used  by 
scientists  and  engineers  across  the  country  (see  Article  VII.Dl).  The  analysis 
by  the  MACSYMA  Advisor  allows  the  user's  efforts  to  be  modeled  in  terms  of  a 
"standard  set"  of  problem-solving  operations.  The  Advisor's  plan- recognition 
procedure  attempts  to  interpret,  or  parse,  the  user's  solution  steps  in  terms 
of  the  grammar,  building  a  model  of  what  the  user  is  trying  to  do,  called  the 
plan.  The  plan  is  used  to  infer  the  user's  beliefs  and  misconceptions. 

The  SPADE-0  system  (Miller,  1979;  Miller  and  Goldstein,  1977a,  1977b) 
explored  the  relation  between  expert  knowledge  and  student  modeling  in  the 
context  of  a  LOGO-graphics  programming  tutor.  Since  a  complete  expert 
module  for  programming  tasks  is  beyond  the  state  of  the  art,  SPADE-0  focused 
on  providing  an  instructional  programming  environment  in  which  an  articu- 
late program-planning  dialogue  could  take  place.  Plans  for  LOGO  programs 
were  displayed  as  treelike  hierarchies  of  design  choices;  programming-language 
"code"  was  at  the  leaves  of  these  tree  structures.  Each  node  in  a  SPADE-0 
plan  could  be  annotated  according  to  purpose  (what  it  was  to  do)  and  rationale 


B  ICAI  Systems  Design  233 

(why  it  was  chosen).  Although  only  rudimentary  tutorial  and  modeling  capa- 
bilities were  actually  implemented  in  SPADE-0,  its  design  provided  a  test 
case  for  exploring  potential  AI  contributions  along  these  lines.  The  insight 
of  human  tutors  apparently  results  from  recognizing  the  student's  plan  and 
analyzing  its  differences  from  the  most  similar  "expert"  plan;  underlying  mis- 
conceptions are  inferred  from  sequences  of  "buggy"  student  plans.  SPADE-0's 
attempt  to  interact  with  the  student  in  terms  of  an  explicit  vocabulary  of 
high-level  planning  and  debugging  ideas  represented  a  radical  departure  from 
conventional  programming  instruction  (which  is  typically  organized  around 
specific  language  constructs). 

Because  of  inherent  limitations  in  the  modeling  process,  it  is  useful  for 
a  "critic"  in  the  modeling  component  to  measure  how  closely  the  student 
model  actually  predicts  the  student's  behavior.  Extreme  inconsistency  or  an 
unexpected  demonstration  of  expertise  in  solving  problems  might  indicate  that 
the  representation  in  the  program  does  not  capture  the  student's  approach. 
Finally,  Goldstein  (1977)  has  suggested  that  the  modeling  process  should 
attempt  both  to  measure  whether  or  not  the  student  is  actually  learning  and 
to  discern  what  teaching  methods  are  most  effective.  Much  research  is  needed 
in  this  area. 

The  Tutoring  Module 

The  tutoring  module  of  ICAI  systems  must  integrate  knowledge  about 
natural-language  dialogues,  teaching  methods,  and  the  subject  area.  This  is 
the  module  that  communicates  with  the  student,  selecting  problems  for  him  to 
solve,  monitoring  and  criticizing  his  performance,  providing  assistance  upon 
request,  and  selecting  remedial  material.  The  design  of  this  module  involves 
issues  such  as  when  it  is  appropriate  to  offer  a  hint  or  how  far  the  student 
should  be  allowed  to  go  down  the  wrong  track: 

These  are  just  some  of  the  problems  which  stem  from  the  basic  fact  that 
teaching  is  a  skill  which  requires  knowledge  additional  to  the  knowledge 
comprising  mastery  of  the  subject  domain.  (Brown,  1977,  pp.  256-257) 

This  additional  knowledge,  beyond  the  representation  of  the  subject  domain 
and  of  the  student's  state  of  understanding,  is  knowledge  about  how  to  teach. 
Most  ICAI  research  has  explored  teaching  methods  based  on  diagnostic 
modeling,  in  which  the  program  debugs  the  student's  understanding  by  posing 
tasks  and  evaluating  his  response  (Collins,  1976;  Brown  and  Burton,  1978; 
Koffman  and  Blount,  1975).  From  the  program's  feedback,  the  student  is 
expected  to  learn  which  skills  he  uses  wrongly,  which  skills  he  does  not  use 
(but  could  use  to  good  advantage),  and  so  forth.  Recently,  there  has  been 
more  concern  with  the  possibility  of  saying  just  the  right  thing  to  the  student 
so  that  he  will  realize  his  own  errors  and  switch  to  a  better  method  (Carr  and 


234  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Goldstein,  1977;  Burton  and  Brown,  1979a;  Norman,  Gentner,  and  Stevens, 
1976).  This  new  direction  is  based  on  attempts  to  make  a  bug  constructive 
by  establishing  for  the  student  that  there  is  something  suboptimal  in  his 
approach,  as  well  as  giving  enough  information  for  the  student  to  use  what 
he  already  knows  to  focus  on  the  bug  and  characterize  it  so  that  he  avoids 
this  failing  in  the  future. 

However,  it  is  by  no  means  clear  how  "just  the  right  thing"  is  to  be  said 
to  the  student.  We  do  know  that  it  depends  on  having  a  very  good  model  of 
his  understanding  process  (the  methods  and  strategies  he  uses  to  construct  a 
solution).  Current  research  is  focusing  on  means  for  representing  and  isolating 
the  bugs  themselves  (Stevens,  Collins,  and  Goldin,  1978;  Brown  and  Burton, 
1978). 

Another  approach  is  to  provide  an  environment  that  encourages  the 
student  to  think  in  terms  of  debugging  his  own  knowledge.  In  one  BIP 
experiment  (Wescourt  and  Hemphill,  1978),  explicit  debugging  strategies  for 
computer  programming  were  conveyed  in  a  written  document  and  then  a 
controlled  experiment  was  undertaken  to  see  whether  this  training  fostered  a 
more  rational  approach  for  detecting  faulty  use  of  programming  skills. 

Brown,  Collins,  and  Harris  (1978)  suggest  that  one  might  foster  the  ability 
to  construct  hypotheses  and  test  them  (the  basis  of  understanding  in  their 
model)  by  setting  up  problems  in  which  the  student's  first  guess  is  likely  to 
be  wrong,  thus  "requiring  him  to  focus  on  how  he  detects  that  his  guess  is 
wrong  and  how  he  then  intelligently  goes  about  revising  it." 

The  Socratic  method  used  in  WHY  (Stevens  and  Collins,  1977)  involves 
questioning  the  student  in  a  way  that  will  encourage  him  to  reason  about 
what  he  knows  and  thereby  modify  his  conceptions.  The  tutor's  strategies  are 
constructed  by  analyzing  protocols  of  real- world  interactions  between  student 
and  teacher. 

Another  teaching  strategy  that  has  been  successfully  implemented  on 
several  systems  is  called  coaching  (Goldstein,  1977).  Coaching  programs  are 
not  concerned  with  covering  a  predetermined  lesson  plan  within  a  fixed  time 
(in  contrast  to  SCHOLAR).  Rather,  the  goal  of  coaching  is  to  encourage  skill 
acquisition  and  general  problem-solving  abilities  by  engaging  the  student  in 
some  activity  like  a  computer  game  (see  Articles  DC  A  and  DC.D).  In  a  coaching 
situation,  the  immediate  aim  of  the  student  is  to  have  fun,  and  skill  acquisition 
is  an  indirect  consequence.  Tutoring  comes  about  when  the  computer  coach, 
"observing"  the  student's  play  of  the  game,  interrupts  the  student  and  offers 
new  information  or  suggests  new  strategies.  A  successful  computer  coach 
must  be  able  to  discern  what  skills  or  knowledge  the  student  might  acquire, 
based  on  his  playing  style,  and  to  judge  effective  ways  to  intercede  in  the 
game  and  offer  advice.  WEST  and  WUMPUS  (Articles  DC.C4  and  DC.C5)  are 
both  coaching  programs. 

Socratic  tutoring  and  coaching  represent  different  styles  for  communicat- 
ing with  the  student.     All  mixed-initiative  tutoring  follows  some  dialogue 


B  ICAI  Systems  Design  235 

strategy,  which  involves  decisions  about  when  and  how  often  to  question  the 
student  and  methods  for  the  presentation  of  new  material  and  review.  For 
example,  a  coaching  program,  by  design,  is  nonintrusive  and  only  rarely  lec- 
tures. On  the  other  hand,  a  Socratic  tutor  questions  repetitively,  requiring 
the  student  to  pursue  certain  lines  of  reasoning.  Recently,  ICAI  research  has 
turned  to  making  explicit  these  alternative  dialogue-management  principles. 
Collins  (1976)  has  pioneered  the  careful  investigation  and  articulation  of  teach- 
ing strategies.  Recent  work  has  explored  the  representation  of  these  strategies 
as  production  rules  (see  Articles  DC.C2  and  DC.C6  on  WHY  and  GUIDON). 

For  example,  the  tutoring  module  in  the  GUIDON  program,  which  dis- 
cusses MYCIN-like  case-diagnosis  tasks  with  a  student,  has  an  explicit  repre- 
sentation of  discourse  knowledge.  Tutoring  rules  select  alternative  dialogue 
formats  on  the  basis  of  economy,  domain  logic,  and  tutoring  or  student- 
modeling  goals.  Arranged  into  procedures,  these  rules  cope  with  various  recur- 
rent situations  in  the  tutorial  dialogue,  for  example,  introducing  a  new  topic, 
examining  a  student's  understanding  after  he  asks  a  question  that  indicates 
unexpected  expertise,  relating  an  inference  to  one  just  discussed,  discussing 
the  next  plan  of  attack  after  the  student  completes  a  subproblem,  and  wrap- 
ping up  the  discussion  of  a  topic. 

Conclusion 

In  general,  ICAI  programs  have  only  begun  to  deal  with  the  problems  of 
representing  and  acquiring  teaching  expertise  and  of  determining  how  this 
knowledge  should  be  integrated  with  general  principles  of  discourse.  The  pro- 
grams described  in  the  articles  to  follow  have  all  investigated  some  aspect  of 
this  problem,  and  none  offers  an  answer  to  the  question  of  how  to  build  a 
computer-tutor.  Nevertheless,  these  programs  have  demonstrated  potential 
tutorial  skill,  sometimes  showing  striking  insight  into  students'  misconcep- 
tions. Research  continues  toward  making  viable  AI  contributions  to  computer- 
based  education. 

References 

Goldstein  (1977)  gives  a  clear  discussion  of  the  distinctions  between  the 
modules  presented  here,  concentrating  on  the  broader,  theoretical  issues. 
Burton  and  Brown  (1976)  also  discuss  the  components  of  ICAI  systems  and 
their  interactions  and  provide  a  good  example.  Self  (1974)  is  a  classic  discus- 
sion of  the  kinds  of  knowledge  needed  in  a  computer-based  tutor. 


C.     INTELLIGENT  CAI  SYSTEMS 
CI.     SCHOLAR 


In  ADDITION  to  responding  to  the  student's  questions,  the  tutor  should  be 
able  to  take  the  initiative  during  an  instructional  dialogue  by  generating  good 
tutorial  questions.  These  questions  can  be  used  by  the  tutor  to  indicate 
the  relevant  material  to  be  learned,  to  determine  the  extent  of  a  student's 
knowledge  of  the  problem  domain,  and  to  identify  any  misconceptions  that  he 
(or  she)  might  have.  SCHOLAR  is  one  such  mixed- initiative,  computer-based 
tutoring  system;  both  the  system  and  the  student  can  initiate  conversation  by 
asking  questions.  SCHOLAR  was  the  pioneering  effort  in  the  development  of 
computer  tutors  capable  of  handling  unanticipated  student  questions  and  of 
generating  instructional  material  in  varying  levels  of  detail,  according  to  the 
context  of  the  dialogue.  Both  the  student's  input  and  the  program's  output 
are  English  sentences. 

The  original  SCHOLAR  system,  created  by  Jaime  Carbonell,  Allan  Collins, 
and  their  colleagues  at  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  tutored  students 
about  simple  facts  in  South  American  geography  (Carbonell,  1970b).  It  has 
a  number  of  tutoring  strategies  for  composing  relevant  questions,  determining 
whether  or  not  the  student's  answers  are  correct,  and  answering  questions 
from  the  student.  Both  the  knowledge-representation  scheme  (see  below) 
and  the  tutorial  capabilities  are  applicable  to  domains  other  than  geography. 
For  example,  NLS-SCHOLAR  was  developed  to  tutor  people  unfamiliar  with 
computers  in  the  use  of  a  complex  text-editing  program  (Grignetti,  Hausmann, 
and  Gould,  1975). 

In  addition  to  investigating  the  nature  of  tutorial  dialogues  and  of  human 
plausible  reasoning,  the  SCHOLAR  research  project  explored  a  number  of  AI 
issues,  including: 

1.  How  can  real- world  knowledge  be  stored  effectively  for  the  fast,  easy 
retrieval  of  relevant  facts  needed  in  tutoring? 

2.  What  general  reasoning  strategies  are  needed  to  make  appropriate  plaus- 
ible inferences  from  the  typically  incomplete  database  of  the  tutor  pro- 
gram? 

3.  To  what  extent  can  these  strategies  be  made  independent  of  the  domain 
being  discussed  (i.e.,  dependent  only  on  the  form  of  the  representation)? 

The  Knowledge  Base — Semantic  Nets 

In  SCHOLAR,  knowledge  about  the  domain  being  tutored  is  represented 
in  a  semantic  net  (see  Article  III.C3,  in  Vol.  i).  Each  node,  or  unit,  in  the  net, 

236 


CI  SCHOLAR  237 

corresponding  to  some  geographical  object  or  concept,  is  composed  of  the 
name  associated  with  that  node  and  a  set  of  properties.  These  properties  are 
lists  of  attribute- value  pairs.  For  example,  Figure  Cl-1  shows  a  representation 
of  the  unit  for  Peru.  (For  a  discussion  of  the  LISP  notation,  see  Article  VI. B.) 
Attributes  can  be  English  words  (other  units)  that  are  defined  elsewhere 
in  the  net;  one  of  several  special  attributes  such  as  SUPRA  for  superattribute, 
SUPERC  for  superconcept  or  superordinate,  SUPERP  for  superpart;  or  case- 
structure  attributes  used  in  parsing  (see  below).  An  example  of  SUPRA  might 
be  the  fact  that  fertile  refers  to  soil  and  soil  refers  to  topography;  of  SUPERC, 
that  Peru  is  a  country;  and  of  SUPERP,  that  Peru  is  part  of  South  America. 
Values  can  also  be  importance  tags,  like  the  expressions  (I  0)  after  LOCATION  in 
Figure  Cl-1  and  (I  1)  after  EASTERN:  the  lower  the  number,  the  more  important 
the  property.  SCHOLAR  uses  these  tags  to  measure  the  relevance  of  a  node 
with  respect  to  the  topic  under  discussion. 

Tutorial  Dialogue 

An  important  part  of  the  SCHOLAR  research  has  been  an  emphasis  on  the 
nature  of  tutorial  dialogue,  in  particular,  the  Socratic  style  of  tutoring,  where 
the  tutor  first  attempts  to  diagnose  the  student's  misconceptions  and  then 
presents  material  that  will  force  the  student  to  see  his  own  errors  (Collins, 
Warnock,  and  Passafiume,  1974).  As  part  of  the  SCHOLAR  research,  human 


PERU: 

((EXAMPLE-NOUN  PERU)) 

(10)  "Importance"  of  unit  is  high 

(SUPERC  (I  0)  COUNTRY) 

(SUPERP    (I   6)    SOUTH/AMERICA)        Link  to  superordinate  units 

(LOCATION    (I  0)  Values  of  LOCATION  attribute  follow: 

(IN  (I  0)  (SOUTH/AMERICA  (I  0)  WESTERN)) 
(ON  (I  0)  (COAST  (I  0)  (OF  (I  0)  PACIFIC)) 
(LATITUDE  (I  4)  (RANGE  (I  0)  -18  0)) 
(LONGITUDE  (I  5)  (RANGE  (I  0)  -82  -68)) 
(BORDERING/COUNTRIES  (I  1) 

(NORTHERN  (I  1)  (LIST  COLUMBIA  ECUADOR)) 

(EASTERN  (I  1)  BRAZIL) 


Figure  Cl-1.  The  unit  for  PERU. 


238  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

tutorial  protocols  were  analyzed  to  see  what  strategies  people  follow,  in  an 
attempt  to  incorporate  these  strategies  into  the  system  (see  also  Article  DC.C2 
on  the  groups  continuing  research  in  this  direction).  The  following  example 
is  an  excerpt  from  a  session  with  the  South  American  geography  tutor.  The 
student's  questions  and  answers  are  preceded  by  **  and  annotations  are  shown 
in  italics: 

What  is  the  language  of  Argentina? 

**  Probably  Spanish 

Very  good. 

Approximately  what  is  the  area  of  Argentina? 

Student  changes  topic . . . 

**  Tell  me  something  about  Peru 

Peru  is  a  country. 

It  is  located  in  South  America. 

The  capital  of  Peru  is  Lima. 

Now  answer  the  question  you  didn't  answer  before. 

. . .  finally  answers  the  question. 

**  The  area  of  Argentina  is   1,100,000  square  miles 

Approximately  true,    but  a  more  exact  value  is   1,200,000. 
The  eastern  bordering  country  of  Peru  is   . 

Student  makes  an  error  and  is  corrected . . . 

**  Catholicism 

Wrong.   Catholicism  is  not  a  country  but  a  religion. 
The  correct  answer  is :  Brazil 
Where  is  Peru? 

. . .  and  once  again  changes  topic. 

**   Is  Asuncion  hot? 

Since  Asuncion  is  part  of  Paraguay,   yes. 

**  What  is  the  most  important  difference  between 
Peru  and  Paraguay? 

The  primary  difference  is :    The  population  of  Peru 
is  larger  by  a  factor  of  7.8. 

The  natural-language  processing  used  by  SCHOLAR  is  based  on  a  case 
grammar  system  (Article  IV.C4,  in  Vol.  i),  and  the  semantic  interpretation 
of  a  student's  response  is  heavily  guided  by  the  geography  knowledge  in  the 
semantic  net.  Natural-language  processing  is  important  in  SCHOLAR  because 


CI  SCHOLAR  239 

it  allows  the  student  to  take  the  initiative  and  ask  questions  that  were  not 
anticipated  by  the  program.  However,  comprehension  of  English  input  is 
facilitated  by  a  taxonomy  of  expected  question  types.  The  case  grammar 
is  also  used  by  the  system  to  construct  questions  and  presentations  of  new 
material  from  the  semantic  network.  English  output  is  composed  of  short, 
simple  sentences,  with  no  embedded  clauses  and  a  limited  repertoire  of  verbs — 
generally  some  form  of  the  verb  to  be. 

A  simple  agenda  keeps  track  of  topics  that  are  being  discussed.  Timing 
considerations  and  relevance  (importance  tags)  affect  the  generation  and  prun- 
ing of  topics  on  this  agenda.  Continuity  between  questions  is  weak,  however, 
since  SCHOLAR  does  not  plan  a  series  of  questions  to  make  a  point.  SCHOLAR 
is  capable  of  diagnosing  a  student's  misunderstanding  only  by  following  up 
one  question  with  a  related  question. 

Making  Inferences 

SCHOLAR'S  inference  strategies,  for  answering  student  questions  and  eval- 
uating student  answers  to  its  questions,  are  designed  to  cope  with  the  incom- 
pleteness of  the  information  stored  in  the  semantic-net  knowledge  base.  Some 
of  the  important  strategies  for  reasoning  with  incomplete  knowledge  are  given 
below.  These  abilities  have  been  explored  further  in  current  research  dealing 
with  default  reasoning  (Reiter,  1978)  and  plausible  reasoning  (Collins,  1978). 

Intersection  search.  Answering  questions  of  the  form  "Can  X  be  a 
part  of  y?"  (e.g.,  "Is  Buenos  Aires  in  Argentina?")  is  done  by  an  intersection 
search:  The  superpart  (SUPERP)  arcs  of  both  nodes  for  X  and  Y  are  traced 
until  an  intersection  is  found  (i.e.,  a  common  superconcept  node  is  found).  If 
there  is  no  intersection,  the  answer  is  "No."  If  there  is  an  intersection  node  Q, 
SCHOLAR  answers  as  follows: 

\{Q  =  Y,  then  "Yes"; 

If  Q  =  X,  then  "No,  ris  an  X" 

For  example,  the  question  "Is  Buenos  Aires  in  Agentina?"  is  answered  "Yes" 
because  Argentina  is  a  SUPERP  of  Buenos  Aires  in  the  net  (Q  =  Y): 

South  America 
/(Superpart) 
Argentina  (Y) 
/(Superpart) 
Buenos  Aires  (X) 


240  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

But  the  question  "Is  Argentina  in  Buenos  Aires?"  receives  the  response  "No, 
Buenos  Aires  is  in  Argentina." 

South  America 
/(Superpart) 
Argentina  (X) 

/(Superpart) 
Buenos  Aires  (Y) 

Common  superordinate.  If  the  common  superpart  node,  Q,  is  neither 
X  nor  Y,  the  program  focuses  on  the  two  elements  that  have  Q  as  a  common 
superordinate.  If  they  are  contradictory  (i.e.,  contain  suitable  CONTRA  prop- 
erties) or  have  distinguishing,  mutually  exclusive  properties  (e.g.,  different 
LOCATIONS),  the  answer  is,  "No";  otherwise,  the  system  answers,  "I  don't 
know."  Answering  "Is  X  a  YV  questions  is  similar,  except  SUPERC  (super- 
concept)  arcs  are  used  for  the  intersection  process. 

Open  and  closed  sets.  In  order  to  look  for  all  objects  in  the  system 
that  satisfy  some  condition  (e.g.,  "How  many  cities  in  Columbia  are  on  the 
Atlantic?"),  a  distinction  must  be  made  about  whether  the  resulting  set  of 
these  objects  is  closed  (explicitly  contains  all  such  objects)  or  open  (contains 
some  and  need  not  contain  all  such  objects).  In  SCHOLAR'S  net,  sets  are 
tagged  by  the  courseware  author  as  either  open  or  closed,  thus  giving  an 
indication  of  the  incompleteness  of  the  system's  knowledge. 

While  it  is  easy  for  SCHOLAR  to  answer  questions  such  as  "Is  France 
a  country  in  South  America?"  about  closed  sets  (i.e.,  the  set  of  countries 
in  South  America),  similar  questions  about  open  sets  require  the  use  of  spe- 
cial techniques — SCHOLAR  must  be  able  to  reason  about  the  extent  of  its 
knowledge.  For  example,  if  we  ask  SCHOLAR  whether  or  not  rubber  is  a 
product  of,  say,  Guyana  and  if  there  is  no  explicit  information  about  Guyanese 
rubber  production  in  the  semantic  net,  SCHOLAR  starts  to  reason  with  what 
it  knows:  It  compares  the  importance  tags  (I-tags)  of  the  agricultural  products 
of  Guyana  with  the  importance  tags  for  rubber  in  countries  that  it  knows 
produce  rubber.  It  happens  that  Peru  is  a  known  rubber  producer.  SCHOLAR 
looks  at  the  I-tag  of  rubber  for  Peru  and  compares  this  tag  to  the  largest 
(least  important)  I-tags  associated  with  Guyana.  If  it  finds  that  these  are  com- 
parable, SCHOLAR  infers  that  it  knows  as  much  about  Guyana  (up  to  some 
large  I-tag  value)  as  it  knows  about  Peru.  Therefore,  SCHOLAR  infers  that  it 
would  know  about  rubber  production  in  Guyana  if  it  were  important.  Since 
rubber  is  not  listed  for  Guyana,  SCHOLAR  makes  the  plausible  (though  uncer- 
tain) conclusion  that  rubber  is  not  produced  there.  At  this  point,  SCHOLAR 


CI  SCHOLAR  241 

answers  that  it  does  not  know  for  certain  and  gives  the  information  about 
rubber  and  Peru. 

SCHOLAR'S  use  of  knowledge  about  the  extent  of  its  knowledge  in  this 
kind  of  plausible  reasoning  is  unique  in  AI  research  and  represents  an  applica- 
tion of  meta-level  knowledge  (see  Article  III.A,  in  Vol.  i). 

Summary 

The  inferencing  strategies  of  SCHOLAR  are  independent  of  the  content 
of  the  semantic  net  and  are  applicable  in  different  domains.  The  inferences 
produced  are  fairly  natural;  that  is,  they  handle  incomplete  knowledge  by 
employing  reasoning  processes  similar  to  those  that  people  use.  The  SCHOLAR 
project  as  a  whole  provides  an  ongoing  environment  for  research  on  dis- 
course, teaching  strategies,  and  plausible  reasoning  (see  Article  DC.C2  on  recent 
research,  including  the  WHY  system). 

References 

Carbonell  (1970a)  is  a  classic  paper,  defining  the  field  of  ICAI  and  intro- 
ducing the  SCHOLAR  system.  Collins  (1976)  is  an  illuminating  study  of 
human  tutorial  dialogues.  Collins  (1978)  discusses  inference  mechanisms,  and 
Collins  (1978)  reports  extended  research  on  plausible  reasoning.  Grignetti, 
Hausmann,  and  Gould  (1975)  describe  NLS-SCHOLAR. 


C2.     WHY 


RECENT  RESEARCH  by  Allan  Collins,  Albert  Stevens,  and  their  ICAI 
research  group  at  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman  (BBN)  has  focused  on  devel- 
oping computer-based  tutors  that  can  discuss  complex  systems.  Their  pre- 
vious research  on  SCHOLAR  (Article  DC.Cl),  a  system  that  offers  tutoring  in 
facts  about  South  American  geography,  led  them  to  investigate  the  nature  of 
tutorial  dialogues  about  subject  matter  that  was  not  just  factual — where  the 
causal  and  temporal  interrelations  between  the  concepts  in  the  domain  were  of 
interest  and  where  students'  errors  could  involve  not  only  forgotten  facts,  but 
also  misconceptions  about  why  processes  work  the  way  they  do.  Stevens  and 
Collins  (1977)  describe  a  new  system,  called  WHY,  that  tutors  students  in  the 
causes  of  rainfall,  a  complex  geophysical  process  that  is  a  function  of  many 
interrelated  factors  (no  single  factor  can  be  isolated  that  is  both  necessary 
and  sufficient  to  account  for  rainfall). 

In  their  research  on  tutorial  dialogue  of  this  type,  the  BBN  group  has 
focused  on  three  questions  that  are  central  themes  throughout  ICAI  research 
(Stevens,  Collins,  and  Goldin,  1978): 

1.  How  can  a  good  tutor's  use  of  questions,  statements,  and  examples  be 
characterized?  What  is  the  "goal  structure"  of  a  Socratic  tutor? 

2.  What  types  of  misconceptions  do  students  have?  How  do  tutors  diagnose 
these  misconceptions  from  the  errors  students  make? 

3.  What  are  the  abstractions  and  viewpoints  that  tutors  use  to  explain 
physical  processes? 

By  analyzing  tutorial  dialogues  between  human  experts  and  students,  Collins 
and  Stevens  identify  elements  of  a  theory  of  tutoring.  These  are  incorporated 
into  a  tutorial  program,  which  is  then  used  to  find  the  weak  points  of  the 
theory  for  further  investigation.  The  current  version  of  the  WHY  system  is 
the  first  of  a  series  of  iterations  of  this  sort.  The  work  so  far  has  concentrated 
on  the  first  topic  above,  the  nature  of  Socratic  tutoring. 

Socratic  Tutoring  Heuristics 

Collins  (1976)  argues  that  learning  to  reason  about  and  understand  com- 
plex processes  is  best  accomplished  by  dealing  with  specific  problems  and  cases 
and  trying  to  generalize  from  them.  Socratic  dialogue  is  especially  appropriate 
for  tutoring  complex  subjects  in  which  factors  interact  and  in  which  their 
interaction  accounts  for  the  phenomenon  under  consideration.  In  an  effort  to 
model  explicitly  the  nature  of  the  Socratic  dialogue,  the  current  version  of 
WHY  incorporates  24  heuristics  that  control  the  student /system  interaction. 


242 


C2  WHY  243 

A  sample  heuristic  is: 

//      the  student  gives  as  an  explanation  of  causal  dependence  one  or  more 
factors  that  are  not  necessary, 

then  select  a  counterexample  with  the  wrong  value  of  the  factor  and  ask 
the  student  why  his  causal  dependence  does  not  hold  in  that  case. 

This  rule  forces  the  student  to  consider  the  necessity  of  a  particular  factor. 
For  example,  if  the  student  gives  rainfall  as  a  reason  for  growing  rice,  then 
the  computer-generated  counterexample  "Why  do  they  grow  rice  in  Egypt, 
where  there  isn't  much  rainfall?"  challenges  the  student's  explanation  of  rice 
growing.  These  heuristic  rules  are  designed  to  facilitate  tutorial  dialogues  in 
which  the  student  must  consider  combinations  of  factors  that  are  necessary  for 
rainfall,  eliminate  irrelevant  factors,  and  attempt  to  generalize  from  specific 
cases  to  general  conditions.  (See  Collins,  1976,  for  a  complete  discussion  of 
the  tutoring  rules;  this  subject  is  also  discussed  in  Article  EX.C6  on  GUIDON.) 

WHY's  knowledge  base  about  rainfall  is  represented  in  script-like  data 
structures  (see  Article  III.C7,  in  Vol.  i),  which  encode  temporal  relations  in  the 
rainfall  process;  for  example,  First  water  evaporates  from  an  ocean  or  sea,  then 
the  water-laden  air  mass  is  carried  over  land  by  winds,  which  in  turn  causes  the 
air  mass  to  cool,  which  causes  precipitation.  This  knowledge  representation 
is  adequate  for  capturing  many  of  the  characteristics  of  a  tutorial  dialogue, 
but  there  are  other  kinds  of  knowledge  about  rainfall  that  are  not  represented 
here  but  that  are  discussed  below. 

The  following  excerpt  is  from  a  dialogue  with  the  current  version  of  the 
WHY  system.  The  system  prompts  the  student  to  suggest  causes  of  rainfall, 
to  look  for  prior  or  intermediate  causes,  and  finally  to  suggest  a  general  rule. 
When  such  a  rule  is  proposed,  the  system  finds  a  counterexample  and  forces 
revision  of  the  rule  to  account  for  it.  The  system  proceeds  in  this  way  until 
a  rule  of  sufficient  generality  is  found.  The  protocol  is  annotated  with  the 
heuristics  employed  by  the  system  at  each  juncture  in  the  conversation. 

Heuristic  1:  Ask  for  a  prediction  about  a  particular  case. 

Do  you  think  the  Amazon  jungle  has  heavy  rainfall 
or  light  rainfall? 

**  Heavy  rainfall 

Heuristic  2:  Ask  for  prior  causes. 
Why  does  the  Amazon  jungle  have  heavy  rainfall? 
**  Because  it's  near  the  Atlantic 
Yes,  the  Amazon  jungle  is  near  the  equatorial  Atlantic. 

Heuristic  3:  Ask  for  intermediate  causes. 
How  does  that  affect  rainfall  in  the  Amazon  jungle? 


244  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

**  The  water  in  the  current  is  warm 

Heuristic  4-'  Ask  for  subsequent  causes. 
What  happens  after  the  moisture-filled  air  reaches   the  land? 
**   I  don't  know 

Heuristic  5:  Suggest  a  factor  and  ask  if  it  is  a  cause. 

Do  you  think  the  Andes  mountain  range  has  any  effect  on  the 
rainfall  in  the  Amazon  jungle? 

**  Yes 

Heuristic  3:  Ask  for  intermediate  causes. 
How? 
**  The  prevailing  wind  hits  the  Andes  and  the  air  cools 

Heuristic  8:  Ask  for  intermediate  causes. 

How  does  the  fact  that  the  prevailing  wind  hits  the  Andes 
lead  to  air  cooling? 

Heuristic  6:  Form  a  general  rule  for  an  insufficient  cause. 

Do  you  think  that  any  place  with  mountains  has  heavy  rainfall? 

**  Yes 

Heuristic  7:  Pick  a  counterexample  for  an  insufficient  cause,  and 
Heuristic  2:  Ask  for  prior  causes. 

Southern  California  has  mountains . 

Why  doesn't  Southern  California  have  heavy  rainfall? 

Current  Research 

Tutorial  goals.  One  of  the  shortcomings  of  the  existing  system  is  that 
it  does  not  have  long-term  "goals"  for  the  tutorial  dialogue.  Implicit  in 
the  tutorial  rules  is  some  idea  about  local  management  of  the  interaction, 
but  a  global  strategy  about  the  tutoring  session  is  absent.  Human  tutors, 
however,  admit  to  having  goals  like  Concentrate  on  one  particular  part  of  the 
causal  structure  of  rainfall  at  a  time  or  Clear  up  one  misconception  before 
discussing  another.  Stevens  and  Collins  (1977)  set  about  codifying  these 
goals  and  strategies  for  incorporation  into  the  WHY  system.  They  analyzed 
tutoring  protocols  in  which  human  tutors  commented  on  what  they  thought 
the  students  did  and  did  not  know  and  on  why  they  responded  to  the  students 
as  they  did.  From  this  analysis,  two  top-level  goals  became  apparent: 


C2  WHY  245 

1.  Refine  the  student's  causal  structure,  starting  with  the  most  important 
factors  in  a  particular  process  and  gradually  incorporating  more  subtle 
factors. 

2.  Refine  the  student's  procedures  for  applying  his  causal  model  to  novel 

situations. 

Student  misconceptions.  The  top-level  goals  involve  subgoals  of  iden- 
tifying and  correcting  the  student's  misconceptions.  Stevens  and  Collins 
classified  these  subgoals  into  five  categories  of  bugs  and  provided  directions 
for  correcting  them,  as  follows: 

1.  Factual  bugs.  The  tutor  deals  with  these  by  correcting  the  student. 
Teaching  facts  is  not  the  goal  of  Socratic  tutoring;  interrelations  of  facts 
are  more  important. 

2.  Outside- domain  bugs.  These  are  misconceptions  about  causal  structure, 
which  the  tutor  chooses  not  to  explain  in  detail.  For  example,  the 
"correct"  relationship  between  the  temperature  of  air  and  its  moisture- 
holding  capacity  is  often  stated  by  the  tutor  as  a  fact,  without  further 
explanation. 

3.  Over  generalization.  When  a  student  makes  a  general  rule  from  an  insuffi- 
cient set  of  factors  (e.g.,  Any  place  with  mountains  has  heavy  rainfall),  the 
tutor  will  find  counterexamples  to  probe  for  more  factors. 

4.  Over  differentiation.  When  a  student  counts  factors  as  necessary  when 
they  are  not,  the  tutor  will  generate  counterexamples  to  show  that  they 
are  not. 

5.  Reasoning  bugs.  Tutors  will  attempt  to  teach  students  skills  such  as 
forming  and  testing  hypotheses  and  collecting  enough  information  before 
drawing  a  conclusion. 

If  a  student  displays  more  than  one  bug,  human  tutors  will  employ  a  set  of 
heuristics  to  decide  which  one  to  correct  first: 

1.  Correct  errors  before  omissions. 

2.  Correct  causally  prior  factors  before  later  ones. 

3.  Make  short  corrections  before  longer  ones. 

4.  Correct  low-level  bugs  (in  the  causal  network)  before  correcting  higher 
level  ones. 

Functional  relationships.  The  bugs  just  discussed  are  all  domain 
independent;  that  is,  they  would  occur  in  tutorial  dialogues  about  other 
complex  processes  besides  rainfall.  But  some  bugs  are  the  results  of  specific 
misconceptions  about  the  functional  interrelationships  of  the  concepts  of  the 
specific  domain.  For  example,  one  common  misconception  about  rainfall  is 
that  Cooling  causes  air  to  rise.  This  is  not  a  simple  factual  misconception,  nor 
is  it  domain  independent.  It  is  best  characterized  as  an  error  in  the  student's 
functional  model  of  rainfall. 


246  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  EX 

In  fact,  the  script  representation  in  the  WHY  system  that  captures  the 
temporal  and  causal  relations  of  land,  air,  and  water  masses  in  rainfall  proved 
inadequate  to  get  at  all  of  the  types  of  student  misconceptions.  Recent  work 
has  investigated  a  more  flexible  representation  of  functional  relationships, 
which  allows  the  description  of  the  processes  that  collectively  determine  rain- 
fall from  multiple  viewpoints — for  example,  the  temporal- causal- subprocess 
view  captured  in  the  scripts  and  the  functional  view  emphasizing  the  roles  that 
different  objects  play  in  the  various  processes  (Stevens,  Collins,  and  Goldin, 
1978).  Misconceptions  about  rainfall  are  represented  as  errors  in  the  student's 
model  of  these  relationships.  A  functional  relationship  has  four  components: 
(a)  a  set  of  actors,  each  with  a  role  in  the  process;  (b)  a  set  of  factors  that 
affect  the  process,  all  of  which  are  attributes  of  the  actors  (e.g.,  water  is  an 
actor  in  the  evaporation  relationship  and  its  temperature  is  a  factor);  (c)  the 
result  of  the  process,  which  is  always  a  change  in  an  attribute  of  one  of  the 
actors;  and  (d)  the  relation  that  holds  between  the  actors  and  the  result,  or 
how  an  attribute  gets  changed.  These  functional  relationships  may  be  the 
result  of  models  from  other  domains  that  are  applied  metaphorically  to  the 
domain  under  discussion  (Stevens  and  Collins,  1978). 

Summary 

The  WHY  system  started  as  an  extension  of  SCHOLAR  by  the  implemen- 
tation of  rules  that  characterize  Socratic  tutoring  heuristics.  Subsequently, 
an  effort  was  made  to  describe  the  global  strategies  used  by  human  tutors 
to  guide  the  dialogue.  Since  these  were  directed  toward  dispelling  students' 
misconceptions,  five  classes  of  misconceptions,  as  well  as  means  for  correcting 
them,  were  established.  Many  misconceptions  are  not  domain  independent 
and  the  key  to  more  versatile  tutoring  lies  in  continuing  research  on  knowledge 
representation. 

References 

The  major  reference  on  the  research  reported  here  is  Stevens,  Collins,  and 
Goldin  (1978).  The  tutorial  rules  are  discussed  fully  in  an  excellent  article  by 
Collins  (1976).  The  later  work  on  the  goal  structure  of  a  tutor  is  reported 
in  Stevens  and  Collins  (1977).  Finally,  research  on  conceptual  models  and 
multiple  viewpoints  of  complex  systems  is  discussed  in  Stevens  and  Collins 
(1978). 


C3.     SOPHIE 


SOPHIE  (a  SOPHisticated  Instructional  Environment)  is  an  ICAI  system  devel- 
oped by  John  Seely  Brown,  Richard  Burton,  and  their  colleagues  at  Bolt 
Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  to  explore  broader  student  initiative  during  the 
tutorial  interaction.  The  SOPHIE  system  provides  the  student  with  a  learning 
environment  in  which  he  (or  she)  acquires  problem-solving  skills  by  trying  out 
his  ideas,  rather  than  by  instruction.  The  system  has  a  model  of  the  problem- 
solving  knowledge  in  its  domain,  as  well  as  numerous  heuristic  strategies  for 
answering  the  student's  questions,  criticizing  his  hypotheses,  and  suggesting 
alternative  theories  for  his  current  hypotheses.  SOPHIE  allows  the  student 
to  have  a  one-to-one  relationship  with  a  computer-based  "expert"  who  helps 
him  come  up  with  his  own  ideas,  experiment  with  these  ideas,  and,  when 
necessary,  debug  them. 

Figure  C3-1  illustrates  the  component  modules  of  the  original  SOPHIE-I 
system  (Brown,  Rubenstein,  and  Burton,  1976)  and  the  capabilities  added  for 
the  SOPHIE-II  system,  discussed  later  in  this  article. 

SOPHIE-I 

SOPHIE  teaches  problem-solving  skills  in  the  context  of  a  simulated  elec- 
tronics laboratory.  The  problem  facing  the  student  is  to  find  the  faults  in  a 
malfunctioning  piece  of  equipment  whose  characteristics  he  obtains  by  taking 
measurements.  Thus,  the  student  takes  a  sequence  of  measurements  (such 
as  voltages,  currents,  and  resistances)  to  determine  what  is  wrong  with  the 
equipment  and  asks  questions  about  the  measurements  and  about  what  fault 
hypotheses  he  should  consider,  given  the  information  he  has  discovered  so 
far.  SOPHIE  evaluates  the  hypotheses  by  considering  all  of  the  information 
that  the  student  should  have  been  able  to  derive  from  his  current  set  of 
measurements.  The  system  also  judges  the  merits  of  a  student's  suggestion  for 
a  new  measurement  in  light  of  the  prior  sequence  of  measurements.  SOPHIE 
can  decide  if  a  measurement  is  valuable,  based  on  whether  it  eliminates  or 
isolates  a  fault,  and  will  inform  the  student  when  a  proposed  measurement 
provides  no  new  information. 

The  following  portion  of  a  sample  protocol  (from  Brown  and  Burton,  1975) 
illustrates  some  of  the  linguistic  and  inferential  capabilities  of  the  SOPHIE 
system.  SOPHIE  randomly  selects  a  fault  (in  the  performance  of  a  circuit 
component),  inserts  it  into  a  model  or  simulation  of  the  circuit,  and  tells  the 
student  how  the  controls  are  set.  The  student  is  given  a  schematic  diagram  of 
the  circuit,  and  the  dialogue  refers  to  components  in  the  schematic  diagram 
(e.g.,  resistor  8  [R8],  node  connection  1  [Nl],  transistors  [Ql]  and  [Q6]).  The 


247 


248 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education 


DC 


Hypothesis 
Evaluator 


Natural 
Languages 


Semantic 
Network 


SOPHIE-I 


Question 
Answerer 


Circuit 
Simulator 


Team 

Game 

Monitor 


Augmentations  for  SOPHIE-II 


Articulate 

Expert 
Debugger/ 
Explainer 


SOPHIE  Menu 


Figure  C3-1.     SOPHIE-I  and  SOPHIE-II  (Brown,  Rubenstein,  and  Burton, 
1976). 

student  begins  his  troubleshooting  by  performing  measurements  in  the  faulted 
circuit. 


Welcome  to  SOPHIE,    a  reactive  learning  environment. 
The  piece  of   equipment  you  are  studying  is  a  regulated 


cc 

1.0 

CR 

HIGH 

LOAD 

20 

VC 

1.0 

VR 

HIGH 

C3  SOPHIE  249 

power  supply.   Would  you  like  to  start  with  a  faulted 
instrument  that  needs  fixing? 

**  Yes 

The  instrument  has  a  fault  and  its  present 
control  settings  are : 

CURRENT  CONTROL 
CURRENT  RANGE  SWITCH 
LOAD  RESISTANCE  IN  OHMS 
VOLTAGE  CONTROL 
VOLTAGE  RANGE  SWITCH 

**  What  is  the  output? 

The  output  voltage  is  11.7  volts. 

Notice  that  "output"  was  disambiguated  as  "output  voltage." 

**  What  is  it  in  a  working  instrument? 

In  a  working  circuit  the  output  voltage  is  19.9  volts. 

In  case  the  student  does  not  know  what  the  required  value  of  measurement 
should  have  been,  he  can  ask  for  any  measurement  in  a  properly  function- 
ing instrument.   The  student  then  requests  an  internal  measurement. 

**  What  is  the  voltage  between  R8  and  Ql? 

The  voltage  at  Nl  is  47.6  volts. 

**  Replace  Q6 

The  student  believes  that  he  has  discovered  the  problem  (in  transistor  Q6) 
and  tries  to  fix  it.  Before  a  component  is  replaced,  however,  the  system 
queries  him  as  to  how  he  thinks  it  is  faulted. 

I  am  going  to  ask  you  some  questions  about  how  Q6  is  faulted. 
Are  any  junctions  shorted? 

**  I  don't  know 

Are  any  terminals  open? 

**  Yes 

Which  terminal (s)  are  open? 

**  The  base 

Q6  is  not  faulted  in  that  manner.   Q6  not  replaced. 

After  learning  that  Q6  does  not  have  an  open  base,  the  student  asks  if 
this  was  at  least  a  reasonable  hypothesis. 


250  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

**   Is  it  possible  that  Q6  has  an  open  base? 

Before  the  system 's  evaluation  procedures  can  be  applied  to  the  student 's 
idea  or  hypothesis,  the  hypothesis  must  be  completely  specified.  To  help 
the  student  out,  the  system  suggests  a  plausible  complete  specification  of 
it  in  an  abbreviated  form  familiar  to  the  student. 

Is  the  complete  fault  mode  EB/EC/BC  =  Open/Ok/Open 
what  you  intended? 

**  Sure 

That  fault  is  consistent  with  all  of  the  measurements 
you  have  made . 

The  hypothesis  is  reasonable,  but  other  measurements  will  indicate  that 
another  component  is  faulty. 


Natural- language  Processing — Semantic  Grammar 

In  an  instructional  setting,  it  is  important  that  the  student  be  provided 
with  a  convenient  way  to  communicate  his  ideas  to  the  system.  The  student 
will  quickly  become  frustrated  if  he  has  to  try  several  ways  of  expressing  an 
idea  before  the  system  can  understand  it.  SOPHIE 's  natural-language  under- 
stander  copes  with  various  linguistic  problems  such  as  anaphoric  references, 
context-dependent  deletions,  and  ellipses,  which  occur  frequently  in  natural 
dialogues. 

SOPHIE's  natural-language  capabilities  are  based  on  the  concept  of  a 
performance  or  semantic  grammar,  in  which  the  usual  syntactic  categories 
such  as  noun,  verb,  and  adjective  are  replaced  by  semantically  meaningful 
categories  (Burton,  1976b;  Burton  and  Brown,  1979b).  These  categories 
represent  concepts  known  to  the  system — measurements,  circuit  elements, 
transistors,  hypotheses,  and  so  on.  For  each  concept  there  is  a  grammar 
rule  that  gives  the  alternate  ways  of  expressing  that  concept  in  terms  of  its 
constituent  concepts.  Each  rule  is  encoded  as  a  LISP  procedure  that  specifies 
the  order  of  application  of  the  various  alternatives  in  each  rule. 

A  grammar  centered  around  semantic  categories  allows  the  parser  to  deal 
with  a  certain  amount  of  "fuzziness,"  or  uncertainty,  in  its  understanding 
of  the  words  in  a  given  statement;  that  is,  if  the  parser  is  searching  for  a 
particular  instantiation  of  a  semantic  category,  and  the  current  word  in  the 
sentence  fails  to  satisfy  this  instantiation,  it  skips  over  that  word  and  continues 
searching.  Thus,  if  the  student  uses  certain  words  or  concepts  that  the  system 
does  not  know,  the  parser  can  ignore  these  words  and  try  to  make  sense  of 
what  remains.  To  limit  the  negative  consequences  that  may  result  from  a 
misunderstood  question,  SOPHIE  responds  to  the  student's  question  with  a 
full  sentence  that  tells  him  what  question  is  being  answered.   (See  Chaps.  IV 


C3  SOPHIE  251 

and  V,  in  Vol.  I,  especially  Articles  IV.F7  and  V.C4,  for  other  systems  using 
semantic  grammar  parsers.) 

Inferencing  Strategies 

To  interact  with  the  student,  SOPHIE  performs  several  different  logical 
and  tutorial  tasks.  First,  there  is  the  task  of  answering  hypothetical  questions. 
For  example,  the  student  might  ask,  "If  the  base-emitter  junction  of  the 
voltage-limiting  transistor  opens,  then  what  happens  to  the  output  voltage?" 

A  second  task  SOPHIE  must  perform  is  that  of  hypothesis  evaluation,  in 
which  the  student  asks,  "Given  the  measurements  I  have  made  so  far,  could 
the  base  of  transistor  Q3  be  open?"  The  problem  here  is  not  to  determine 
whether  the  assertion  The  base  of  Q3  is  open  is  true,  but  whether  this  asser- 
tion is  logically  consistent  with  the  data  that  have  already  been  collected  by 
the  student.  If  it  is  not  consistent,  the  program  explains  why  it  is  not.  When 
it  is  consistent,  SOPHIE  identifies  which  information  supports  the  assertion 
and  which  information  is  independent  of  it. 

A  third  task  that  SOPHIE  must  perform  is  hypothesis  generation.  In  its 
simplest  form,  this  involves  constructing  all  possible  hypotheses  consistent 
with  the  known  information.  This  procedure  permits  SOPHIE  to  answer 
questions  like  "What  could  be  wrong  with  the  circuit  (given  the  measurements 
that  I  have  taken)?"  The  task  is  solved  using  generate  and  test  with  the 
hypothesis-evaluation  task  described  above  performing  the  test  function. 

Finally,  SOPHIE  can  determine  whether  a  given  measurement  is  redun- 
dant, that  is,  if  the  results  of  the  measurement  could  have  been  predicted 
from  a  complete  theory  of  the  circuit,  given  the  previous  measurements. 

SOPHIE  accomplishes  all  of  these  reasoning  tasks  through  an  inference 
mechanism  that  relies  principally  on  a  general-purpose  simulator  of  the  circuit 
under  discussion.  For  example,  to  answer  a  question  about  a  changed  voltage 
resulting  from  a  hypothetical  modification  to  a  circuit,  SOPHIE  first  interprets 
the  question  with  its  parser  and  then,  applying  this  interpretation,  simulates 
the  desired  modification.  The  result  is  a  voltage  table  that  represents  the 
voltages  at  each  terminal  in  the  modified  circuit.  The  original  question  is 
then  answered  in  terms  of  these  voltages. 

The  tasks  of  hypothesis  evaluation  and  hypothesis  generation  are  handled 
in  a  similar  manner,  using  the  simulator.  In  evaluating  hypotheses,  SOPHIE 
attempts  to  determine  the  logical  consistency  of  a  given  hypothesis.  To  accom- 
plish this  task,  a  simulation  of  the  hypothesis  is  performed  on  the  circuit 
model  and  measurements  are  taken  of  the  result.  If  the  values  of  any  of  these 
measurements  are  not  equivalent  to  the  measurements  taken  by  the  student, 
a  counterexample  has  been  established,  which  is  used  to  critique  the  student's 
hypothesis. 


252  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  IX 

When  generating  hypotheses,  SOPHIE  attempts  to  determine  the  set  of 
possible  faults  or  hypotheses  that  are  consistent  with  the  observed  behavior  of 
the  faulted  instrument.  This  task  is  performed  by  a  set  of  specialist  procedures 
that  propose  a  possible  set  of  hypotheses  to  explain  a  measurement  and  then 
simulate  them  to  make  sure  that  they  explain  the  output  voltage  and  all  of 
the  measurements  that  the  student  has  taken.  Hypothesis  generation  can 
suggest  possible  paths  to  explore  when  the  student  has  run  out  of  ideas  for 
what  could  be  wrong  with  the  circuit  or  when  he  wishes  to  understand  the  full 
implications  of  his  last  measurement.  It  is  also  used  by  SOPHIE  to  determine 
when  a  measurement  is  redundant. 

SOPHIE-II:  The  Augmented  SOPHIE  Laboratory 

Extensions  to  SOPHIE  include  (a)  a  troubleshooting  game  with  two  teams 
of  students  and  (b)  the  development  of  an  articulate  expert  debugger/explainer. 
The  simple  reactive  learning  environment  has  also  been  augmented  by  the 
development  of  frame-oriented  CAI  lesson  material,  to  prepare  the  student  for 
the  laboratory  interaction  (Brown  et  al.,  1976).  The  articulate  expert  not  only 
locates  student-inserted  faults  in  a  given  instrument  but  also  can  articulate 
exactly  the  deductions  that  led  to  its  discovery,  as  well  as  the  more  global 
strategies  that  guide  the  troubleshooting  scenario. 

Experience  with  SOPHIE  indicates  that  its  major  weakness  is  an  inability 
to  follow  up  on  student  errors.  Since  SOPHIE  is  to  be  reactive  to  the  student,  it 
will  not  take  the  initiative  to  explore  a  student's  misunderstanding  or  suggest 
approaches  that  he  does  not  consider.  However,  the  competitive  environment 
of  the  troubleshooting  game,  in  which  partners  share  a  problem  and  work  it 
out  together,  was  found  to  be  an  effective  means  of  exercising  the  student's 
knowledge  of  the  operation  of  the  instrument  being  debugged.  Finally,  an 
experiment  involving  a  minicourse — and  exposure  to  the  frame-based  texts, 
the  expert,  and  the  original  SOPHIE  laboratory — indicated  that  long-term 
use  of  the  system  is  more  effective  than  a  single,  concentrated  exposure  to  the 
material  (Brown  et  al.,  1976). 

Summary 

The  goal  of  the  SOPHIE  project  was  to  create  a  learning  environment  in 
which  students  would  be  challenged  to  explore  ideas  on  their  own  and  to  come 
up  with  conjectures  or  hypotheses  about  a  problem-solving  situation.  The 
students  receive  detailed  feedback  as  to  the  logical  validity  of  their  proposed 
solutions.  In  cases  where  the  students'  ideas  have  logical  flaws,  SOPHIE 
can  generate  relevant  counterexamples  and  critiques.  The  SOPHIE  system 
combines  domain-specific  knowledge  and  powerful  domain-independent  infer- 
encing  mechanisms  to  answer  questions  that  even  human  tutors  might  find 
extremely  difficult  to  answer. 


C3  SOPHIE  253 

References 

The  most  thorough  discussion  of  SOPHIE  is  in  Brown,  Burton,  and 
de  Kleer  (in  preparation).  Brown,  Burton,  and  Bell  (1975)  give  a  complete 
description  of  the  early  work  on  SOPHIE;  and  Brown,  Rubenstein,  and  Burton 
(1976)  report  on  the  later  work.  Also  see  Brown  and  Burton  (1978). 


C4.     WEST 


DEVELOPMENT  of  the  first  computer  coach  was  undertaken  by  Richard 
Burton  and  John  Seely  Brown  at  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  for  the 
children's  board  game  called  "How  the  West  Was  Won."  The  term  Coach 
describes  a  computer-based  learning  environment  in  which  the  student  is 
involved  in  an  activity,  like  playing  a  computer  game,  and  the  instructional 
program  operates  by  "looking  over  his  shoulder"  during  the  game  and  occa- 
sionally offering  criticisms  or  suggestions  for  improvement  (Goldstein,  1977). 
This  research  focused  on  identifying  (a)  diagnostic  strategies  required  to  infer 
a  student's  misunderstandings  from  his  observed  behavior  and  (b)  various 
explicit  tutoring  strategies  for  directing  the  tutor  to  say  the  right  thing  at  the 
right  time  (Burton  and  Brown,  1976,  1979a). 

The  intention  of  the  WEST  research  project  was  to  use  these  strategies  to 
control  the  interaction  so  that  the  instructional  program  took  every  possible 
opportunity  to  offer  help  to  the  student  without  interrupting  so  often  as  to 
become  a  nuisance  and  destroy  the  student's  fun  at  the  game.  By  guiding  a 
student's  learning  through  discovery,  computer-based  coaching  systems  hold 
the  promise  of  enhancing  the  educational  value  of  the  increasingly  popular 
computer  games. 

Philosophy  of  the  Instructional  Coach 

The  pedagogical  ideas  underlying  much  of  the  computer-coaching  research 
in  WEST  can  be  characterized  as  guided  discovery  learning.  It  assumes  that 
the  student  constructs  his  (or  her)  understanding  of  a  situation  or  a  task  based 
on  his  prior  knowledge.  According  to  this  theory,  the  notion  of  misconception, 
or  bug,  plays  a  central  role  in  the  construction  process.  Ideally,  a  bug  in  the 
student's  knowledge  will  cause  an  erroneous  or  suboptimal  behavior,  which  the 
student  will  notice.  If  the  student  has  enough  information  to  determine  what 
caused  the  error  and  can  then  correct  it,  the  bug  is  referred  to  as  constructive. 
The  role  of  a  tutor  in  an  informal  environment  is  to  give  the  student  extra 
information  in  situations  that  would  otherwise  be  confusing  to  him,  so  that 
he  can  determine  what  caused  his  error  and  can  convert  nonconstructive 
bugs  into  constructive  ones  (see  Fisher,  Brown,  and  Burton,  1978,  for  further 
discussion). 

However,  an  important  constraint  on  the  Coach  is  that  it  should  not 
interrupt  the  student  too  often.  If  the  Coach  immediately  points  out  the 
student's  errors,  there  is  a  danger  that  the  student  will  never  develop  the 
necessary  skills  for  examining  his  own  behavior  and  identifying  the  causes 
of  his  mistakes.     The  Coach  must  be  perceptive  enough  to  make  relevant 


254 


C4  WEST  255 

comments  but  not  be  too  intrusive,  destroying  the  fun  of  the  game.  The 
research  on  the  WEST  system  examined  a  wide  variety  of  tutorial  strategies 
that  must  be  included  to  create  a  successful  coaching  system. 

"How  the  West  Was  Won" 

"How  the  West  Was  Won"  was  originally  a  computer-simulated  board 
game,  designed  by  Bonnie  Anderson  of  the  Elementary  Mathematics  Project, 
on  the  PLATO  computer-based  education  system  at  the  University  of  Illinois 
(Dugdale  and  Kibbey,  1977).  The  purpose  of  this  original  (nontutorial)  pro- 
gram was  to  give  elementary-school  students  drill  and  practice  in  arithmetic. 
The  game  resembles  the  popular  "Chutes  and  Ladders"  board  game  and, 
briefly,  goes  something  like  this:  At  each  turn,  a  player  receives  three  numbers 
(from  spinners)  with  which  he  constructs  an  arithmetic  expression  using  the 
operations  of  addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  and  division.  The  numeric 
value  of  the  completed  expression  is  the  number  of  spaces  the  player  can  move, 
the  object  of  the  game  being  to  get  to  the  end  first. 

However,  the  strategy  of  combining  the  three  numbers  to  make  the  largest 
valued  expression  is  not  always  the  best  strategy,  because  there  are  several 
special  features  on  the  game  board  that  have  a  bearing  on  the  outcome.  Towns 
occur  every  10  spaces,  and  if  a  player  lands  exactly  on  one,  he  skips  ahead 
to  the  next  town.  There  are  also  shortcuts,  and  if  the  player  lands  on  the 
beginning  of  one,  he  advances  to  the  other  end  of  the  shortcut.  Finally,  if 
the  player  lands  on  the  space  that  his  opponent  is  occupying,  the  opponent 
is  bumped  back  two  towns.  The  spinner  values  in  WEST  are  small,  so  these 
special  moves  are  encouraged  (i.e.,  landing  on  towns,  on  shortcuts,  or  on  the 
opponent). 

Differential  Modeling 

There  are  two  major  related  problems  that  must  be  solved  by  the  com- 
puter Coach.  They  are  (a)  when  to  interrupt  the  student's  problem-solving 
activity  and  (b)  what  to  say  once  the  Coach  has  interrupted.  In  general, 
solutions  to  these  problems  require  techniques  for  determining  what  the  stu- 
dent knows  (procedures  for  constructing  a  diagnostic  model)  as  well  as  explicit 
tutoring  principles  about  interrupting  and  advising.  These,  in  turn,  require 
theories  about  how  a  student  forms  abstractions,  how  he  learns,  and  when 
he  is  apt  to  be  most  receptive  to  advice.  Unfortunately,  few,  if  any,  exist- 
ing psychological  theories  are  precise  enough  to  suggest  anything  more  than 
caution. 

Since  the  student  is  primarily  engaged  in  a  gaming  or  problem-solving 
activity,  diagnosis  of  his  strengths  and  weaknesses  must  be  unobtrusive  to 
his  main  activity.  This  objective  means  that  the  diagnostic  component  can- 
not use  prestored  tests  or  pose  a  lot  of  diagnostic  questions  to  the  student. 


256  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Instead,  the  computer  Coach  must  restrict  itself  mainly  to  inferring  a  stu- 
dent's shortcomings  from  what  he  does  in  the  context  of  playing  the  game 
or  solving  the  problem.  This  objective  can  create  a  difficulty — just  because  a 
student  does  not  use  a  certain  skill  while  playing  a  game,  one  cannot  conclude 
that  he  does  not  know  that  skill. 

Although  this  point  seems  quite  obvious,  it  poses  a  serious  diagnostic 
problem:  The  absence  of  a  possible  skill  carries  diagnostic  value  if  and  only 
if  an  expert  in  an  equivalent  situation  would  have  used  that  skill.  Hence, 
apart  from  outright  errors,  the  main  window  a  computer-based  Coach  has  on 
a  student's  misconceptions  is  through  a  differential-modeling  technique  that 
compares  what  the  student  is  doing  with  what  an  expert  would  do  in  his 
place.  These  differences  suggest  hypotheses  about  what  the  student  does  not 
know  or  has  not  yet  mastered.  (See  the  related  discussion  of  overlay  models 
in  Articles  EX.C5  and  DC.C6.) 

Constructing  the  differential  model  requires  that  two  tasks  be  performed 
by  the  Coach  with  the  computer  Expert  (the  part  of  the  program  that  is 
expert  at  playing  the  game  WEST): 

1.  Evaluate  the  student's  current  move  with  respect  to  the  set  of  possible 
alternative  moves  that  the  Expert  might  have  made  in  exactly  the  same 
circumstances. 

2.  Determine  what  underlying  skills  were  used  to  select  and  compose  the 
student's  move  and  each  of  the  "better"  moves  of  the  Expert. 

To  accomplish  the  evaluative  task,  the  Expert  need  only  use  the  results  of 
its  knowledge  and  reasoning  strategies — its  better  moves.  However,  for  the 
second  task  the  Coach  has  to  consider  the  "pieces"  of  knowledge  involved  in 
making  those  moves,  since  the  absence  of  one  of  these  pieces  of  knowledge 
might  explain  why  the  student  failed  to  make  a  better  move. 

Tutoring  by  Issue  and  Example — A  General  Paradigm 

The  Coach's  comments  should  be  both  relevant  to  the  situation  and  mem- 
orable to  the  student.  The  Issues  and  Examples  tutoring  strategy  provides 
a  framework  for  meeting  these  two  constraints.  Issues  are  concepts  used  in 
the  diagnostic  process  to  identify,  at  any  particular  moment,  what  is  relevant. 
Examples  provide  concrete  instances  of  these  abstract  concepts.  Providing 
both  the  description  of  a  generic  Issue  (a  concept  used  to  select  a  strategy) 
and  a  concrete  Example  of  its  use  increases  the  chance  that  the  student  will 
integrate  this  piece  of  tutorial  commentary  into  his  knowledge.  In  the  Issues 
and  Examples  paradigm,  the  Issues  embody  the  important  concepts  under- 
lying a  student's  behavior.  They  define  the  space  of  concepts  that  the  Coach 
can  address — the  facets  of  the  student's  behavior  that  are  monitored  by  the 
Coach. 


C4  WEST  257 

In  WEST,  there  are  three  levels  of  Issues  on  which  a  Coach  can  focus:  At 
the  lowest  level  are  the  basic  mathematical  skills  that  the  student  is  practicing 
(the  use  of  parentheses,  the  use  of  the  various  arithmetic  operations,  and 
the  form  or  pattern  of  the  student's  move  as  an  arithmetic  expression).  The 
second  level  of  Issues  concerns  the  skills  needed  to  play  WEST  (like  the  special 
moves:  bump  opponent,  land  on  town,  take  shortcut)  and  the  development  of 
a  strategy  for  choosing  moves.  At  the  third  level  are  the  general  skills  of  game 
playing  (like  watching  the  opponent  to  learn  from  his  moves),  which  are  not 
addressed  by  the  WEST  program. 

Each  of  the  Issues  is  represented  in  two  parts,  a  recognizer  and  an  evalu- 
ator.  The  Issue  recognizer  is  data  driven;  it  watches  the  student's  behavior 
for  evidence  that  he  does  or  does  not  use  a  particular  concept  or  skill.  The 
recognizers  are  used  to  construct  a  model  of  the  student's  knowledge.  The 
Issue  evaluators  are  goal  directed;  they  interpret  this  model  to  determine 
the  student's  weaknesses.  The  Issue  recognizers  of  WEST  are  fairly  straight- 
forward but  are,  nevertheless,  more  complex  than  simple  pattern-matchers. 
For  example,  the  recognizer  for  the  PARENTHESIS  Issue  must  determine  not 
only  whether  or  not  parentheses  are  present  in  the  student's  expression,  but 
also  whether  or  not  they  were  necessary  for  his  move,  or  for  an  optimal  move. 

Figure  C4-1  is  a  diagram  of  the  modeling-tutorial  process  underlying  the 
Issues  and  Examples  paradigm.  The  top  part  of  Figure  C4-1  shows  the  process 
of  constructing  a  model  of  the  student's  behavior.  It  is  important  to  observe 
that  without  the  Expert  it  is  impossible  to  determine  whether  the  student  is 
weak  in  some  skill  or  whether  the  skill  has  not  been  used  because  the  need 
for  it  has  arisen  infrequently  in  the  student's  experience. 

The  Coaching  Process 

The  lower  part  of  Figure  C4-1  illustrates  the  top  level  of  the  coaching 
process.  When  the  student  makes  a  less  than  optimal  move  (as  determined  by 
comparing  his  move  with  that  of  the  Expert),  the  Coach  uses  the  evaluation 
component  of  each  Issue  to  create  a  list  of  Issues  on  which  it  has  assessed 
that  the  student  is  weak.  From  the  Expert's  list  of  better  moves,  the  Coach 
invokes  the  Issue  recognizers,  to  determine  a  second  list  of  Issues  that  are 
illustrated  by  these  better  moves.  From  these  two  lists  of  Issues,  the  Coach 
selects  an  Issue  and  the  move  that  illustrates  it  (i.e.,  creates  an  example  of  it) 
and  decides,  on  the  basis  of  tutoring  principles,  whether  or  not  to  interrupt  the 
game.  If  the  two  lists  have  no  Issues  in  common,  the  reason  for  the  student's 
problem  lies  outside  the  collection  of  Issues,  and  the  Coach  says  nothing. 

If  the  Coach  decides  to  interrupt,  the  selected  Issue  and  Example  are 
then  passed  to  the  explanation  generators,  which  provide  the  feedback  to 
the  student.     Currently,   the  explanations  are  stored  in  procedures,   called 


258 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education 


DC 


Gaming  Environment 

or 

Problem-Solving  Situation 


Data  Structure  or 
Observable  Behavior 


□ 


C_3   Process 

Input 

Output 


Expert's  Behavior 
(Over  Same  Environment) 


ssue  Recognizers 

(Identify  Pertinent 

Aspects  of  Behavior) 


Abstracted  Component , 

of  Student  Behavior 


Abstracted  Component 
of  Expert  Behavior 


Issue 
Evaluators 


Issues  Where 

Student  is 

Weak 


Student's 

Current  Move 

(Behavior) 


Issue  and  Example 

(Tutor  Hypothesis 

of  Student's  Weakness 

Illustrated  by  a 

Better  Move) 


Expert's 
Current 
Moves 


Issues 
Exhibited  by 
Better  Moves 


(b) 


Figure  C4-1.     Diagram  of  the  modeling-coaching  process  (Burton  and 
Brown,  1979a). 


C4  WEST  259 

SPEAKERS,  attached  to  each  Issue.  Each  SPEAKER  is  responsible  for  presenting 
a  few  lines  of  text  explaining  its  Issue. 


Tutoring  Principles 

General  tutoring  principles  dictate  that,  at  times,  even  when  relevant 
Issues  and  Examples  have  been  identified,  it  may  be  inappropriate  to  interrupt. 
For  example,  what  if  there  are  two  competing  Issues,  both  applicable  to  a 
certain  situation?  Which  one  should  be  selected?  The  Issues  in  WEST  are 
sufficiently  independent  that  there  is  little  need  to  consider  their  prerequisite 
structure,  for  example,  whether  or  not  the  use  of  parentheses  should  be  taught 
before  division  (see,  however,  the  description  of  the  syllabus  in  WUMPUS  in 
Article  DC.C5).  Instead,  additional  tutoring  principles  must  be  invoked  to 
decide  which  one  of  the  set  of  applicable  Issues  should  be  used. 

In  WEST,  experiments  have  been  conducted  using  two  alternate  principles 
to  guide  this  decision.  The  first  is  the  Focus  Strategy,  which  ensures  that, 
everything  else  being  equal,  the  Issue  most  recently  discussed  is  chosen — the 
Coach  will  tend  to  concentrate  on  a  particular  Issue  until  evidence  is  present 
to  indicate  that  it  has  been  mastered.  The  alternate  principle  is  the  Breadth 
Strategy,  in  which  Issues  that  have  not  recently  been  discussed  tend  to  be 
selected.  This  strategy  minimizes  a  student's  boredom  and  ensures  a  breadth 
of  concept  coverage. 

The  rest  of  WEST's  strategies  for  deciding  whether  to  raise  an  Issue  and 
what  to  say  can  be  placed  in  the  four  categories  listed  below,  with  sample 
rules  of  each: 

1.  Coaching  philosophy.  Tutoring  principles  can  enhance  a  student's  likeli- 
hood of  remembering  what  is  said.  For  example,  When  illustrating  an 
Issue,  use  an  Example  (an  alternate  move)  only  when  the  result  or  outcome 
of  that  move  is  dramatically  superior  to  the  move  made  by  the  student. 

2.  Maintaining  interest  in  the  game.  The  Coach  should  not  destroy  the 
student's  inherent  interest  in  the  game  by  interrupting  too  often.  For 
example,  Never  tutor  on  two  consecutive  moves  or  If  the  student  makes  an 
exceptional  move,  identify  why  it  is  good  and  congratulate  the  student. 

3.  Increasing  chances  of  learning.  Four  levels  of  hints  are  provided  by  the 
WEST  tutor,  at  the  student's  request:  (a)  Isolate  a  weakness  and  directly 
address  that  weakness,  (b)  delineate  the  space  of  possible  moves  at  this 
point  in  the  game,  (c)  select  the  optimal  move  and  tell  why  it  is  optimal, 
and  (d)  describe  how  to  make  the  optimal  move. 

4.  Environmental  considerations.  The  game-playing  environment  should  be 
considered  by  the  Coach.  For  example,  //  the  student  makes  a  possibly 
careless  error,  one  for  which  there  is  evidence  that  the  student  knows  better,  be 
forgiving. 


260  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Noise  in  the  Model 

When  the  student  does  not  make  an  optimal  move,  the  program  knows 
only  that  at  least  one  of  the  Issues  required  for  that  move  was  not  employed 
by  the  student.  Which  of  these  Issues  blocked  the  student  from  making  the 
move  is  not  known.  In  practice,  blame  is  apportioned  more  or  less  equally 
among  all  of  the  Issues  required  for  a  missed  better  move.  One  effect  of  this  is 
the  introduction  of  noise  into  the  model;  that  is,  blame  will  almost  certainly 
be  apportioned  also  to  Issues  that  are,  in  fact,  understood.  A  second  source 
of  noise  in  the  differential  model  is  that  the  system  does  not  account  for  the 
entire  process  that  a  person  goes  through  in  deriving  a  move,  so  the  set  of 
Issues  is,  by  definition,  incomplete.  A  third  source  of  noise  is  the  difficulty  of 
modeling  human  factors  such  as  boredom  or  fatigue  that  cause  inconsistent 
behaviors.  For  example,  students  are  seldom  completely  consistent.  They 
often  forget  to  apply  techniques  that  they  know,  or  they  get  tired  and  accept 
a  move  that  is  easy  but  that  does  not  reflect  their  knowledge. 

Another  source  of  noise  is  inherent  in  the  process  of  learning.  As  the 
student  plays  the  game,  he  acquires  new  skills.  The  student  model,  which  has 
been  building  during  the  course  of  his  play,  will  not  be  up  to  date;  that  is,  it 
will  still  show  the  newly  learned  issues  as  weaknesses.  Ideally,  the  old  pieces  of 
the  model  should  decay  with  time.  The  costs  involved  in  this  computation  are 
prohibitive.  To  avoid  this  particular  failing  of  the  model,  the  WEST  Coach 
removes  from  consideration  any  Issues  that  the  student  has  used  recently  (in 
the  last  three  moves),  assuming  that  they  are  now  part  of  his  knowledge. 

To  combat  the  noise  that  arises  in  the  model,  the  Evaluator  for  each  Issue 
tends  to  assume  that  the  student  has  mastery  of  the  Issue.  Some  coaching 
opportunities  may  be  missed,  but  eventually,  if  the  student  has  a  problem 
addressed  by  an  Issue,  a  pattern  will  emerge. 

Experience  with  WEST 

WEST  has  been  used  in  elementary-school  classrooms;  in  a  controlled 
experiment,  the  coached  version  of  WEST  was  compared  to  an  uncoached  ver- 
sion. The  coached  students  showed  a  considerably  greater  variety  of  patterns 
in  the  mathematical  expressions  they  used,  indicating  that  they  had  acquired 
many  of  the  more  subtle  patterns  and  had  not  fallen  permanently  into  "ruts" 
that  prevented  them  from  seeing  when  such  moves  were  important.  Perhaps 
most  significant  of  all,  the  students  in  the  coached  group  enjoyed  playing  the 
game  considerably  more  than  did  the  uncoached  group  (Goldstein,  1979). 

References 

A  good  discussion  of  the  WEST  coach  is  Burton  and  Brown  (1979a). 


C5,     WUMPUS 


THIS  ARTICLE  describes  a  computer  coach  for  WUMPUS,  a  computer  game 
in  which  the  player  must  track  down  and  slay  the  vicious  Wumpus  while 
avoiding  pitfalls  that  result  in  certain,  if  fictional,  death  (Yob,  1975).  The 
coach  described  here  is  WUSOR-II,  one  of  three  generations  of  computer 
coaches  for  WUMPUS  developed  by  Ira  Goldstein  and  Brian  Carr  at  M.I.T. 
(Carr  and  Goldstein,  1977;  for  discussions  of  WUSOR-I  and  WUSOR-III,  see 
Stansfield,  Carr,  and  Goldstein,  1976,  and  Goldstein,  1979,  respectively).  To 
be  a  skilled  Wumpus-hunter,  one  must  know  about  logic,  probability,  decision 
theory,  and  geometry.  A  deficit  in  one's  knowledge  may  result  in  being  eaten 
by  the  Wumpus  or  falling  to  the  center  of  the  earth.  In  keeping  with  the 
philosophy  of  computer  coaching,  students  are  highly  motivated  to  learn  these 
fundamental  skills. 

The  design  of  the  WUSOR-II  system  involves  the  interactions  of  the 
specialist  programs  shown  in  Figure  C5-1.  There  are  four  modules:  the 
Expert,  the  Psychologist,  the  Student  Model,  and  the  Tutor.  The  Expert  tells 
the  Psychologist  if  the  player's  move  is  nonoptimal  and  which  skills  are  needed 
for  him  (or  her)  to  discover  better  alternatives.  The  Psychologist  employs  this 
comparison  to  formulate  hypotheses  concerning  which  domain-specific  skills 
are  known  to  the  student.  These  hypotheses  are  recorded  in  the  Student 
Model,  which  represents  the  student's  knowledge  as  a  subset  of  the  Expert's 
skills — an  overlay  model  (see  Article  DC.B).  The  Tutor  uses  the  Student  Model 
to  guide  its  interactions  with  the  player.  Basically,  it  chooses  to  discuss  skills 
not  yet  exhibited  by  the  player  in  situations  where  their  use  would  result  in 
better  moves.  Goldstein  (1977)  provides  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  the 
structure  and  function  of  these  coaching  modules.  (See  also  the  discussion  of 
the  WEST  computer  coach  in  Article  DC.C4.) 

The  central  box  of  Figure  C5-1  contains  a  representation  for  the  problem- 
solving  skills  of  the  domain  being  tutored.  It  is,  in  essence,  a  formal  repre- 
sentation of  the  syllabus.  The  Expert  is  derived  from  the  skills  represented 
therein,  as  is  the  structure  of  the  student  model.  The  Psychologist  derives 
expectations  from  this  knowledge  regarding  which  skills  the  student  can  be 
expected  to  acquire  next,  based  on  a  model  of  the  relative  difficulty  of  items  in 
the  syllabus.  The  Tutor  derives  relationships  between  skills  such  as  analogies 
and  refinements,  which  can  be  employed  to  improve  its  explanations  of  new 
skills  (see  Goldstein,  1979). 

Theoretical  Goals:  Toward  a  Theory  of  Coaching 

The  approach  to  the  design  of  computer  coaches  in  WUSOR-II  is  to 
construct  a  rule-based  representation  (see  Article  III.C4,  in  Vol.  i)  for  the  skills 


261 


262 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education 


DC 


Coach 


Psychologist 

A 

Move 
Analysis 


Expert 


Game 
State 


Code 


Data 


Rules 
Defining 

Expert 
Play 


State 


Game 


Complexity 
Data 


Problem 

Solving 

Knowledge 


Explanation 
Data 


Update 
Model 


Overlay 


Student 
Model 


Student's 
Current  State 


Control 


Data 


Play 


Figure  C5-1.     Diagram  of  a  computer  coach  (Goldstein,  1979). 


C5  WUMPUS  263 

needed  by  the  Expert  to  play  the  game,  for  the  modeling  criteria  used  by  the 
Psychologist,  and  for  the  alternative  tutoring  strategies  used  by  the  Tutor. 
Each  is  expanded  below. 

The  Expert  uses  rules  that  embody  the  knowledge  or  skills  required  to 
play  the  game  in  order  to  analyze  the  player's  behavior.  The  virtue  of  a  rule- 
based  representation  of  expertise  is  that  its  modularity  both  allows  tutoring 
to  focus  on  the  discussion  of  specific  skills  and  permits  modeling  to  take  the 
form  of  hypotheses  regarding  which  rules  are  known  by  the  player. 

The  Psychologist  applies  rules  of  evidence  to  make  reasonable  hypotheses 
about  which  of  the  Expert's  skills  the  player  possesses.  Typical  rules  of  evi- 
dence are: 

1.  Increase  the  estimate  that  a  player  possesses  a  skill  if  the  player  explic- 
itly claims  acquaintance  with  the  skill,  and  decrease  the  reliability  if  the 
player  expresses  unfamiliarity. 

2.  Increase  the  estimate  that  a  player  possesses  a  skill  if  the  skill  is  manifest 
in  the  player's  behavior,  and  decrease  the  estimate  if  the  skill  is  not 
manifest  in  a  situation  in  which  the  Expert  believes  it  to  be  appropriate; 
hence,  implicit  as  well  as  overt  evidence  plays  a  role. 

3.  Decrease  the  estimate  that  a  player  possesses  a  skill  if  there  is  a  long 
interval  since  the  last  confirmation  was  obtained  (thereby  modeling  the 
tendency  for  a  skill  to  decay  with  less  use). 

The  Tutor  uses  explanation  rules  to  select  the  appropriate  topic  to  discuss 
with  the  player  and  to  choose  the  form  of  the  explanation.  These  rules  include: 

1 .  Rules  of  simplification  that  take  a  complex  statement  and  reduce  it  to  a 
simpler  assertion.  Simplification  rules  are  essential  if  the  player  is  not 
to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  Tutor's  explanations. 

2.  Rules  of  rhetoric  that  codify  alternative  explanation  strategies.  The  two 
extremes  are  explanation  in  terms  of  a  general  rule  and  explanation  in 
terms  of  a  concrete  instance. 


The  WUMPUS  Expert 

In  WUMPUS,  the  player  is  initially  placed  somewhere  in  a  randomly 
connected  warren  of  caves  and  is  told  which  caves  adjoin  his  cave.  His  goal 
is  to  find  the  horrid  Wumpus  and  slay  it  with  an  arrow.  Each  move  to  a 
neighboring  cave  yields  information  regarding  that  cave's  neighbors.  The 
difficulty  in  choosing  a  move  arises  from  the  various  dangers  in  the  warren — 
bats,  pits,  and  the  Wumpus  itself.  If  the  player  moves  into  the  Wumpus's  lair, 
he  is  eaten.  If  he  walks  into  a  pit,  he  falls  to  his  death.  Bats  pick  the  player 
up  and  randomly  drop  him  elsewhere  in  the  warren. 

The  player  can  minimize  risk  and  find  the  Wumpus  by  making  the  proper 
logistic  and  probabilistic  inferences  from  warnings  that  he  is  given.    These 


264  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

warnings  are  provided  whenever  the  player  is  near  a  danger.  The  Wumpus 
can  be  smelled  within  one  or  two  caves.  The  squeak  of  bats  can  be  heard  one 
cave  away,  and  the  breeze  of  a  pit  can  be  felt  one  cave  away.  The  game  is  won 
by  shooting  an  arrow  into  the  Wumpus's  lair.  If  the  player  exhausts  his  set 
of  five  arrows  without  hitting  the  creature,  all  is  lost. 

The  WUMPUS  Expert  uses  a  rule-based  representation,  consisting  of  about 
20  rules,  to  infer  the  risk  of  visiting  new  caves.  Five  of  these  rules  are  shown 
below: 

LI.  Positive  Evidence  Rule.  A  warning  in  a  cave  implies  that  a  danger  exists 
in  a  neighboring  cave. 

L2.  Negative  Evidence  Rule.  The  absence  of  a  warning  implies  that  no  danger 
exists  in  any  neighbors. 

L3.  Elimination  Rule.  If  a  cave  has  a  warning  and  all  but  one  of  its  neighbors 
are  known  to  be  safe,  the  danger  is  in  the  remaining  neighbor. 

PI.  Equal  Likelihood  Rule.  In  the  absence  of  other  knowledge,  all  of  the 
neighbors  of  a  cave  with  a  warning  are  equally  likely  to  contain  a 
danger. 

P2.  Double  Evidence  Rule.  Multiple  warnings  increase  the  likelihood  that  a 
given  cave  contains  a  danger. 

A  Sample  Protocol  with  the  WUSOR-II  Computer  Coach 

A  transcript  of  an  interaction  with  the  WUSOR-II  Coach  is  presented 
below.  The  player's  responses  are  preceded  by  **. 

Hello,    Timmy.      There  are   15  caves,    2  bats,    2  pits, 
and  1  Wumpus.      You  are  now  at  cave   15  with  neighbors  4, 
14,    and  0.      Brrr !      There  is  a  draft.      You  are  near  a  pit. 
What  a  stench!      The  Wumpus  is  near.      What  now? 

**   4 

You  are  now  at  cave  4  with  neighbors  15,  14,  and  2. 
Brrr!   Squeak!   A  bat  is  near.   What  now? 

The  goal  of  the  Coach  is  to  tutor  a  beginner  in  the  relevant  logical,  prob- 
abilistic, and  strategic  knowledge  needed  to  play  the  game.  For  example, 
the  Expert  informs  the  Tutor  that  cave  14  should  be  treated  as  more  dan- 
gerous than  cave  0  or  2,  since  there  is  multiple  evidence  (from  the  drafts 
in  caves  15  and  4)  that  cave  14  contains  a  pit.  If  the  player  now  moved 
to  cave  14,  coaching  might  take  place  as  follows: 

**   14 

Timmy,  it  isn't  necessary  to  take  such  large  risks  with  pits. 
One  of  caves  2  and  14  contains  a  pit.   Likewise  one  of 


C5  WUMPUS  265 

caves  0  and  14  contains  a  pit.      This  is  multiple  evidence 
of  a  pit  in  cave   14,    which  makes   it  quite   likely  that  cave   14 
contains  a  pit.      It  is   less  likely  that  cave  0  contains  a  pit. 
Hence,    we  might  want  to  explore  cave  0  instead. 
Do  you  want  to  take  back  your  move? 

Although  it  is  not  apparent  from  these  simple  remarks,  every  module  of 
the  Coach  contributed  to  the  dialogue.  These  contributions  are  summarized 
below. 

The  Expert  analyzes  all  possible  moves,  using  its  set  of  skills.  The  outcome 
of  its  analysis  is  a  ranking  of  possible  moves  with  an  attached  list  that 
associates  the  skills  that  would  be  needed  to  make  each  move.  For  example, 
using  the  five  skills  listed  earlier,  the  Expert  recognizes  that  cave  14  is  the 
most  dangerous  move  and  cave  0  is  the  safest  move. 

Essentially,  the  Expert  provides  the  following  proof  for  use  by  the  Psy- 
chologist and  Tutor  modules.  (The  proof  is  given  here  in  English  for  read- 
ability; the  Expert's  actual  analyses  are  in  the  programming  language  LISP.) 

Lemma  1:  The  Wumpus  cannot  be  in  cave  0,  2,  or  14  since  there  is  no  smell 
in  4.  (Application  of  the  Negative  Evidence  Rule,  L2,  for  the 
two-cave  warning  of  Wumpus.) 

Lemma  2:  Caves  0  and  2  were  better  than  14  because  there  was  single 
evidence  that  caves  0  and  2  contained  a  pit,  but  double  evidence 
for  cave  14.  (Application  of  the  Double  Evidence  Rule,  P2.) 

Lemma  3:  Cave  2  is  more  dangerous  than  cave  0,  since  2  contains  a  bat, 
and  the  bat  could  drop  you  in  a  fatal  cave.  (We  know  this  fact 
because  the  squeak  in  4  implied  a  bat  in  14  or  2,  but  the  absence 
of  a  squeak  in  15  implies  no  bat  in  14.  Hence,  by  the  Elimination 
Rule,  L3,  there  is  a  bat  in  2.) 

The  Psychologist,  after  seeing  Timmy  move  to  cave  14,  decreases  the 
Student  Model  weight  indicating  familiarity  with  the  Double  Evidence  Rule, 
P2,  since  the  Expert's  proof  indicates  that  this  heuristic  was  not  applied. 
Table  C5-1  presents  the  Psychologist's  hypotheses  regarding  which  skills  of 
the  Expert  the  student  possesses. 

Modeling  raises  many  issues.  One  subtlety  is  that  the  move  to  cave  14 
above  may  be  evidence  of  a  more  elementary  limitation — a  failure  to  under- 
stand the  logical  implications  of  the  draft  warning — that  is,  that  a  pit  is  in 
a  neighboring  cave.  The  current  state  of  the  Student  Model  is  used  by  the 
Psychologist  to  determine,  in  the  event  of  a  nonoptimal  move,  which  skill  is, 
in  fact,  missing.  The  Student  Model  indicates  the  level  of  play  that  can  be 
expected  from  this  player — the  player  might  be  a  beginner  with  incomplete 
knowledge  of  the  basic  rules  of  the  game,  a  novice  with  an  understanding 
of  the  logical  skills,  an  amateur  with  knowledge  of  the  logical  and  the  more 
elementary  probability  skills,  and  so  on.    The  Psychologist  would  attribute 


266  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Table  C5-1 

A  Typical  Student  Model  Maintained  by  the  Coach 


Rules 

Appropriate 

Used 

Percent 

Known 

LI 

5 

5 

100 

Yes 

L2 

4 

3 

75 

Yes 

L3 

4 

2 

50 

? 

L4 

5 

5 

100 

Yes 

L5 

4 

1 

25 

No 

the  student's  error  in  the  current  situation  to  unfamiliarity  with  a  skill  at 
his  current  level  of  play;  in  this  case,  Timmy  is  a  player  who  has  mastered 
the  logical  skills  and  is  learning  the  basic  probability  heuristics.  Hence,  the 
Coach's  explanation  focused  on  explaining  the  double-evidence  heuristic. 

The  Tutor  is  responsible  for  abridging  the  Coach's  response  to  the  player's 
move  to  cave  14.  (The  complete  explanation  generated  by  the  Expert  was 
the  three  lemmas  shown  above.)  Such  pruning  is  imperative  if  the  Coach  is 
to  generate  comprehensible  advice.  Hence,  the  Tutor  prunes  the  complete 
analysis  using  simplification  rules  that  delete  those  parts  of  the  argument 
that  are  already  known  to  the  player  (on  the  basis  of  the  Student  Model) 
and  those  portions  that  are  too  complex.  Here,  the  coach  deleted  Lemma  1, 
the  discussion  of  the  Wumpus  danger,  because  it  is  based  on  the  negative- 
evidence  skill  that  the  Student  Model  attributes  to  the  player.  Lemma  2, 
the  elimination  argument  for  bats,  is  potentially  appropriate  to  discuss,  but  a 
simplification  strategy  directs  the  Coach  to  focus  on  a  single  skill.  Additional 
information  will  be  given  by  the  Coach  if  requested  by  the  player. 

Conclusions 

The  novelty  of  this  research  is  that  in  a  single  system  there  is  significant 
domain  expertise,  a  broad  range  of  possible  interaction  strategies  available  to 
the  tutor,  and  a  modeling  capability  for  the  student's  current  knowledge  state. 
Informal  experience  with  over  20  players  of  various  ages  has  shown  WUSOR-II 
to  be  a  helpful  learning  aid,  as  judged  by  interviews  with  the  players.  The 
short-term  benefit  from  this  research  is  an  improved  understanding  of  the 
learning  and  teaching  processes.  The  long-term  benefit  may  be  the  develop- 
ment of  a  practical  educational  technology,  given  the  expected  decrease  in 
hardware  costs. 

References 

Carr  and  Goldstein  (1977)  describe  WUSOR,  the  overlay  model,  and 
related  theory.  Also  see  Goldstein  (1977,  1979)  and  Stansfield,  Carr,  and 
Goldstein  (1976). 


C6.     GUIDON 


GUIDON,  a  program  for  teaching  diagnostic  problem-solving,  is  being  devel- 
oped by  William  J.  Clancey  and  his  colleagues  at  Stanford  University.  Using 
the  rules  of  the  MYCIN  consultation  system  (Article  VIII. Bi)  as  subject  mate- 
rial, GUIDON  engages  a  student  in  a  dialogue  about  a  patient  suspected 
of  having  an  infection.  In  this  manner,  it  teaches  the  student  about  the 
relevant  clinical  and  laboratory  data  and  about  how  to  use  that  information 
for  diagnosing  the  causative  organism.  GUIDON's  mixed-initiative  dialogue 
differs  from  that  of  other  ICAI  programs  in  its  use  of  prolonged,  structured 
teaching  interactions  that  go  beyond  responding  to  the  student's  last  move 
(as  in  WEST  and  WUMPUS)  and  repetitive  questioning  and  answering  (as  in 
SCHOLAR  and  WHY). 

MYCIN'S  infectious-disease  diagnosis  rules  constitute  the  skills  to  be 
taught.  As  applied  to  a  particular  problem,  the  rules  provide  GUIDON  with 
topics  to  be  discussed  and  with  a  basis  for  evaluating  the  student's  behavior. 
GUIDON's  teaching  knowledge  is  wholly  separate  from  MYCIN.  It  is  stated 
explicitly  in  the  form  of  200  tutorial  rules,  which  include  methods  for  guiding 
the  dialogue  economically,  presenting  diagnostic  rules,  constructing  a  student 
model,  and  responding  to  the  student's  initiative.  Because  of  the  separation  of 
teaching  and  domain  knowledge,  MYCIN'S  infectious-disease  knowledge  base 
can  be  replaced  by  diagnostic  rules  for  another  problem  domain. 

GUIDON  is  designed  to  explore  two  basic  questions:  First,  how  do  the 
problem-solving  rules,  which  perform  so  well  in  the  MYCIN  consultation 
system,  measure  up  to  the  needs  of  a  tutorial  interaction  with  a  student? 
Second,  what  knowledge  about  teaching  might  be  added  to  MYCIN  to  make 
it  into  an  effective  tutorial  program?  MYCIN'S  rules  have  not  been  modified 
for  the  tutoring  application,  but  they  are  used  in  new  ways,  for  example,  for 
forming  quizzes,  guiding  the  dialogue,  summarizing  evidence,  and  modeling 
the  student's  understanding. 

Several  design  guidelines  for  the  rules  make  it  plausible  that  the  rules 
would  be  a  good  vehicle  for  teaching.  First,  they  are  designed  to  capture  a 
significant  part  of  the  knowledge  necessary  for  good  problem  solving.  Formal 
evaluation  of  MYCIN  demonstrated  that  its  competence  in  selecting  antimicro- 
bial therapy  for  meningitis  and  for  bacteremia  is  comparable  to  that  of  the 
members  of  the  infectious-disease  faculty  at  the  Stanford  University  School 
of  Medicine  (where  MYCIN  was  developed;  see  Yu,  Buchanan,  et  al.,  1979). 
Second,  flexible  use  of  the  rule  set  is  made  possible  by  the  provision  of  repre- 
sentational meta- know  ledge,  which  allows  a  program  to  take  apart  rules  and 
to  reason  about  the  components  (see  Article  III.A,  in  Vol.  i).  Finally,  MYCIN'S 
rules,  in  contrast  with  Bayesian  programs,  are  couched  in  terms  familiar  to 


267 


268  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

human  experts,  so  it  seems  likely  that  reading  back  MYCIN'S  line  of  reasoning 
to  a  student  might  be  helpful  to  him  (or  her). 

This  article  discusses  the  following  aspects  of  a  GUIDON  tutorial  dialogue: 

1 .  The  nature  of  the  interaction 

2.  The  components  of  the  student  model 

3.  The  organization  of  teaching  knowledge  into  discourse  procedures 

4.  The  use  of  the  student  model 

5.  Opportunistic  tutoring 

6.  Pedagogical  principles  behind  the  tutoring  rules. 

The  capability  of  GUIDON  to  tutor  from  a  library  of  cases  and  for  domains 
outside  of  medicine  is  also  discussed.  The  final  section  outlines  the  lessons 
learned  about  knowledge  representation  that  are  being  applied  to  reconfigure 
the  MYCIN  rule  base  for  its  use  in  teaching. 

Interaction  with  GUIDON 

An  essential  part  of  tutorial  dialogue  management  is  allowing  the  student 
to  express  himself.  In  a  mixed-initiative  program,  provision  must  be  made  for 
every  kind  of  initiative  on  the  part  of  the  student.  This  includes  referring  back 
to  an  earlier  topic  to  provide  more  details,  changing  the  topic,  and  so  on.  We 
might  summarize  this  by  saying  that  we  must  allow  the  student  to  specify  what 
he  knows,  what  he  wants  to  know  more  about,  and  what  he  wants  to  ignore. 
The  annotated  protocol  excerpted  below  illustrates  GUIDON's  flexibility  in 
responding  to  the  student's  initiative. 

The  student  asks  for  the  data  and  subgoals  relevant  to  the  topic  being 
discussed.   These  are  extracted  from  MYCIN'S  rules. 

**  Factors 

The  following  factors  will  be  useful  to  determine  the  type  of 
the  infection: 

3a.  whether  the  meningitis  is  partially  treated 

3b.  whether  a  lumbar  puncture  has  been  performed  on  Pt538 

3c.  the  duration  of  the  neurological  signs 

3d.  the  CSF  protein 

(*)3e.  whether  Pt538  has  a  rash  consistent  with  Herpes  Zoster 

GUIDON  keeps  track  of  what  has  been  discussed,  MYCIN'S  use  of  data, 
and  conjectures  about  what  the  student  knows. 

Factors  marked  with  (*)  have  already  been  stated.  Based 
on  what  we  have  already  mentioned,  you  should  be  able  to 
conclude  about:  3b. 


C6  GUIDON  269 

The  student  asks  how  a  particular  datum  is  useful.  He  is  given  the  case- 
specific  information,  and  then  a  summary  of  its  use  in  the  rule  or  rules 
that  apply  in  this  case  (negative  conclusions  are  omitted  here  because  the 
choices  are  mutually  exclusive). 

**  Use  3c 

The  duration  of  the  neurological  signs  is  7.2  hours. 

Using  other  information  available  to  you  now,  the  duration 
of  the  neurological  signs  enables  you  to  conclude  that  the 
type  of  the  infection  is  bacterial  (.2)  viral  (.2)  [RULE524] . 

The  student  indicates  that  he  has  determined  a  particular  subgoal.  As 
described  in  this  article,  a  "discourse  procedure"  is  invoked  to  respond  to 
the  student.  If  the  student  model  were  not  consistent  with  his  claim,  he 
would  be  asked  to  state  his  conclusion  and  then  possibly  support  it. 

**   IKNOW  3b 

Good.   MYCIN  has  also  made  a  decision. 

The  site  of  CULTURE-1  is  evidence  that  a  lumbar  puncture  has 
been  performed  on  Pt538  [RULE112]  . 

Back  to  our  discussion  of  the  type  of  the  infection  . . . 

At  this  point,  the  topic  of  discussion  is  completed,  and  the  student  is 
receiving  a  summary  of  the  relevant  conclusions.  The  program  is  automat- 
ically extracting  the  "key  factor"  from  each  rule  and  displaying  only  the 
"interesting"  (useful)  conclusions. 

Summary  of   evidence  that  the  type  of  the  infection  is 
bacterial    (.98): 

29a.    The  fact  that  the  meningitis   is  partially  treated    (.95) 
is  evidence  that  the  type  of  the  infection 
is  bacterial    (.19)    [RULE148] 

29b.    The  WBC  from  the  CSF  and  the  percent  of  PMNs   in  the  CSF 
is  evidence  that  the  type  of  the  infection 
is  bacterial    (.9)    [RULE501] 

The  student  requests  more  information  about  one  of  the  inferences.  The 
program  reasons  that  because  several  subgoals  have  not  been  discussed, 
these  are  the  details  to  offer  first. 

**  Details   29a 

For  which  of  the  following  factors  would  you  like  to  see 
a  review  of  the  evidence? 

(Select  from  the  following) : 

1 .  the  infection  which  requires  therapy 

2.  the  fact  that  the  meningitis 
is  partially  treated  (.95) 

**  2 


270  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Summary  of  evidence  that  the  meningitis 
is  partially  treated  (.95): 

32a.  The  infection  which  requires  therapy,  the  fact  that 
organisms  were  not  seen  on  the  stain  of  the  pending 
CSF  culture,  and  the  time  since  therapy  with  the 
cephalothin  was  started  are  evidence  that  the 
meningitis  is  partially  treated  (.95)  [RULE145] 

Given  this  information,  perhaps  the  student  would  like  to  see  the  details 
of  how  it  is  used. 

Do  you  want  to  see  RULE148? 

**  No 

GUIDON  provides  a  menu  of  options  for  requesting  case  data,  asking  for 
MYCIN'S  evaluation  of  the  problem  (e.g.,  "What  subgoals  are  PENDING?" 
"Give  me  DETAILS"),  determining  dialogue  context  (e.g.,  "What  RULE  are 
we  discussing?"),  changing  the  topic,  requesting  assistance  (the  options  HELP, 
HINT,  and  TELLME),  and  conveying  what  is  known  (e.g.,  "I  want  to  make  a 
HYPOTHESIS").  The  menu  of  over  30  options  allows  for  input  to  be  terse, 
while  defining  clearly  for  the  student  what  the  program  can  understand.  As 
arguments  to  the  options,  the  student  can  use  phrases  (e.g.,  "IKNOW  about 
the  lumbar  puncture"),  keywords  (e.g.,  "IKNOW  LP"),  or  indices  of  remarks 
made  by  the  program  (e.g.,  "IKNOW  3B"). 

The  Student  Model 

Before  a  session  with  the  student  begins,  GUIDON  uses  MYCIN  to  "solve" 
the  case  to  be  presented  to  the  student.  The  results  of  this  background 
consultation,  consisting  of  MYCIN'S  rule  conclusions  and  its  records  of  why 
rules  did  not  apply,  are  reconfigured  into  a  complete  AND/OR  tree  of  goals 
and  rules,  so  the  rules  are  indexed  both  by  the  goals  they  conclude  about  and 
the  subgoals  or  data  needed  to  apply  them.  During  the  tutorial  session,  as 
the  student  inquires  about  the  patient  and  receives  more  case  data,  this  same 
information  is  used  to  drive  MYCIN'S  rules  in  a  forward  direction.  Thus,  at 
any  time,  some  of  the  rules  MYCIN  uses  for  determining,  say,  the  type  of 
the  infection,  will  have  led  to  a  conclusion,  while  others  will  require  more 
information  about  the  patient  before  they  can  be  applied. 

This  record  of  what  the  expert  (i.e.,  MYCIN)  "knows"  at  any  time  during 
the  student-run  consultation  forms  the  basis  for  evaluating  a  student's  partial 
solutions  and  providing  assistance.  Such  an  overlay  model  (see  Articles  DC.B 
and  LX.C5)  assumes  that  the  student's  knowledge  is  a  subset  of  MYCIN'S 
knowledge  and  that  there  are  unique  reasoning  steps  for  making  any  particular 


C6  GUIDON  271 

deduction.  Neither  assumption  is  always  correct;  the  rule  set  nevertheless 
provides  a  first-order  approximation  to  the  student-modeling  problem. 

The  three  components  of  the  student  model  are  shown  in  Figure  C6-1. 
The  cumulative  record  of  which  rules  the  student  knows  is  called  the  USE- 
HISTORY.  It  is  the  program's  belief  that,  if  the  student  were  given  the  premise 
of  the  rule,  he  would  be  able  to  correctly,  in  the  abstract,  draw  the  proper 
conclusion.  USE-HISTORY  is  primed  by  the  student's  initial  indication  of  his 
level  of  expertise,  which  is  matched  against  "difficulty  ratings"  associated 
with  each  rule.  Like  the  other  components,  USE-HISTORY  is  represented  as 
a  certainty  factor  (see  Article  VIII.Bl)  that  combines  the  background  evidence 
with  the  implicit  evidence  stemming  from  needs  for  assistance  and  verbalized 
partial  solutions,  as  well  as  the  explicit  evidence  stemming  from  a  direct 
question  that  tests  knowledge  of  the  rule. 

The  second  component,  called  STUDENT-APPLIED?,  records  the  program's 
belief  that  the  student  is  able  to  apply  the  rule  to  the  given  case,  that  is,  that 
the  student  would  refer  to  this  rule  to  support  a  conclusion  about  the  given 
goal.  Thus,  there  is  a  distinction  between  knowing  a  rule  (USE-HISTORY)  and 
being  able  to  apply  it,  since  the  student  may  know  which  subgoals  appear  in 
the  rule  but  be  unable  to  achieve  them.  STUDENT-APPLIED?  is  determined 
once  for  each  rule  during  a  case,  at  the  time  MYCIN  is  able  to  apply  the  rule. 

The  third  component  of  the  student  model,  called  USED?,  is  relevant 
whenever  the  student  states  a  partial  solution.  It  records  the  program's  belief 
that  the  student  would  mention  a  rule  if  asked  to  support  his  partial  solution. 
This  component  combines  indirect  evidence  by  comparing  conclusions  made 
by  rules  with  the  student's  conclusions,  the  record  of  what  rules  the  student 
is  believed  to  be  able  to  use  (STUDENT-APPLIED?),  and  evidence  that  the 
student  may  have  remembered  to  apply  the  rule  in  this  case  (e.g.,  the  rule 
mentioned  earlier  in  the  dialogue).  This  combined  evidence  affects  how  the 
program  responds  to  the  partial  solution  and  feeds  back  into  the  USE-HISTORY 
component  of  the  student  model. 

Update  When  a  Update  During 

D-rule  Fires  Hypothesis  Evaluation 

Background USE-HISTORY ►STUDENT-APPLIED ►  USED?  — 


Assistance      Quiz 
Needs 


Hypothesis 


Figure  C6-1.     Maintenance  relations  for  student-model  components 
(Clancy,  1979b). 


272  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Discourse  Procedures  and  Alternative  Dialogues 

The  student  is  allowed  to  explore  MYCIN'S  reasoning  by  using  options  like 
FACTORS,  shown  earlier  in  the  protocol  excerpt.  However,  the  tutor  is  not  a 
simple,  passive,  information-retrieval  system.  In  addition  to  clearly  laying  out 
data  and  inferences,  the  tutor  has  to  reason  about  what  constitutes  reasonable, 
expected  elaboration  on  the  basis  of  what  has  been  previously  discussed.  For 
example,  in  the  excerpt,  GUIDON  provided  details  for  an  inference  (rule  148) 
by  offering  to  support  achieved  preconditions  that  were  not  mentioned  in  the 
tutorial  dialogue  up  to  that  point. 

Similarly,  when  the  student  takes  the  initiative  by  saying  he  has  deter- 
mined some  subgoal,  the  tutor  needs  to  determine  what  response  makes  sense, 
based  on  what  it  knows  about  the  student's  knowledge  and  shared  goals  for 
the  tutorial  session  (topics  or  rules  to  discuss).  The  tutor  may  want  to  hold 
a  detailed  response  in  abeyance,  simply  acknowledge  the  student's  remark, 
or  probe  him  for  evidence  that  he  does  indeed  know  the  fact  in  question. 
Selection  among  these  alternative  dialogues  might  require  determining  what 
the  student  could  have  inferred  from  previous  interactions  and  the  current 
situation.  In  the  dialogue  excerpt  shown  above,  GUIDON  decides  that  there 
is  sufficient  evidence  that  the  student  knows  the  solution  to  a  relevant  sub- 
problem,  so  detailed  discussion  and  probing  are  not  necessary. 

Decoupling  domain  expertise  from  the  dialogue  program,  an  approach 
used  by  all  ICAI  systems,  is  a  powerful  way  to  provide  flexible  dialogue 
interaction.  In  GUIDON,  discourse  procedures  formalize  how  the  program 
should  behave  in  general  terms,  not  in  terms  of  the  data  or  outcome  of  a 
particular  case.  A  discourse  procedure  is  a  sequence  of  actions  to  be  followed 
under  conditions  determined  by  the  complexity  of  the  material,  the  student's 
understanding  of  the  material,  and  tutoring  goals  for  the  session.  Each  option 
available  to  the  student  generally  has  a  discourse  procedure  associated  with  it. 

For  example,  if  the  student  indicates,  via  the  IKNOW  option,  that  he  has  a 
hypothesis  about  some  subgoal  but  MYCIN  has  not  been  able  to  make  a  deci- 
sion yet,  the  procedure  for  requesting  and  evaluating  a  student's  hypothesis 
is  invoked.  Otherwise,  if  MYCIN  has  reached  the  same  conclusion,  the  proce- 
dure for  discussing  a  completed  topic  is  followed.  Whether  or  not  the  student 
will  be  probed  for  details  depends  on  the  model  that  the  tutor  is  building  of 
the  student's  understanding  (considered  below). 

Conditional  actions  in  discourse  procedures  are  expressed  as  tutoring 
rules.  Figure  C6-2  shows  the  tutoring  rule  (t-rule)  that  caused  GUIDON  to 
acknowledge  the  student's  statement  about  what  he  knew  in  the  dialogue 
illustrated  above,  rather  than  ask  for  details.  Of  course,  this  discourse  proce- 
dure for  discussing  a  completed  topic  is  invoked  from  many  other  procedures 
besides  the  one  corresponding  to  the  IKNOW  option:  It  may  be  invoked  in  the 
course  of  giving  details  about  how  a  subgoal  is  determined,  in  responding  to  a 
student's  hypothesis  for  a  subgoal,  when  the  program  detects  that  the  current 


C6  GUIDON  273 

T-RULE5  .  02     Directly  state  single,  known  rule. 

IF  1)    There  are  rules  having  a  bearing  on  this  goal 

that  have   succeeded  and  have  not  been 

discussed,    and 

2)  The  number  of  rules  having  a  bearing  on  this 
goal  that  have   succeeded  is   1,    and 

3)  There  is   strong  evidence  that  the   student  has 
applied  this  rule 

THEN  Simply  state  the  rule  and  its   conclusion 

Figure  C6-2.     T-rule  for  deciding  how  to  complete  discussion  of  a  topic. 

subgoal  (topic)  is  substantially  completed  (enough  data  have  been  given  to 
make  a  strong  conclusion),  and  so  on. 

Responding  to  Partial  Solutions 

Shown  below  is  an  annotated  excerpt  demonstrating  how  the  program 
responds  to  partial  solutions  stated  by  the  student.  Tutoring  rules  are  used 
both  to  update  the  model  and  to  select  the  appropriate  discourse  procedures 
for  responding.  In  this  excerpt,  while  the  student's  hypothesis  for  a  sub- 
problem  is  correct,  nevertheless,  after  analyzing  the  previous  history  of  inter- 
action with  the  student,  GUIDON  is  not  sure  that  the  student  really  knows 
why  his  hypothesis  is  correct.  Therefore,  instead  of  accepting  this  answer, 
GUIDON  requests  relevant  factors  to  support  the  hypothesis  and  probes  fur- 
ther to  see  if  the  student  knows  why  an  alternative  hypothesis  is  discredited. 

GUIDON  asks  the  student  to  state  a  hypothesis  for  a  subgoal.  The  student 
may  have  volunteered  to  do  this,  or  the  program  may  be  testing  the 
student's  understanding. 

What  is  the  type  of  the  infection? 

**  Bacterial 

The  program  asks  the  student  to  support  this  hypothesis  either  because  it  is 
incorrect  or,  as  in  this  case,  the  student  model  indicates  that  the  student 
may  not  know  all  of  the  relevant  rules.  (GUIDON  changes  the  prompt 
for  student  input  to  "»"  to  indicate  that  specific  input  is  expected  and 
student-initiated  options  are  not.) 

What  facts  about  this  case  tell  you  that  the  type  of   the 
infection  is  bacterial? 
(Enter  one  factor  per  line.) 

>>  PMNs 


274  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

The  percent  of  PMNs  in  the  CBC  is  not  relevant  for  determining 
the  type  of  the  infection. 

>>  PMNs  in  the  CSF 

>>  Cerebral-fluid  glucose  value 

>>  Protein  of  the  CSF 

These  factors  are  related  to  the  rules  used  by  MYCIN  to  conclude  that  the 
infection  is  bacterial,  and  the  student  model  is  updated  accordingly. 

You're  right  about  the  CSF  protein,  the  percent  of  PMNs  in 
the  CSF,  and  the  CSF  glucose  value;  however,  you  should  have 
mentioned  the  fact  that  the  meningitis  is  partially  treated, 
the  WBC  from  the  CSF,  and  the  fact  that  the  simultaneous 
blood  glucose  value  is  not  known. 

Other  hypotheses  are  then  discussed. 

MYCIN  rejected  some  possibilities  you  did  not  mention: 

What  facts  about  this  case  tell  you  that  the  type  of  the 
infection  is  not  viral? 

Referring  to  the  rules  that  MYCIN  uses  to  solve  subproblems  (such  as 
determining  whether  a  meningitis  infection  is  bacterial,  fungal,  viral,  or  tuber- 
culous), GUIDON  decides  which  of  these  rules,  if  any,  might  have  been  used 
by  the  student.  That  is,  what  inference  chains  are  consistent  with  the  stu- 
dent's behavior?  This  analysis  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  a  particular 
hypothesis  about  the  problem  may  be  indicated  by  more  than  one  rule,  or 
negative  evidence  may  outweigh  positive  evidence. 

A  potential  weakness  of  the  GUIDON  program  is  that  it  attempts  to 
explain  the  student's  behavior  solely  in  terms  of  MYCIN'S  rules.  If  the  student 
is  basing  his  questions  and  hypotheses  on  incorrect  rules,  GUIDON  is  not  able 
to  formulate  these  rules  and  address  them  directly.  It  is  possible  as  well  that 
the  student's  concepts  are  different  from  MYCIN'S,  so  his  conclusions  might  be 
correct,  but  he  will  want  to  support  them  with  reasoning  that  is  different  from 
MYCIN'S.  This  could  involve  something  as  simple  as  wanting  to  refer  to  the 
patient's  age  in  general  terms  (infant,  adolescent),  while  MYCIN  recognizes 
only  precise,  numerical  ages. 

Modeling  medical  reasoning  in  terms  of  an  alternative  rule  set  (not  just  a 
subset  of  MYCIN'S  rules)  is  a  theory-formation  problem  that  goes  beyond  the 
current  capabilities  of  AI.  It  is  possible  that  the  approach  followed  by  Stevens 
and  Collins  (see  Article  DC.C2)  of  collecting  data  about  student  misconceptions 
and  then  incorporating  these  variations  into  the  modeling  process  will  prove 
tenable  for  the  medical  domain. 


C6  GUIDON  275 

Opportunistic  Tutoring 

It  is  sometimes  advantageous  for  the  tutor  to  take  the  initiative  to  present 
new  material  to  the  student.  This  requires  that  the  tutor  have  presentation 
methods  that  opportunistically  adapt  material  to  the  needs  of  the  dialogue. 
In  particular,  the  tutor  has  to  be  sensitive  to  how  a  tutorial  dialogue  fits 
together,  including  what  kinds  of  interruptions  and  probing  are  reasonable 
and  expected  in  this  kind  of  discourse.  GUIDON  demonstrates  its  sensitivity 
to  these  concerns  when  it  corrects  the  student  before  quizzing  him  about 
"missing  hypotheses,"  asks  him  questions  about  recently  mentioned  data  to 
see  if  he  understands  how  to  use  them,  quizzes  him  about  rules  that  are 
related  (by  premise  and  action)  to  one  that  has  just  been  discussed,  follows 
up  on  previous  hints,  and  comments  on  the  status  of  a  subproblem  after  an 
inference  has  been  discussed  ("Other  factors  remain  to  be  considered ..."). 


Pedagogical  Style 

There  are  many  subtle  issues — when  to  interrupt  the  student,  how  much 
to  say,  and  the  like — that  constitute  a  pedagogical  style  and  are  implicit  in 
GUIDON's  teaching  rules.  For  example,  several  tutoring  rules  in  different 
situations  may  present  short  orientation  lectures,  but  nowhere  does  GUIDON 
reason  that  its  interaction  will  be  of  the  tutorial  type,  which  provides  orienta- 
tion when  appropriate,  in  contrast  with  the  coaching  type  (see  Article  DC.C5), 
which  only  makes  interruptions.  For  this  reason,  it  is  useful  to  summarize  the 
set  of  tutoring  principles  that  appear  implicitly  in  the  tutoring  rules: 

1.  Be  perspicuous:  Have  an  economical  presentation  strategy,  provide  lucid 
transitions,  and  adhere  to  conventional  discourse  patterns. 

2.  Provide  orientation  to  new  tasks  by  top-down  refinement:  Provide  the  student 
with  an  organized  framework  of  considerations  he  should  be  making, 
without  giving  away  the  solution  to  the  problem  (important  factors, 
subgoals,  size  of  the  task),  thus  challenging  the  student  to  examine  his 
understanding  constructively. 

3.  Strictly  guide  the  dialogue:  Say  when  topics  are  finished  and  inferences 
are  completed,  as  opposed  to  letting  the  student  discover  transitions  for 
himself. 

4.  Account  for  incorrect  behavior  in  terms  of  missing  expertise  (as  opposed  to 
assuming  alternative  methods  and  strategies):  Explain  clearly  what  is 
improper  from  the  tutor's  point  of  view  (e.g.,  improper  requests  for  case 
data).  This  is,  of  course,  more  a  statement  of  how  GUIDON  models  the 
student  than  a  principle  of  good  teaching. 


276  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

5.  Probe  the  student's  understanding  when  you  are  not  sure  what  he  knows,  when 
you  are  responding  to  partial  student  solutions:  Otherwise,  directly 
confirm  or  correct  the  solution. 

6.  Provide  assistance  by  methodically  introducing  small  steps  that  will  con- 
tribute to  the  problem's  solution: 

a.  Assistance  should  at  first  be  general,  to  remind  the  student  of 
solution  methods  and  strategies  he  already  knows; 

b.  Assistance  should  encourage  the  student  to  advance  the  solution 
by  using  case  data  he  has  already  been  given. 

7.  Examine  the  student's  understanding  and  introduce  new  information  when- 
ever there  is  an  opportunity  to  do  so. 


Case  and  Domain  Independence 

Patient  cases  are  entered  into  the  MYCIN  system  for  receiving  a  consul- 
tation or  for  testing  the  program,  so  the  case  library  is  available  to  GUIDON 
at  no  cost.  This  provides  over  100  patients  that  GUIDON  can  discuss,  clearly 
demonstrating  the  advantage  that  ICAI  has  over  the  traditional  computer- 
based-instruction  approach  in  which  each  lesson  must  be  designed  individually. 

Besides  being  able  to  use  the  teaching  procedures  to  tutor  different  cases, 
GUIDON  can  provide  tutorials  in  any  problem  area  for  which  a  MYCIN-like 
knowledge  base  of  decision  rules  and  fact  tables  has  been  formalized  (see 
van  Melle,  1980).  This  affords  an  important  perspective  on  the  generality  of 
the  discourse  and  pedagogical  rules. 

Experimental  tutorials  using  other  knowledge  bases  have  revealed  that  the 
effectiveness  of  discourse  strategies  for  carrying  on  a  dialogue  economically 
is  determined  in  part  by  the  depth  and  breadth  of  the  reasoning  tree  for 
solving  problems,  a  characteristic  of  the  rule  set  for  each  domain.  When  a 
solution  involves  many  rules  at  a  given  level,  for  example,  when  there  are 
many  rules  to  determine  the  organism  causing  the  infection,  the  tutor  and 
student  will  not  have  time  to  discuss  each  rule  in  the  same  degree  of  detail. 
Similarly,  when  inference  chains  are  long,  an  effective  discourse  strategy  will 
entail  summarizing  evidence  on  a  high  level,  rather  than  considering  each 
subgoal  in  the  chain. 

Results 

GUIDON  demonstrated  that  teaching  knowledge  could  be  treated  analo- 
gously to  the  domain  expertise  of  consultation  systems:  It  can  be  codified  in 
rules  and  built  incrementally  by  testing  it  on  different  cases.  The  framework 
of  tutoring  rules  organized  into  discourse  procedures  worked  well,  indicating 
that  it  is  suitable  to  think  of  a  tutorial  dialogue  as  being  separated  into 


C6  GUIDON  277 

relatively  independent  sequences  of  interaction.  Moreover,  the  judgmental 
knowledge  for  constructing  a  student  model  can  also  be  captured  in  rules 
utilizing  certainty  factors,  showing  that  the  task  of  modeling  a  student  bears 
some  relation  to  MYCIN'S  task  of  diagnosing  a  disease. 

In  contrast  to  GUIDON's  teaching  knowledge,  the  evaluation  of  MYCIN'S 
rule  set  for  this  application  was  not  so  positive.  While  MYCIN'S  repre- 
sentational meta-knowledge  made  possible  a  wide  variety  of  tutorial  activity, 
students  find  that  the  rules  are  difficult  to  understand,  remember,  and  incor- 
porate into  a  problem-solving  approach.  These  difficulties  prompted  an  exten- 
sive study  of  MYCIN'S  rules  to  determine  why  the  teaching  points  were  not 
as  clear  as  had  been  expected.  GUIDON  researchers  discovered  that  impor- 
tant structural  knowledge  (hierarchies  of  data  and  diagnostic  hypotheses)  and 
strategic  knowledge  (searching  the  problem  space  by  top-down  refinement) 
were  implicit  in  the  rules.  That  is,  the  choice  and  ordering  of  rule-premise 
clauses  constitute  procedural  knowledge  that  brings  about  good  problem- 
solving  performance  in  a  MYCIN  consultation  but  is  unavailable  for  teaching 
purposes.  Rather  than  teaching  a  student  problem-solving  steps  (rule  clauses) 
by  rote,  it  is  advantageous  to  convey  an  approach  or  strategy  for  bringing 
those  steps  to  mind — the  plan  that  knowledge-base  authors  were  following 
when  they  designed  MYCIN'S  rule  set.  To  make  this  implicit  design  knowledge 
explicit,  a  new  system,  NEOMYCIN  (Clancey  and  Letsinger,  1981),  is  being 
developed  that  separates  out  diagnostic  strategy  from  domain  knowledge  and 
makes  good  use  of  hierarchical  organization  of  data  and  hypotheses. 

Moreover,  besides  reconfiguring  MYCIN'S  rules  so  that  knowledge  is  sepa- 
rated out  and  represented  more  declaratively,  it  is  necessary  to  add  knowledge 
about  the  justification  of  rules.  Justifications  are  important  as  mnemonics 
for  the  heuristic  associations,  as  well  as  for  providing  an  understanding  that 
allows  the  problem  solver  to  violate  the  rules  in  unusual  situations. 

Finally,  NEOMYCIN  has  additional  knowledge  about  disease  processes 
that  allows  it  to  use  the  strategy  of  "group  and  differentiate"  for  initial 
problem  formulation,  in  which  the  problem  solver  must  think  about  broad 
categories  of  disorders  and  consider  competing  hypotheses  that  explain  the 
problem  data.  Thus,  we  want  to  teach  the  student  the  knowledge  a  human 
would  need  to  focus  on  infectious-disease  problems  in  the  first  place,  essentially 
the  knowledge  (previously  unformalized)  that  a  human  needs  to  use  MYCIN 
appropriately. 

In  conclusion,  GUIDON  research  sets  out  to  demonstrate  the  advantages 
of  separate,  explicit  representations  of  both  teaching  knowledge  and  subject 
material.  The  problems  of  recognizing  student  misconceptions  aside,  this 
research  demonstrated  that  simply  representing  in  an  ideal  way  what  to 
teach  the  student  is  not  a  trivial,  solved  problem.  An  unstructured  set 
of  production  rules  is  inadequate.  GUIDON's  teaching  rules  are  organized 
into  procedures;  NEOMYCIN'S  diagnostic  rules  are  hierarchically  grouped 
by  both  premise  and  action  and  are  controlled  by  meta-rules.     GUIDON 


278  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

research  demonstrated  that  the  needs  of  tutoring  can  serve  as  a  "forcing 
function"  to  direct  research  toward  more  psychologically  valid  representations 
of  domain  knowledge,  which  potentially  will  benefit  those  aspects  of  expert- 
systems  research  that  require  human  interaction,  particularly  explanation  and 
knowledge  acquisition. 

References 

GUIDON  is  described  fully  by  Clancey  (1979b);  a  shorter  discussion  is 
given  in  Clancey  (1979a).  Clancey  and  Letsinger  (1981)  describe  the  NEO- 
MYCIN research.  The  study  of  MYCIN'S  rule  base  leading  up  to  this  new 
system  and  some  methodological  considerations  are  provided  by  Clancey  (in 
press-a,  in  press-b). 


C7.     BUGGY 


BUGGY  is  a  program  that  can  determine  accurately  a  student's  misconcep- 
tions (bugs)  about  basic  arithmetic  skills.  The  system,  developed  by  John 
Seely  Brown,  Richard  Burton,  and  Kathy  M.  Larkin  at  Bolt  Beranek  and 
Newman,  Inc.,  provides  a  mechanism  for  explaining  why  a  student  is  making 
an  arithmetic  mistake,  as  opposed  to  simply  identifying  the  mistake.  Having 
a  detailed  model  of  a  student's  knowledge  that  indicates  his  (or  her)  miscon- 
ceptions is  important  for  successful  tutoring. 

A  common  assumption  among  teachers  is  that  students  do  not  follow  pro- 
cedures very  well  and  that  erratic  behavior  is  the  primary  cause  of  students' 
inability  to  perform  each  step  correctly.  Brown  and  Burton  (1978)  argue  that 
students  are  remarkably  competent  procedure  followers,  although  they  often 
follow  the  wrong  procedures.  By  presenting  examples  of  systematic  incorrect 
behavior,  BUGGY  allows  teachers  to  practice  diagnosing  the  underlying  causes 
of  students'  errors.  Through  BUGGY,  teachers  gain  experience  in  forming 
hypotheses  about  the  relation  between  the  symptoms  of  bugs  that  students 
manifest  and  the  underlying  misconceptions.  This  experience  helps  teachers 
become  more  aware  of  methods  or  strategies  available  for  diagnosing  their 
students'  problems  properly. 

Manifesting  Bugs 

Experience  with  BUGGY  indicates  that  forming  a  model  of  what  is  wrong 
with  a  student's  method  of  performing  a  task  is  often  more  difficult  than 
performing  the  task  itself.  Consider,  for  example,  the  following  addition 
problems  and  their  (erroneous)  solutions.  They  were  provided  by  a  student 
with  a  "bug"  in  his  addition  procedure: 

41         328        989  66       216 

±9      +917       +52      +887      +13 

50       1345      1141        1053       229 

Once  you  have  discovered  the  bug,  try  testing  your  hypothesis  by  simulating 
the  buggy  student — predict  his  results  on  the  following  two  test  problems: 

446         201 
+815      +399 

The  bug  is  simple.  In  procedural  terms,  after  determining  the  carry, 
the  student  forgets  to  reset  the  "carry  register"  to  zero;  he  accumulates  the 
amount  carried  across  the  columns.  For  example,  in  the  student's  second 
problem  (328  +  917  =  1345),  he  proceeds  as  follows:  8  +  7  =  15,  so  he  writes  5 
and  carries  1;  2  +  1  =  3  plus  the  1  carried  is  4;  finally,  3  +  9  =  12,  but  the  1 


279 


280  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

carried  from  the  first  column  is  still  there — it  has  not  been  reset — so  adding 
it  to  the  final  column  gives  13.  If  this  is  the  correct  bug,  the  answers  to  the 
test  problems  will  be  1361  and  700.  (This  bug  is  really  not  so  unusual;  a  child 
often  uses  his  fingers  to  remember  the  carry  and  might  forget  to  bend  them 
back  after  each  column.) 

The  model  built  by  BUGGY  incorporates  both  correct  and  incorrect  sub- 
procedures  that  simulate  the  student's  behavior  on  particular  problems  and 
capture  what  parts  of  a  student's  skill  are  correct  and  what  parts  are  incorrect. 
BUGGY  represents  a  skill,  such  as  addition,  as  a  collection  of  subskills,  one 
of  which,  for  example,  is  knowing  how  to  carry  a  digit  into  the  next  column. 
The  subprocedures  in  BUGGY  that  correspond  to  human  subskills  are  linked 
into  a  procedural  net  (Sacerdoti,  1974),  which  is  BUGGY's  representation  of 
the  entire  human  skill.  If  all  the  subprocedures  in  BUGGY's  procedural  net 
for  addition  work  correctly,  then  BUGGY  will  do  addition  problems  correctly. 
On  the  other  hand,  replacing  correct  subprocedures  with  ones  that  are  faulty 
will  result  in  systematic  errors  of  the  kind  shown  above.  Brown  and  Burton 
call  a  procedural  network  with  one  or  more  faulty  subprocedures  a  diagnostic 
model,  because  it  is  a  way  of  representing  systematic  errors.  The  model  has 
been  used  in  two  ways.  First,  it  can  diagnose  a  student's  errors  and  pinpoint 
the  bugs  in  the  student's  skill.  Second,  it  can  help  train  a  teacher  to  diag- 
nose student  errors  by  playing  the  part  of  a  student  with  one  or  more  buggy 
subskills. 

When  BUGGY  is  diagnosing  a  student's  errors,  its  task  is  to  modify  the 
correct  procedural  network  of,  say,  subtraction  until  it  accounts  for  all  of 
the  student's  answers,  both  right  and  wrong.  This  modification  is  done  by 
systematically  replacing  correct  subprocedures  with  incorrect  variants  until 
a  consistent  diagnostic  model  is  found.  There  are  currently  70  primitive 
faulty  subprocedures  for  subtraction.  These  are  explored  exhaustively  while 
attempting  to  determine  a  consistent  diagnostic  model.  If  a  single  variant  or 
bug  is  insufficient  to  explain  a  student's  behavior,  combinations  of  two  bugs 
are  tried.  (Because  of  the  overwhelming  number  of  combinations  of  three  or 
more  bugs,  they  are  not  used  to  form  diagnostic  models.)  In  this  manner, 
330  bugs  have  been  identified,  each  with  a  bug  description.  Interactions 
among  bugs  and  the  ramifications  of  a  buggy  subprocedure's  being  called 
by  several  high-order  procedures  constitute  major  challenges  for  designing 
efficient  simulations  of  multiple  bugs.  Note  also  that  this  technique  requires 
a  large  amount  of  compute  time  and  is  amenable  only  to  domains  where  bugs 
can  be  explicated  in  a  more  or  less  complete  way. 

The  procedural  network  for  subtraction  (and  its  bugs)  was  evaluated  in 
an  experiment  based  on  the  results  of  a  test  administered  to  1,325  students  in 
the  fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  grades.  The  BUGGY  model  indicated  that  about 
40%  of  the  students  exhibited  consistently  buggy  behavior.  That  is,  BUGGY 
was  able  to  construct  a  diagnostic  model  for  students'  errors  demonstrating 
that  they  were  using  nonrandom,  though  incorrect,  procedures. 


C7  BUGGY  281 

Using  BUGGY  to  Train  Teachers 

BUGGY  can  also  help  train  teachers  to  diagnose  student  errors.  This 
facility  is  illustrated  by  the  following  protocol  excerpted  from  Brown  (1977), 
in  which  BUGGY  presents  a  team  of  teachers  with  incorrectly  solved  mathe- 
matics problems  and  supervises  their  diagnosis  of  the  bug. 

Welcome  to  Bugland.   I  have  chosen  a  bug. 
Here  is  an  example  of  the  bug. 

17 
±5 

13 

The  system  presents  an  example  in  which  the  student  did  not  get  the  right 
answer. 

Now  you  can  give  me  problems  to  determine  the  bug. 


**   18 

43 

**  +6 

+79 

15 

23 

The  teachers  suggest  problems,  and  BUGGY  solves  them  incorrectly,  fol- 
lowing a  buggy  procedure.  The  team  is  trying  to  diagnose  the  bug  in 
BUGGY's  addition  procedures  by  presenting  BUGGY  with  problems  to 
solve.  However,  they  are  using  problems  similar  to  the  original  one,  which 
is  a  poor  strategy  because  it  may  leave  other  symptoms  of  the  bug  undis- 
covered. 

**  Got  the  bug! 

The  team  thinks  that  they  know  what  the  problem  is.  Omitted  here 
for  space  (but  illustrated  later  in  the  dialogue),  BUGGY  asks  them  to 
formulate  the  bug  in  English.  This  step  has  the  effect  of  making  the  team 
verbalize  the  bug  clearly.  It  is  a  difficult  task,  and  the  results  are  often 
ambiguous.  BUGGY  does  not  "read"  the  description  of  the  bug,  because  it 
does  not  have  the  natural- language  abilities  to  do  so.  Instead,  it  generates 
a  series  of  problems  for  the  team  to  solve.  The  team  must  solve  them 
incorrectly,  using  the  bug  that  they  think  they  have  identified,  to  convince 
BUGGY  that  they  have,  in  fact,  discovered  the  bug. 

Here. are  some  problems  to  test  your  theories  about  the  bug. 
What  is: 

21 
+39 

**  51 

That's  not  the  bug  I  have.   Using  my  bug: 


282  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

21 
+39 

15 

Try  giving  me  some  more  examples. . . 

The  team  fails  BUGGY 's  test  by  being  unable  to  solve  the  given  problem. 
That  is,  their  bug  is  not  the  same  one  that  BUGGY  is  using.  If  they  had 
solved  five  problems  "correctly"  (i.e.,  incorrectly  because  of  a  bug),  then 
BUGGY  would  credit  them  with  a  correct  diagnosis.  Now,  however,  they 
must  set  more  problems  for  BUGGY  to  solve,  in  an  attempt  to  deduce  the 
bug. 

**    51     99    68 

**  +1707    +99    +9 

21     36    23 

**  Got  the  bug! 

Please  describe  the  bug  you  think  I  have: 

**  The  student  is  adding  all  the  digits  together. 

Here  are  some  problems  to  test  your  theory  about  the  bug. 
What  are : 

33    1091      8     28    90 

+99     +60    +34    +70    +6 

**  24      17     15     17    15 

Very  good.   My  description  of  the  bug  is: 
The  student  always  sums  up  all  the  digits, 
with  no  regard  to  columns . 

Summary 

The  central  idea  of  this  research  is  that  procedural  networks  can  be  used  to 
build  diagnostic  models.  This  representation  scheme  facilitates  an  appropriate 
decomposition  of  a  skill  into  subskills,  to  make  explicit  the  control  structures 
underlying  a  collection  of  skills  and  to  execute  directly  the  resulting  diagnostic 
model.  Rather  than  being  a  subset  or  simplification  of  expert  rules,  as  in 
overlay  modeling  (see  Articles  IX.B,  DC.C4,  and  DC.C5),  the  procedural  network 
is  a  model  of  a  student's  behavior  that  is  structured  in  terms  of  semantically 
meaningful  deviations  from  the  correct  procedure.  Each  subskill,  whether 
correct  or  incorrect,  is  explicitly  represented  as  a  subprocedure  in  the  network. 

References 

Brown  and  Burton  (1978)  is  the  most  complete  report  on  BUGGY.  Recent 
extensions  of  this  research  are  discussed  by  Van  Lehn  and  Brown  (1981).  See 
also  Brown,  Burton,  Hausmann,  et  al.  (1977)  and  Brown,  Burton,  and  Larkin 

(1977). 


C8.     EXCHECK 


EXCHECK  is  an  instructional  system  developed  by  Patrick  Suppes  and  his 
colleagues  at  the  Institute  for  Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences 
(IMSSS)  at  Stanford  University.  It  presents  complete,  university-level  courses 
in  logic,  set  theory,  and  proof  theory.  At  a  computer  terminal,  the  student 
is  presented  lesson  material  followed  by  exercises  consisting  of  theorems  that 
he  (or  she)  is  to  prove.  The  courses  are  taught  on  IMSSS 's  CAI  system,  which 
uses  computer-generated  speech  and  split-screen  displays.  Several  hundred 
Stanford  students  take  these  courses  each  year. 

From  an  AI  point  of  view,  the  most  interesting  aspects  of  the  EXCHECK 
system  are  the  facilities  that  permit  the  interaction  to  take  place  in  a  natural 
style  that  closely  approximates  standard  mathematical  practice.  The  pro- 
gram's "expertise"  consists  of  inference  procedures  that  allow  it  to  understand 
sketches  of  proofs,  summarize  proofs,  and  explain  set-theoretical  construc- 
tions. These  inference  procedures  conform  to  the  kinds  of  reasoning  steps 
mathematicians  make,  called  natural  deduction  (Suppes,  1957).  EXCHECK 
has  no  student  model,  but  its  inference  procedures  allow  it  to  make  assump- 
tions about  a  student's  reasoning  and  track  his  solutions  and  thus  it  provides 
a  "reactive  environment"  similar  to  that  of  SOPHIE  (Article  DCC3). 

Understanding  Informal  Mathematical  Reasoning 

The  mathematical  reasoning  involved  in  the  set  theory  and  proof  theory 
courses  is  complex  and  subtle.  The  fundamental  AI  problem  of  EXCHECK 
is  making  the  program  capable  of  understanding  informal  mathematical 
reasoning:  It  must  be  able  to  follow  mathematical  proofs  presented  in  a 
"natural"  manner.  That  is,  just  as  the  intent  of  natural-language  process- 
ing is  to  handle  languages  in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  actually  written 
or  spoken,  the  intent  of  natural  proof  processing  is  to  handle  proofs  as  they 
are  actually  done  by  practicing  mathematicians.  In  general,  such  proofs  are 
presented  by  giving  a  sketch  of  the  main  line  of  argument  along  with  any  other 
mathematically  significant  information  that  might  be  needed  to  reconstruct 
the  proof  completely.  This  style  should  be  contrasted  with  the  derivations 
familiar  from  elementary  logic,  where  each  detail  is  presented  and  the  focus 
of  attention  is  on  syntactic  manipulations  rather  than  on  the  underlying 
semantics. 

A  major  aspect  of  the  problem  of  machine  understanding  of  natural 
proofs  is  finding  languages  that  permit  users  to  express  their  proofs  in  the 
fashion  described  above.  Such  languages,  in  turn,  must  find  their  basis  in  an 
analysis  or  model  of  informal  mathematical  reasoning.  Finding  these  natural 
proof  languages  should  be  compared  to  the  problem  of  finding  high-level 


283 


284  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

"natural"  or  "English-like"  programming  languages.  For  more  detailed  dis- 
cussions of  these  issues,  see  Blaine  and  Smith  (1977),  R.  L.  Smith  (1976),  and 
Smith  et  al.  (1975).  A  simple  example  of  understanding  informal  mathemati- 
cal reasoning  and  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  techniques  involved  follow. 

A  Student  Proof 

We  present  two  proofs  of  the  elementary  theorem 

Thm:  If  A  C  B,   then  -i(£  C  A) , 

where  "C"  indicates  proper  subset  and  "C"  indicates  subset 

First,  the  proof  is  given  in  the  informal  style  of  standard  mathematical 
practice: 

We  want  to  show  that  if  A  C  B,  then  ->(B  C  A). 

Assume  A  C  B.  We  show  ->(B  C  A)  by  indirect  proof.  Assume  that 
B  C  A.  Since  A  C  B,  then,  by  definition,  A  C  B  and  A  y^  B.  Since 
A  C  B  and  £?  C  A,  then  A  =  B.  But  this  is  a  contradiction  and,  hence, 
the  assumption  that  B  C  A  is  false.  Therefore,  ->(B  C  A). 

The  following  typescript  shows  how  one  student  did  the  proof  in  the 
EXCHECK  system.  Input  from  the  student  is  underscored  and  comments 
are  in  italics;  everything  else  is  generated  by  the  program.  The  program 
keeps  track  of  the  goal  that  the  student  is  currently  trying  to  establish;  the 
initial  goal  is  the  theorem  to  be  proved.  EXCHECK  indicates  acceptance  of 
an  inference  by  returning  the  top-level  prompt  "**";  if  a  suggested  inference 
is  not  acceptable,  EXCHECK  returns  an  error  message. 

Derive:    If  A  C  B  then  ^(B   C   A) 

**  hyp    (1)    **  A   C   B 

The  hypothesis  of  the  theorem  is  assumed.  The  goal  is  automatically  reset 
to  the  consequent  of  the  theorem. 

**  raa 

assume     (2)  **G  B   C   A 

The  student  begins  an  indirect  proof  (the  command  "raa"  is  a  mnemonic 
for  reductio  ad  absurdum).  The  program  assumes  the  negation  of 
current  goal.  The  goal  is  now  any  contradiction. 

**   ldef inition  Number  or  Name?      **  proper   subset 
1  Df .    proper   subset 

(3)    A   C   B  and  A  ^  B 

The  definition  of  proper  subset  is  applied  to  line  1. 


C8  EXCHECK  285 

**   2,3establish  **  B  =  A 

2.3  Establish 

(4)  B  =  A 

The  student  asks  the  theorem  prover  to  check  the  simple  set-theoretic 
inference. 

**  3 ,  Contradiction 
Using  **  ok 

3.4  Contradiction 

(5)  B  -i  C  A 

The  student  indicates  that  lines  3  and  4  lead  to  a  contradiction.  EXCHECK 
returns  the  negation  of  assumption  2. 

**  qed 
Correct 

EXCHECK  accepts  the  derivation. 

The  following  informal  review  printout  was  generated  by  the  program  from 
the  proof  given  in  the  above  typescript. 

Derive:    If  A   C   B  then  -.  (B   C   A) 

Assume    (1)    A   C   B 

By  raa  show:    -i(B   C   A) 

Assume    (2)    B   C   A 

From  1,    by  definition  of  proper   subset, 

(3)  A   C   B  and  A  ^  B 
From  2,3  it  follows   that, 

(4)  A  =  B 

3,4  lead  to  a  contradiction;  hence,  assumption  2  is  false: 

(5)  -.(B   C   A) 

Natural-inference  Procedures 

There  are  no  significant  structural  differences  between  the  detailed  infor- 
mal proof  and  the  student's  proof  as  presented  to  EXCHECK.  The  same  steps 
occur  in  the  same  relations  to  each  other.  Such  global  or  structural  fidelity  to 
natural  proofs  is  a  major  research  goal  of  the  EXCHECK  project  and  depends 
on  the  development  of  natural-inference  procedures.  Some  of  these,  such  as 
the  HYPOTHESIS  and  INDIRECT  PROOF  procedures  in  the  preceding  proof,  are 
familiar  from  standard  logical  systems.  The  procedure  used  in  the  applica- 
tion of  the  definition  of  proper  subset  to  line  1  is  called  IMPLIES.  It  is  used  to 
derive  results  that,  intuitively  speaking,  follow  by  applying  a  previous  result 
or  definition.  It  is  considerably  more  complex  than  the  inference  procedures 
usually  found  in  standard  logical  systems.  An  even  more  complex  natural- 
inference  procedure  in  the  preceding  proof  is  the  ESTABLISH  procedure.    In 


286  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

general,  ESTABLISH  is  used  to  derive  results  that  are  consequences  of  prior 
results  in  the  theory  under  consideration,  in  this  case,  in  the  theory  of  sets, 
eliminating  the  need  to  cite  specific  results  in  the  theory,  which  would  disrupt 
the  main  line  or  argument.  Both  IMPLIES  and  ESTABLISH  are  discussed  in 
more  detail  below. 

The  inference  procedures  in  EXCHECK  are  intended  not  only  to  match 
natural  inferences  in  strength  but  also  to  match  them  in  degree  and  kind. 
However,  there  are  differences.  EXCHECK  inference  procedures  must  always 
be  invoked  explicitly — in  standard  practice,  particular  inference  procedures  or 
rules  are  usually  not  cited  explicitly.  For  example,  compare  how  the  student 
expresses  the  inferences  that  result  in  lines  3  and  4  with  their  counterparts  in 
the  informal  proof.  The  explicit  invocation  of  inference  procedures  basically 
requires  that  two  pieces  of  information  be  given:  first,  the  inference  procedure 
to  be  used  and,  second,  the  previous  results  to  be  used — in  particular,  explicit 
line  numbers  must  be  used. 

Explicitness  is  not  disruptive  of  mathematical  reasoning.  Neither  is  the 
reduction  of  complex  inferences  to  smaller  inferences  nor  is  the  use  of  explicit 
line  numbers  disruptive,  in  the  sense  of  distracting  the  student  from  the  main 
line  of  the  mathematical  argument.  They  are  both  simple  elaborations  of 
the  main  structure.  However,  having  to  think  about  what  inference  rule  to 
apply  can  interrupt  the  main  line  of  argument.  The  success  of  a  system  for 
interactively  doing  mathematics  depends  crucially  on  having  a  few  powerful 
and  natural  inference  procedures,  with  clear  criteria  for  use,  that  are  sufficient 
to  handle  all  the  inferences. 

IMPLIES 

IMPLIES  is  used  to  derive  results  by  applying  a  previous  result  or  definition 
as  a  rule  of  inference  in  a  given  context.  This  form  of  inference  is  probably 
the  most  frequent,  naturally  occurring  inference.  While  the  basic  pattern  is 
simple,  the  refinements  that  must  be  added  to  the  basic  form  to  handle  most  of 
the  naturally  occurring  cases  result  in  a  computationally  complex  procedure. 
The  following  is  a  simple  example  of  the  basic  pattern: 

(i)    A  is  a  subset  of  B 

**  i  definition  (Name  or  Number)  **  subset 

(i)  (Vx)  (x  G  A  -h.  x  e   B)  . 

In  this  example,  the  student  directed  the  program  to  apply  the  definition  of 
subset  to  line  i  and  IMPLIES  generated  the  result:  (Vx)(x  GA^iG  B).  It 
is  important  to  note  that,  in  an  application  of  the  IMPLIES  procedure,  the 
student  indicates  what  axiom,  definition,  theorem,  or  line  to  apply  to  which 
lines,  and  the  IMPLIES  procedure  generates  the  formula  that  is  the  result  of 
the  inference. 


C8  EXCHECK  287 

The  IMPLIES  procedure  seems  to  correspond  closely  to  naive  notions  of 
inference,  in  that  logically  unsophisticated  but  mathematically  sophisticated 
users  can  use  it  very  well  after  seeing  the  basic  explanation  and  a  few  simple 
examples.  However,  the  IMPLIES  rule  does  have  a  fault.  It  is  a  purely 
logical  inference  procedure,  and  this  can  occasionally  cause  problems  for  users 
because  mathematicians  tend  to  think  in  terms  of  set-theoretic  rather  than 
logical  consequence.  The  following  discussion  of  the  ESTABLISH  rule  carries 
this  distinction  further. 

ESTABLISH 

The  following  example  of  a  simple  use  of  ESTABLISH  is  taken  from  the 
earlier  typescript,  in  which  the  student  was  trying  to  produce  a  contradiction: 

(2)  B  C  A 

(3)  A  C  B  and  A  7^  B 

**  2,3establish  **  B  =  A 


2,3  Establish 
(4)  B  =  A 

The  ESTABLISH  rule  allows  users  simply  to  assert  that  some  formula  is  an 
elementary  set-theoretic  truth  or  is  an  elementary  set-theoretic  consequence 
of  prior  results.  In  the  example  above,  ESTABLISH  is  used  to  infer  from  B  C  A 
(line  2)  and  A  G  B  (line  3)  that  A  =  B,  which  in  turn  contradicts  the  other 
clause  in  line  3.  A  =  B  is  a  set-theoretic  consequence,  but  not  a  logical 
consequence,  of  A  C  B  and  B  C.  A. 

If  ESTABLISH  handled  only  logical  consequence,  the  student  would  have 
had  to  cite  explicitly  the  relevant  set-theoretic  theorems  or  definitions  needed 
to  reduce  the  inference  to  a  purely  logical  inference.  This  is  not  only  disruptive 
of  the  line  of  argument  but  also  difficult  to  do.  Even  the  most  experienced 
logicians  and  mathematicians  have  difficulty  ferreting  out  all  the  axioms, 
definitions,  and  theorems  needed  to  reduce  even  simple  inferences  to  purely 
logical  inferences. 

All  of  the  examples  so  far  are  extremely  simple  if  considered  in  terms  of 
the  full  capabilities  of  the  ESTABLISH  procedure.  ESTABLISH  incorporates  a 
theorem  prover  that  can  prove  about  85%  of  the  first  200  theorems  in  the  set 
theory  course. 

Proof  Analysis  and  Summarization 

EXCHECK  contains  procedures  that  generate  informal  summaries  and 
sketches  of  proofs.  Such  analyses  and  summaries  are  useful  not  only  as  a 
semantic  basis  for  the  program,  to  understand  and  to  present  proofs  better, 


288 


Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education 


IX 


but  also  to  give  guidance  to  the  student,  as  illustrated  in  Figure  C8-1.  The 
summarization  procedures  analyze  the  proof  by  breaking  it  into  parts  (or  sub- 
proofs)  and  isolating  the  mathematically  important  steps.  They  also  permit 
a  goal-oriented  interpretation  of  the  proof,  in  which  the  program  keeps  track 
of  what  is  to  be  established  at  each  point  (i.e.,  the  current  goal);  which  lines, 
terms,  and  the  like,  are  relevant;  and  how  the  current  line  or  part  fits  into  the 
whole  structure.  MYCIN'S  consultation  explanation  system  (see  Article  VIII. Bl) 
takes  a  similar  approach.  Goldstein  (1977)  also  employs  summarization  tech- 
niques in  the  rhetorical  modules  of  the  WUMPUS  coach  (Article  IX.C5). 

The  summaries  presented  in  Figures  C8-1  and  C8-2  were  generated  by 
EXCHECK  from  a  student  proof  of  the  Hausdorff  maximal  principle.  The 
original  line  numbers  have  been  retained  (in  parentheses)  to  give  a  sense  of 
how  much  of  the  proof  has  been  omitted  in  the  summary.  In  Figure  C8-1, 
only  the  top-level  part  of  the  proof  is  presented;  the  proofs  of  its  subparts  are 
omitted.  All  mathematically  or  logically  insignificant  information  is  omitted. 
In  these  proofs  and  summaries,  "D  contains  E"  is  synonymous  with  "E  C  £)." 
Also,  C  is  a  chain  if  and  only  if  both  C  is  a  set  of  sets  and,  given  any  two 
elements  of  C,  at  least  one  is  a  subset  of  the  other.  Figure  C8-1  is  not  the 
only  summary  that  could  be  generated;  it  essentially  presents  only  the  main 
part  of  the  proof.  Subparts  of  the  main  part  could  have  been  included  or  even 
handled  independently  if  so  desired. 


Derive:    If  A  is  a  family  of   sets   then 

every  chain  contained  in  A  is   contained  in  some 
maximal   chain  in  A 


Proof 


Assume  (1)  A  is  a  family  of  sets 

Assume  (2)  C  is  a  chain  and  CCA 

Abbreviate:  {B:  B  is  a  chain  and  C  C  B  and  B  C  A} 

by:  C! chains 
By  Zorn's  lemma, 

(23)  C! chains  has  a  maximal  element 
Let  B  be  such  that 

(24)  B  is  a  maximal-element  of  C! chains 
Hence, 

(25)  B  is  a  chain  and  C  C  B  and  B  C  A 
It  follows  that 

(31)  B  is  a  maximal  chain  in  A 
Therefore, 

(32)  C  is  contained  in  some  maximal  chain  in  A 


Figure  C8-1.     Informal  summary  of  a  proof  of  the  Hausdorff  maximal 
principle. 


C8  EXCHECK  289 


Derive:    If  A  is  a  family  of   sets  then 

every  chain  contained  in  A  is   contained  in  some 
maximal  chain  in  A 
Proof : 

Use  Zorn's   lemma  to  show  that 

{B:    B  is  a  chain  and  C    C   B  and  B   C   A} 

contains  a  maximal  element  B.    Then  show  that  B  is   a 
maximal   chain  in  A  which  contains  C. 


Figure  C8-2.     An  example  of  summarization. 

The  proof-analysis  and  proof-summarization  procedures  will  also  generate 
the  summary  presented  in  Figure  C8-2,  which  is  an  attempt  to  sketch  the 
basic  idea  of  the  proof. 

The  summarization  presented  in  Figure  C8-2  was  obtained  from  the  ear- 
lier one  by  tracing  backward  the  history  of  the  maximal  chain  in  A  that  con- 
tains C.  That  is,  the  general  form  of  the  theorem  to  be  proved  is  (3x)FM(x), 
which  is  proved  by  showing  FM(t)  for  some  term  t.  Usually,  in  proofs  of 
this  form,  the  most  important  piece  of  information  is  the  term  t.  Tracing 
backward  in  this  particular  proof  yields  the  information  that  there  are  two 
terms  involved.  The  first  is  the  set  of  all  chains  in  A  containing  C,  and  the 
second  is  any  maximal  element  of  the  set  of  all  chains  in  A  containing  C. 

Elementary  Exercises  and  Dialogues 

Another  form  of  reasoning  done  by  students  is  the  solution  of  construction 
problems.  A  great  many  problems  in  elementary  mathematics  take  the  form 
of  asking  the  student  to  give  finite  objects  that  satisfy  certain  conditions.  For 
example,  given  the  finite  sets  A  and  B,  the  student  might  be  asked  to  give  a 
function  F  that  is  a  bijection  (i.e.,  one-to-one  and  onto)  from  A  to  B. 

For  a  large  class  of  construction  problems,  there  are  procedures  that  will 
generate  a  tree  of  formulas  and  other  information  from  the  original  state- 
ment of  the  problem.  We  call  such  trees  verification  trees  for  the  prob- 
lem. Essentially,  the  verification  tree  for  a  problem  constitutes  a  reduction 
of  the  original  (usually  not  directly  verifiable)  condition  to  a  collection  of 
directly  verifiable  conditions  (the  formulas  at  the  leaves).  These  trees  have 
the  property  that  the  failure  of  the  formula  at  a  node  in  the  tree  explains  the 
failure  of  formulas  at  any  of  its  ancestors.  Similarly,  the  failure  of  a  formula 
at  a  node  is  explained  by  the  failure  of  formulas  at  any  of  its  descendants. 

For  example,  in  the  problem  above  of  supplying  a  bijection  F  from  A 
onto  B,  suppose  that  the  student  forgets  to  specify  a  value  for  some  element 


290  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  EX 

of  A,  say,  3.  The  first  response  to  the  student  might  be:  "The  domain  of  F 
isn't  A"  The  student  might  then  ask,  "Why?"  The  program  would  then 
answer  (going  toward  the  leaves),  "Because  there  is  an  element  of  A  that 
has  not  been  assigned  a  value  in  B."  The  student  might  then  ask,  "Which 
one?"  Since  the  routines  that  evaluate  the  formulas  at  the  leaves  provide 
counterexamples  if  those  formulas  fail,  the  program  could  then  respond,  "3." 
Or  going  back  to  the  first  response  by  the  program  ("The  domain  of  F 
isn't  A"),  the  student  might  say,  "So?"  The  program  could  then  move  a  step 
toward  the  root  (the  original  statement  of  the  conditions)  and  say,  "Then  F 
is  not  a  map  from  A  into  5."  The  student  might  then  again  say,  "So?"  to 
which  the  program  could  respond,  "F  is  not  a  bijection  from  A  onto  B." 

The  highly  structured  information  in  the  verification  tree  provides  the 
semantic  base  for  a  dialogue  with  the  student  in  which  the  program  can  explain 
to  the  student  what  is  wrong  with  the  answer.  It  should  be  noted  that  more 
complex  forms  of  explanation  are  available.  In  particular,  the  program  could 
have  said  at  the  beginning,  "Because  3  is  not  given  a  value  by  F,  the  domain 
of  F  is  not  A  and  hence  F  is  not  a  bijection  from  A  onto  J5." 

Summary 

A  primary  activity  in  mathematics  is  finding  and  presenting  proofs.  The 
EXCHECK  instructional  system  attempts  to  handle  natural  proofs — proofs 
as  they  are  actually  done  by  practicing  mathematicians — instead  of  requiring 
that  these  proofs  be  expressed  as  derivations  in  an  elementary  system  of  first- 
order  logic.  This  objective  requires  the  analysis  of  inferences  actually  made 
and  the  design  and  implementation  of  languages  and  procedures  that  permit 
such  inferences  to  be  easily  stated  and  mechanically  verified.  Some  progress 
has  been  made  in  handling  natural  proofs  in  elementary  mathematics,  but 
there  is  a  considerable  amount  of  work  yet  to  be  done. 

References 

See  Blaine  and  Smith  (1977),  Smith  et  al.  (1975),  Smith  and  Blaine  (1976), 
and  Suppes  (1981). 


D.     OTHER  APPLICATIONS  OF  AJ  TO  EDUCATION 


THE  ICAI  programs  described  in  this  chapter  teach  various  subjects.  Learning, 
however,  does  not  always  require  teaching.  Here,  we  discuss  "learning  by 
doing"  and  how,  with  this  approach,  Artificial  Intelligence  can  help  construct 
learning  tools  and  provide  a  rich  learning  environment. 

Learning  by  Doing 

AI  research  has  struggled  repeatedly  with  the  complexity  of  so-called 
commonsense  knowledge  and  reasoning.  Yet  children  can  learn  many  compli- 
cated things  without  formal  schooling.  While  some  argue  that  much  of  this 
knowledge  (e.g.,  the  basic  structures  of  language)  is  innate,  the  great  diversity 
of  human  cultures  and  the  observability  of  the  learning  process  in  children 
suggest  that  children  actually  do  learn  on  their  own. 

Recent  work  in  developmental  psychology  has  underscored  how  very  dif- 
ferent this  kind  of  learning  seems  to  be  from  what  takes  place  in  schools. 
For  example,  Jean  Piaget  and  his  colleagues  have  amassed  evidence  that  the 
child's  activity  is  the  key — learning  must  take  place  by  "doing"  (Piaget,  1970; 
Piaget  and  Inhelder,  1969).  Accordingly,  some  educators  have  argued  that  this 
insight  ought  to  be  applied  more  in  schools  (see,  e.g.,  Ashton-Warner,  1963; 
Holt,  1964),  although  others  contend  that  it  is  fundamentally  incompatible 
with  formal  schooling  and  that  formal  schooling  should  therefore  be  abolished: 

The  totally  destructive  and  constantly  progressive  nature  of  obligatory 
instruction  will  fulfill  its  ultimate  logic  unless  we  begin  to  liberate  ourselves 
right  now  from  our  pedagogical  hubris,  our  belief  that  man  can  do  what 
God  cannot,  namely,  manipulate  others  for  their  own  salvation.  (Illich, 
1971,  p.  73) 

There  is  little  room  for  the  traditional  "teacher"  role  in  learning  by  doing, 
for  the  task  provides  its  own  feedback.  Hence,  the  basic  question  in  improving 
learning  efficiency  becomes;  What  are  good  things  for  students  to  "do"?  Any 
activity  is  in  some  sense  educational,  but  which  activities  pack  the  most  value? 
And  what  are  the  right  "powerful  tools"  to  give  them?  A  good  example 
is  "turtle  geometry,"  which  starts  from  the  notion  of  curvature  rather  than 
points  and  straight  lines  (Euclidean  geometry)  or  coordinate  systems  (analytic 
geometry)  and  results  in  a  "discovery-rich"  geometry  from  which  one  can  gain 
an  intuitive  notion  of  the  important  underlying  ideas  (like  number  theory  and 
topology)  relatively  quickly.  (See  Papert,  1980,  Chap.  2;  Abelson  and  diSessa, 
1981.) 


291 


292  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  IX 

The  Status  Quo  and  Why  AI  Can  Help 

Educators  occasionally  experiment  with  learning-by-doing  methods,  but 
there  are  major  hurdles  to  a  more  widespread  use  of  such  techniques: 

1.  A  lot  of  careful  thought  goes  into  good  "learning  environments,"  espe- 
cially into  figuring  out  the  real  basics.  A  good  example  is  arithmetic, 
as  demonstrated  by  BUGGY  (Article  DC.C7):  Arithmetic  has  a  set  of 
underlying  issues,  as  reflected  by  "bugs,"  that  should  be  addressed. 

2.  Such  environments  are  expensive.  "Doing"  is  only  rarely  compatible 
with  the  standard  educational  technology  of  paper  and  pencil. 

3.  Such  instruction  is  highly  individualized:  Students  cannot  be  rigidly 
controlled,  the  results  are  difficult  to  test,  and  the  curricula  are  hard  to 
standardize. 

Computers  and  AI  can  help  overcome  these  problems;  for  example, 

1 .  AI  can  help  build  a  theory  of  knowledge  for  a  domain — a  theory  of  what 
the  "basics"  are  (see  Papert,  1980,  Chap.  6). 

2.  Computer  and  AI  techniques  are  sufficiently  general  that  the  same 
resource  (the  computer  system)  can  serve  many  learning  needs,  thus 
reducing  the  cost  of  innovative  learning  environments. 

3.  Because  of  its  modeling  flexibility  and  power,  AI  provides  sophisticated 
approaches  to  accommodating  different  needs  within  a  single  (possibly 
mass-produced)  program. 

Thus,  the  computer  and  AI  may  help  make  previously  "utopian"  ideas  like 
Illich's  possible. 

AI  for  Learning  Resources 

This  brings  us  to  the  possibilities  of  AI  for  constructing  "powerful  tools" 
to  help  students  learn  by  doing  rather  than  by  "being  told."  (It  should  be 
noted  that  useful  computer-based  learning  tools,  e.g.,  turtle  geometry,  do  not 
necessarily  require  AI.) 

Consider  the  effect  of  removing  the  tutoring  components  from  SCHOLAR, 
SOPHIE,  or  EXCHECK.  (WEST  and  WUMPUS  would  not  be  AI  programs  if 
their  tutors  were  removed,  but  analogous,  more  interesting  and  complicated 
games  conceivably  would  be.)  There  might  actually  be  advantages  to  these 
truncated  systems.  Without  tutoring,  the  students  are  freer  to  experiment, 
not  having  to  worry  constantly  whether  they  are  "right"  or  "wrong."  No 
longer  bound  by  what  must  inevitably  be  a  narrow  perspective  of  effective 
system  usage,  they  can  "browse,"  leave  tasks  unfinished,  jump  between  unre- 
lated tasks,  and  so  on.  (The  GUIDON  system,  Article  DC.C6,  encourages  this 
kind  of  browsing.)    Suppose,  for  example,  that  students  were  allowed  to  go 


D  Other  Applications  of  AI  to  Education  293 

ahead  and  replace  the  wrong  component  in  SOPHIE's  "broken"  circuit;  the 
demonstration  that  the  measurements  from  the  supposedly  corrected  circuit 
are  nearly  unchanged  may  constitute  more  effective  feedback  than  any  ver- 
bal warning.  And  since  students  are  allowed  to  "do"  more  in  such  modified 
systems,  they  may  possibly  learn  more. 

These  examples  fall  short,  however,  in  two  respects.  First,  these  ICAI 
systems  were  not  designed  for  "nontutorial"  use,  and,  second,  they  emphasize 
right-wrong  distinctions  inconsistent  with  teacherless  learning.  Better  exam- 
ples are  operator-rich  "learning  environments"  like  LISP-based  LOGO  and  its 
best-known  application,  turtle  geometry  (Solomon  and  Papert,  1976), 
message-passing  SMALLTALK  (Kay  and  Goldberg,  1977)  and  its  constraint- 
resolving  extension  THINGLAB  (Borning,  1979),  and  Kahn's  actor-based 
DIRECTOR  animation  system  (Kahn,  1976).  In  all  of  these,  powerful 
programming-language  features  are  tied  to  sophisticated  graphics  facilities 
that  are  not  "frills"  for  motivational  incentives  but  are  central  to  the  system — 
a  means  for  presenting  complicated  ideas  in  the  most  efficient  and  accessible 
form.  Except  for  the  graphics,  these  systems  look  much  like  other  cooperative, 
interactive  AI  systems,  but  with  especially  good  tailoring  to  less  sophisti- 
cated users — with  informal  formats,  flexible  user-specifications,  and  a  care- 
fully thought-out  set  of  basic  operators. 

A  tutor  is  a  learning  resource,  and  "hybrids"  between  ICAI  ideas  and 
learning-by-doing  systems  are  possible.  For  instance,  AI  methods  like  parsing 
(see  Chap.  IV,  in  Vol.  i)  or  inductive  inference  (Chap.  XIV,  in  Vol.  Ill)  may  be 
exploited  to  check,  not  whether  the  student  is  right  or  wrong,  but  whether  his 
behavior  is  consistent  with  his  explicitly  defined  goals  (Miller  and  Goldstein, 
1977a;  Miller,  1979;  Rowe,  1978).  Thus,  a  very  broad  range  of  behavior  may 
be  allowed  the  student,  yet  tutorlike  comments  could  be  supplied  as  well. 

AI  Applied  to  Human  Reasoning 

One  suspects  that  the  more  a  student  can  "do"  in  a  learning-by-doing 
situation — that  is,  the  richer  and  more  lifelike  the  environment  is  for  him — 
the  better  he  will  learn;  the  role  of  the  student  in  a  computer-based  learning 
environment  should  be  mostly  that  of  "programmer."  The  richer  the  environ- 
ment becomes,  the  more  the  student  can  be  seen  as  an  integral  part  of  the 
system,  rather  than  as  an  appendage.  Since  we  claim  that  AI  ideas  can  be 
applied  to  modeling  human  reasoning  (see  Chap.  XI,  in  Vol.  Ill),  we  could  make 
general  reasoning  and  programming  methods  (e.g.,  modular  problem  decom- 
position, hierarchical  organization,  bugs,  recursive  problem  solving)  explicitly 
available  to  the  student  "programmer"  to  use  as  tools  to  manipulate  com- 
plex systems  (Papert,  1973,  1980,  Chaps.  3  and  5;  Howe  and  O'Shea,  1976). 
Students  can  learn  these  tools  and  carry  them  away  from  the  computer-based 
learning  environment.  Furthermore,  such  tools  can  be  applied  naturally  to 
many  things  having  nothing  to  do  with  computers  (see,  e.g.,  Austin,  1974: 


294  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education  DC 

Bamberger,  1974).  Thus,  thanks  to  AI,  we  can  teach  problem  solving  as  such 
more  effectively,  extending  Polya's  (1957)  approach. 

Applications  of  Education  to  AI 

Finally,  we  can  turn  the  tables  and  recognize  that  an  approach  to  learn- 
ing that  proves  to  be  particularly  effective  tells  us  something  itself  about  the 
structure  of  what  is  being  learned.  For  instance,  if  identifying  the  "bug  types" 
of  BUGGY  makes  it  easier  for  students  to  learn  arithmetic,  this  confirms  that 
BUGGY's  model  of  arithmetic  as  a  set  of  procedures  may  be  an  important 
insight  into  arithmetic  itself.  Similarly,  if  students  learn  mathematical  ideas 
better  with  turtle  geometry  than  with  Euclidean  or  Cartesian  geometry,  per- 
haps turtle  geometry  reflects  better  the  "deep  structure"  of  mathematics. 
Thus,  we  can  think  of  educational  applications  as  a  laboratory  for  testing  the 
epistemologies  of  various  domains,  including  AI  theories. 

References 

The  books  by  Abelson  and  diSessa  (1981)  and  Papert  (1980)  are  highly 
recommended.  See  also  Papert  (1972a,  1972b). 


Chapter  X 


Automatic  Programming 


CHAPTER  X:     AUTOMATIC  PROGRAMMING 


A.  Overview  /  297 

B.  Methods  of  Program  Specification  /  306 

C.  Basic  Approaches  /  312 

D.  Automatic  Programming  Systems  /  326 

1.  P SI  and  CHI  /  326 

2.  SAFE  /  336 

3.  The  Programmer's  Apprentice  /  343 

4.  PECOS/350 

5.  DEDALUS  /  355 

6.  Protosystem  I  / 

7.  NLPQ  /  370 

8.  LIBRA  /  375 


A.     OVERVIEW 


AUTOMATIC  PROGRAMMING  (AP)  is  the  automation  of  some  part  of  the 
programming  process.  As  an  application  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  AP  research 
has  achieved  some  success  with  experimental  systems  that  help  program- 
mers manage  large  programs  or  that  produce  small  programs  from  some 
specification  of  what  they  are  to  do  (besides  the  code  itself).  Such  specifica- 
tions could  be  examples  of  the  desired  input/output  behavior  or  a  "higher  level 
language"  specification  of  the  program,  for  example,  in  English.  However,  the 
importance  of  automatic-programming  research  in  AI  goes  well  beyond  even- 
tually relieving  the  plight  of  human  programmers.  In  a  sense,  all  of  AI  is  a 
search  for  appropriate  methods  of  automatic  programming. 

What  Is  Automatic  Programming? 

Programming  can  be  defined  as  specifying  the  method  for  doing  something 
the  computer  can  do  in  terms  the  computer  can  interpret.  In  the  simplest  case, 
programmers  code  the  steps  of  algorithms  they  want  the  machine  to  perform 
in  terms  of  its  hard-wired  primitives  for  adding,  subtracting,  and  moving 
numbers.  But  very  few  programmers  really  program  that  way  any  more.  With 
the  introduction  of  compilers — programs  that  translate  a  specification  of  an 
algorithm  from  a  higher  level  language  into  the  machine's  primitive  codes — 
programming  became  a  much  more  reasonable  task,  since  the  activity  took 
place  at  something  closer  to  the  human  level  than  it  did  with  the  primitive 
machine  code.  For  instance,  in  higher  level  languages,  normal  algebraic 
notation,  such  as  (N  +  4)2,  could  be  used  to  specify  what  is  a  substantially 
more  involved  procedure  at  the  primitive  level. 

The  first  step  toward  automatic  programming  was,  in  fact,  the  devel- 
opment of  compilers.  The  first  FORTRAN  compiler  was  even  billed  as  an 
"automatic  programming"  system  (Backus  and  Herrik,  1954;  Backus,  1958). 
To  reiterate,  then,  programming  is  the  process  of  specifying  what  is  to  be  done 
so  that  the  computer  can  do  it,  and  automatic  programming  uses  another 
program,  the  AP  system,  to  assist  in  this  process,  in  particular,  to  raise  the 
level  at  which  instructions  are  specified.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  AI  itself  can  be 
viewed  as  automatic  programming:  There  are  some  things  that  computers  just 
cannot  do,  like  flying.  There  are  others,  like  becoming  the  world-champion 
chess  player,  that  a  computer  might  do  if  we  could  find  a  way  of  specifying 
the  steps  to  winning  chess  games  (see,  however,  Chap.  II,  in  Vol.  i). 

There  is  a  connection  between  AI  and  AP  that  is  still  deeper  than  this 
similarity  of  goals.  At  the  core  of  AI  is  the  ability  of  programs  to  reason  about 


297 


298  Automatic  Programming  X 

what  they  do — to  reason  about  themselves  as  programs.  This  is  why,  for 
example,  the  ability  to  manipulate  programs  as  data  in  LISP  is  so  important 
(Chap.  VI).  And  the  ability  to  understand  and  reason  about  programs  is  the 
central  research  goal  of  automatic  programming — an  important  open  research 
problem  in  AI. 

Returning  to  the  more  practical  view  of  AP  systems  as  programs  that  help 
people  write  programs,  let  us  consider  how  the  AP  researchers  themselves 
define  the  field.  Since  most  of  the  research  was  begun  in  the  1970s,  it  is 
not  surprising  that  there  is  some  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the  definition, 
scope,  and  direction  of  the  endeavor.  One  definition  says  simply  that  AP 
is  something  that  will  spare  people  the  chores  of  programming  (Biermann, 
1976a).  Another  states  that  an  AP  system  carries  out  part  of  the  programming 
activity  currently  performed  by  a  human  in  constructing  a  program  written 
in  some  machine-executable  language,  given  the  definition  of  the  problem 
to  be  solved;  here,  the  essence  of  an  AP  system  is  that  it  assumes  some 
responsibilities  otherwise  borne  by  a  human  and  thereby  reduces  the  size  of 
the  person's  task  (Hammer  and  Ruth,  1979).  Yet  another  definition  states  that 
AP  means  having  the  computer  help  write  its  own  programs  (Heidorn,  1977). 
AP  is  the  application  of  a  computing  system  to  the  problem  of  effectively 
utilizing  that  system  or  another  computing  system  to  perform  a  task  specified 
by  the  user  (Balzer,  1973b). 

Other,  more  extensive  definitions  have  been  suggested.  One  definition 
(Balzer,  1973b)  rates  AP  systems  according  to  a  measure  of  merit,  which 
includes  the  following  factors: 

1.  The  time  and  effort  required  of  the  programmer  to  formulate  and  specify 
the  desired  program,  which  is  determined  in  part  by  the  system's  infor- 
mality, that  is,  the  degree  that  the  user's  statements  can  be  ambiguous  or 
incomplete;  its  language  level,  that  is,  the  degree  to  which  the  AP  system 
can  accept  specifications  in  a  terminology  natural  to  the  problem  area 
under  consideration;  and  its  execut ability,  that  is,  the  degree  to  which  the 
user  need  specify  only  what  is  wanted  rather  than  how  to  obtain  it; 

2.  The  efficiency  of  the  decisions  made  by  the  system  in  designing  the 
program  and,  consequently,  the  overall  efficiency  of  the  program  that  is 
produced  by  the  system; 

3.  The  ease  with  which  future  modifications  can  be  incorporated  into  the 
program; 

4.  The  reliability  and  ruggedness  of  the  program; 

5.  The  computer  resources,  including  time  and  memory,  required  by  the 
system  to  produce  that  program; 

6.  The  range,  as  well  as  the  complexity,  of  the  tasks  that  can  be  handled 
by  the  system. 


A  Overview  299 

Motivations  for  Automatic  Programming 

As  mentioned  above,  the  term  automatic  programming  in  the  early  days  of 
computing  meant  writing  a  program  in  a  high-level  language  (e.g.,  FORTRAN) 
and  having  a  compiler  transform  the  program  into  machine-language  code. 
At  that  time,  "real"  programming  referred  to  writing  a  program  in  machine 
or  assembly  language.  Today,  when  most  programming  is  done  in  high- 
level  languages,  AP  implies  programming  in  an  even  more  advanced  software 
environment. 

In  a  general  way,  the  forces  responsible  20  years  ago  for  FORTRAN  are 
still  the  pragmatic  reasons  for  developing  AP  systems  today.  Programmers 
were  burdened  with  the  need  to  specify  many  details,  with  the  need  to  keep 
track  of  the  many  relations  between  these  details,  and  with  a  programming 
environment  that  was  not,  perhaps,  natural  to  the  way  in  which  they  thought 
about  the  problem  they  were  writing  a  program  to  solve.  It  was  believed  that 
new  programming  environments  might  be  the  answer  and  that  the  software 
technologies  required  for  such  environments  might  be  feasible. 

The  situation  with  programming  environments  today  seems  even  more 
critical.  Software  is  costly  and  unreliable.  Much  time,  money,  and  effort  are 
currently  being  expended,  with  even  greater  expenditures  forecast.  Software 
is  seldom  produced  within  budget  or  on  time.  Quite  often  the  supposedly 
finished  product,  when  delivered,  fails  to  meet  specifications.  As  programming 
applications  of  increasingly  greater  complexity  are  addressed,  not  only  does 
reliability  become  more  difficult  to  achieve,  but  the  costs  of  software,  in  terms 
of  time,  money,  and  effort,  spiral  upward. 

To  help  alleviate  these  problems,  AP  aims  at  a  general  goal,  namely, 
to  restyle  the  way  in  which  the  programmer  specifies  the  desired  program. 
This  restyling  should  allow  the  programmer  to  think  of  the  problem  at  a 
higher  and  more  natural  level.  AP  would  like  to  relieve  the  programmer 
of  mundane  portions  of  programming,  that  is,  the  need  to  keep  track  of 
inordinate  amounts  of  detail.  By  improving  the  programming  environment, 
AP  could  allow  programmers  to  construct  with  greater  ease  and  accuracy  the 
programs  of  the  present  and  to  attempt  with  confidence  the  more  complex 
programs  of  the  future. 

Characteristics  of  AP  Systems 

Automatic  programming  research  in  AI,  then,  refers  to  systems  that 
assist  humans  in  some  aspect  of  programming.  Each  of  these  systems  has 
four  identifying  characteristics:  a  specification  method,  a  target  language,  a 
problem  area,  and  an  approach  or  method  of  operation. 

Specification  method.  Programming  involves  some  means  or  method 
for  conveying  to  the  computer  the  desired  program.  A  variety  of  specification 
methods  have  been  used  in  experimental  AP  systems. 


300  Automatic  Programming  X 

Formal  specification  methods  are  those  that  might  be  considered  to  be 
very  high  level  programming  languages.  In  general,  the  syntax  and  semantics 
of  such  methods  are  precisely  and  unambiguously  defined.  Formal  methods 
also  tend  to  be  complete;  that  is,  the  specification  completely  and  precisely 
indicates  what  it  is  that  the  program  is  to  accomplish,  though,  of  course,  the 
specification  may  not  indicate  the  form  of  the  program  or  how  the  program  is 
to  accomplish  its  task.  On  the  one  hand,  many  formal  specification  methods 
are  not  usually  interactive,  which  is  to  say,  the  system  does  not  interact 
with  the  user  to  obtain  missing  information,  to  verify  hypotheses,  or  to 
point  out  inconsistencies  in  the  specification.  For  example,  it  is  comparable 
to  the  passive  acceptance  of  a  program's  specification  by  a  compiler  of  a 
high-level  language  (e.g.,  FORTRAN).  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  some 
formal  specification  methods  that  are  interactive  (see  McCune,  1979,  which 
emphasizes  interactive,  formal  specification  techniques  as  a  natural  extension 
of  incremental  compiling). 

Specification  by  examples  is  simply  giving  examples  of  what  the  desired 
program  is  to  do — sufficient  examples  to  allow  the  AP  system  then  to  construct 
it.  The  specification  might  consist  of  examples  of  the  input/output  behavior  of 
the  desired  program,  or  it  might  consist  of  traces  of  how  the  program  processed 
the  input.  There  are  many  difficulties  involved  in  specification  by  examples 
(or  traces);  for  instance,  this  kind  of  specification  is  rarely  complete,  since  a 
few  examples  will  not  fully  describe  the  behavior  of  the  desired  program  in 
all  cases. 

Natural  language  (e.g.,  English)  is  another  method  of  specification.  The 
user  specifies  "in  so  many  words"  what  the  desired  program  is  to  do.  This 
method  is  often  interactive — checking  hypotheses,  pointing  out  inconsisten- 
cies, and  asking  for  further  information  (cf.  Articles  X.Dl  on  PSI  and  X.D7  on 
NLPQ). 

A  more  detailed  discussion  of  specification,  including  some  advantages 
and  disadvantages  of  the  various  methods,  is  presented  in  Article  X.B. 

Target  language.  The  language  in  which  the  AP  system  writes  the 
finished  program  is  called  the  target  language.  The  target  languages  of  the  AP 
systems  described  later  in  this  chapter  are  high-level  languages  such  as  LISP, 
PL/1,  and  GPSS.  In  other  words,  the  user  of  an  AP  system,  possibly  using 
examples  of  what  he  wanted  the  program  to  do,  would  expect  the  system  to 
produce  a  program  in,  say,  LISP  that  would  do  the  right  thing  on  the  examples 
he  used. 

Problem  area.  Another  characteristic  of  an  AP  system  is  its  problem 
area,  or  area  of  intended  application.  For  some  AP  systems,  the  scope  of 
the  problem  area  is  relatively  precise.  For  example,  for  the  NLPQ  system  it 
is  simple  queuing  problems,  whereas  for  the  Protosystem  I  project  it  is  all 
input/output-intensive  data-processing  systems  (including  inventory  control, 
payroll,  and  other  record-keeping  systems)  and  for  the  PSI  system  it  is  all 
symbolic  computation  (including  list  processing,  searching  and  sorting,  data 


A  Overview  301 

storage  and  retrieval,  and  concept  formation).  The  problem  area  of  a  system 
can  have  a  bearing  on  the  method  of  specification,  introducing  relevant  ter- 
minology, influencing  the  method  of  operation  or  approach  used  by  the  AP 
system,  and  so  forth. 

Method  of  operation.  Because  AP  is  a  young  research  area,  the  cate- 
gorization of  the  methods  used  by  existing  systems  is  difficult.  Article  X.C 
discusses  some  of  the  more  clear-cut  approaches,  including  theorem  proving, 
program  formation,  knowledge  engineering,  automatic  data  selection,  tradi- 
tional problem  solving,  and  induction. 

In  the  theorem-proving  approach,  the  user  specifies  the  conditions  that 
must  hold  for  the  input  data  (to  the  desired  program)  and  the  conditions  that 
the  output  data  should  satisfy:  The  conditions  are  specified  in  some  formal 
language,  often  the  predicate  calculus  (see  Article  III. CI,  in  Vol.  i).  A  theorem 
prover  is  then  asked  to  prove  that,  for  all  given  inputs,  there  exists  an  output 
that  satisfies  the  output  conditions,  and  the  proof  yields  as  a  side  effect  the 
desired  program  (Article  XII.A,  in  Vol.  III). 

The  program-transformation  approach  refers  to  transforming  a  specifica- 
tion or  description  of  a  program  into  an  equivalent  description  of  the  program. 
The  reason  for  the  transformation  might  be  to  convert  a  specification  that 
can  be  easily  written  and  read  into  one  that  is  more  complicated  but  more 
efficient;  alternately,  the  goal  might  be  to  convert  a  very  high  level  description 
of  the  program  into  a  description  closer  to  a  target-language  implementation. 

Knowledge  engineering,  applicable  to  many  areas  of  AI  besides  AP,  refers 
to  identifying  and  codifying  expert  knowledge  (see  Article  VILA),  and  it  often 
means  encoding  the  knowledge  as  specific,  rule-type  data  structures  that  can 
be  added  to  or  removed  from  the  knowledge  base  of  a  system  (Article  III.C4, 
in  Vol.  I). 

Traditional  problem  solving,  also  a  general  AI  technique,  refers  to  the  use 
of  goals  to  direct  the  choice  and  application  of  a  set  of  operators. 

These  approaches  overlap,  and  many  systems  utilize  a  method  that  may, 
in  part,  draw  on  elements  from  several.  While  it  is  hard  to  categorize  the 
approaches  of  AP  systems,  there  are  now  enough  systems  to  be  able  to  identify 
some  common  issues. 

Basic  Issues 

Partial  information  pertains  to  systems  whose  methods  of  specification 
allow  for  partial  or  fragmentary  descriptions  of  the  desired  program:  Not 
all  of  the  required  information  is  present  in  the  specification,  or,  where  it  is 
present,  it  may  not  be  explicit.  Systems  that  accept  incomplete  specifications, 
for  example,  natural-language  specifications,  are  very  much  concerned  with 
partial  information.  The  NLPQ,  PSI,  and  SAFE  systems  fall  in  this  category. 
A  classification  of  the  different  kinds  of  missing  information  that  might  occur 
in  a  natural-language  specification  is  given  in  Article  X.D2  on  SAFE. 


302  Automatic  Programming  X 

Usually  going  hand  in  hand  with  the  problem  of  partial  information  is 
the  problem  of  consistency.  Incomplete  methods  of  specification  often  permit 
inconsistency  between  different  parts  of  the  same  specification.  In  such  cases, 
the  system  must  check  for  inconsistencies  and,  if  they  are  found,  resolve  them. 

In  trying  to  fill  in  missing  information  in  one  part  of  the  specification  or 
checking  for  consistency  between  different  parts  and  resolving  any  discovered 
inconsistencies,  the  system  may  use  information  that  occurs  either  explicitly  or 
implicitly  in  other  parts  of  the  specification.  Also,  it  might  utilize  a  knowledge 
base  containing  information  about  the  problem  area.  Finally,  the  system  may 
consult  the  user  in  an  attempt  to  gain  the  sought- for  information.  One  of 
the  explicit  devices  for  making  use  of  such  information  is  constraints.  For 
examples  of  these,  see  Article  X.Dl  on  PSI  and  especially  Article  X.D2  on  SAFE. 

Transformation  is,  simply,  changing  a  program  description,  or  part  of 
a  program  description,  into  another  form.  All  AP  systems  use  transfor- 
mation, if  only  to  convert  an  internal  description  of  the  program  into  a 
target-language  implementation  (description).  Even  a  compiler  of  high-level 
languages  (e.g.,  FORTRAN,  PL/1,  ALGOL)  will  often  transform  a  program 
description  several  times,  taking  it  through  several  internal  representations, 
the  last  of  which  is  the  machine-language  description. 

However,  a  compiler  differs  from  an  AP  system  in  that  it  applies  the  trans- 
formations in  a  rigid,  predetermined  manner;  in  an  automatic-programming 
system,  the  application  of  transformations  may  depend  on  an  analysis  and 
exploration  of  the  results  of  applying  various  transformations.  Systems  that 
use  extensive  transformation  on  the  program  description,  like  DEDALUS  and 
PECOS,  have  a  knowledge  base  with  many  transformation  rules  that  convert 
parts  of  a  higher  level  description  into  a  lower  level  description,  closer  to  a 
target-language  implementation.  Such  rules  are  repeatedly  applied  to  parts 
of  the  program  description  with  the  goal  of  eventually  producing  descriptions 
within  the  target  language.  These  systems  develop  a  tree  of  possible  descrip- 
tions of  the  program,  with  each  descendant  of  a  node  being  the  result  of  a 
transformation.  One  of  the  goals,  then,  in  developing  the  tree  is  to  find  a 
description  that  is  a  target-language  implementation  of  the  desired  program. 
Another  goal  might  be  to  find  an  efficient  target-language  implementation. 

Other  AP  systems  may  use  transformation  rules  in  various  ways.  For 
instance,  in  the  NLPQ  system,  transformation  rules  parse  the  natural-language 
input  from  the  user,  to  generate  natural-language  output  to  the  user  and  to 
generate  the  target-language  program  from  an  internal  description. 

Efficiency  of  the  target-language  implementation  is  another  general  con- 
cern of  AP  systems.  The  two  systems  described  here  that  deal  especially  with 
this  issue  are  Protosystem  I  and  the  PSI  subsystem  called  LIBRA  (Article  X.D8). 
While  the  Protosystem  I  approach  to  creating  efficient  programs  combines 
AI  with  the  mathematical  technique  of  dynamic  programming,  the  LIBRA 
approach  uses  a  more  extensive  range  of  AI  techniques,  employing  a  variety 


A  Overview  303 

of  heuristics,  cost  estimates,  and  other  kinds  of  knowledge  to  guide  its  search 
for  an  efficient  program. 

When  it  is  said  that  an  AP  system  optimizes  a  program  for  efficiency,  it 
does  not  mean  that  the  system  finds  the  absolutely  most  efficient  implemen- 
tation; combinatorial  explosion  makes  such  a  task  impossible,  since  there  are 
usually  many  equivalent  target-language  implementations  of  any  program. 
Rather,  optimizing  means  making  some  reasonable  choices  in  the  implemen- 
tation to  achieve  a  relatively  efficient  program. 

The  basic  concern  of  one  of  the  systems  described  below,  the  Program- 
mer's Apprentice,  pertains  more  to  understanding  the  program  than  it  does 
to  the  issues  discussed  previously.  In  this  situation,  understanding  a  program 
might  be  defined  as  a  system's  being  able  to  talk  about,  analyze,  modify,  or 
write  parts  of  a  program.  It  is  the  intention  of  the  Programmer's  Apprentice, 
though  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  this  system  is  not  yet  operational,  to 
bring  about  program  understanding  through  the  explicit  use  of  plans.  A  plan 
represents  one  particular  way  of  viewing  a  program,  or  part  of  a  program  (for 
a  more  detailed  explanation,  see  Article  X.D3).  Understanding  in  the  other 
systems  is  relatively  implicit  and  does  not  reside  in  any  one  particular  class 
of  structure. 

Overview  of  AP  Research 

The  projects  described  in  Section  X.D  cover  much  of  the  current  research 
in  AP  and  span  the  four  basic  issues  discussed  above,  namely,  transformation 
rules,  search  for  efficiency,  handling  of  partial  information,  and  explicit  under- 
standing. 

NLPQ  is  the  first  AP  system  to  utilize  natural-language  dialogue  as  a 
specification  method.  The  user  specifies  part  of  a  simple  queuing-simulation 
problem  in  English,  and  then  the  system,  as  necessary,  answers  questions 
posed  by  the  user  and  queries  the  user  to  fill  in  missing  information  or  to 
resolve  inconsistencies.  The  partial  knowledge  that  the  system  has  obtained 
about  the  desired  program  is  represented  as  a  semantic  net  that  is  eventually 
used  to  generate  the  program  in  the  target  language,  GPSS.  Transformation 
rules  analyze  the  user's  natural-language  specification,  build  and  modify  the 
semantic  net,  produce  natural-language  responses,  and  finally  generate  the 
target-language  program. 

The  PSI  system  consists  of  many  subsystems;  it  stresses  the  integration 
of  a  number  of  different  processes  and  sources  of  knowledge.  The  problem- 
application  area  is  symbolic  (nonnumeric)  programming,  including  informa- 
tion retrieval,  simple  sorting,  and  concept  formation.  The  user  can  specify 
the  desired  program  with  a  mixture  of  examples  and  mixed-initiative,  natural- 
language  dialogue;  for  an  easier  and  more  natural  interaction  with  the  user, 
the  system  maintains  and  utilizes  a  tree  of  the  topics  that  occur  during  the 


304  Automatic  Programming  X 

specification  dialogue.  Through  such  a  dialogue,  PSI  creates  a  complete,  con- 
sistent description  of  the  desired  program.  In  the  last  phase,  the  system 
explores  repeated  application  of  transformation  rules  to  convert  the  descrip- 
tion into  a  target-language  implementation.  This  last  phase,  the  synthesis 
phase,  is  carried  out  by  two  subsystems:  PECOS  provides  suitable  transfor- 
mation rules  and  LIBRA  directs  and  explores  the  application  of  the  rules, 
with  the  goal  of  obtaining  an  efficient  target  implementation.  The  PECOS 
and  LIBRA  subsystems  are  described  separately  in  Articles  X.D4  and  X.D8. 

Both  PECOS  and  DEDALUS  are  examples  of  full-fledged,  dynamic  trans- 
formation systems.  They  each  start  out  with  a  complete  specification  of 
the  desired  program.  Each  has  a  knowledge  base  of  many  transformation 
rules  that  are  repeatedly  applied  to  the  specification.  These  repeated  applica- 
tions produce  a  sequence  of  specifications  that  eventually  terminate  with  a 
specification  that  is  a  target-language  implementation.  Because  more  than 
one  transformation  rule  can  apply  in  some  cases,  each  system  actually  devel- 
ops a  tree  of  specifications,  with  eventually  one  or  more  of  the  leaf  nodes  of 
the  tree  being  a  program  implementation  within  the  target  language.  Some  of 
the  differences  between  these  two  systems  stem  from  the  fact  that  DEDALUS  is 
concerned  with  the  logic  of  such  programming  concepts  as  recursion  and  sub- 
routine. On  the  other  hand,  PECOS  is  more  concerned  with  the  multiplicity 
of  implementations  of  very  high  level  programming  constructs  and  operations, 
because  that  is  its  task  within  the  PSI  system. 

The  SAFE  system  (Article  X.D2)  contains  an  extensive  description  of  con- 
straints and  their  use  in  handling  partial  information.  SAFE  processes  a 
variety  of  constraints  to  fill  in  different  kinds  of  information  in  the  specification 
of  the  desired  program  and  employs  different  methods  of  processing  these  con- 
straints. There  are  constraints  related  to  the  type  of  object  referenced  in  the 
specification,  as  well  as  some  related  to  sequencing  of  steps.  Constraints  are 
processed  by  backtracking  and  by  carrying  out  a  form  of  symbolic  execution. 

One  of  the  ideas  of  the  SAFE  project  is  that  a  completely  specified  pro- 
gram satisfies  a  very  large  number  of  constraints.  Information  in  the  user's 
partial,  fragmentary  specification  (partial  and  fragmentary,  since  the  specifi- 
cation does  not  mention  all  objects  explicitly,  or  partially  mentions  other 
objects  and  may  not  specify  explicit  sequencing  of  actions)  combined  with  the 
many  constraints  that  a  formal  program  satisfies  (and  possibly  with  informa- 
tion from  a  knowledge  base  of  the  application  area  or,  in  special  cases,  from 
information  obtained  from  queries  to  the  user)  fully  determine  a  complete  and 
formal  description  of  the  program.  No  other  system  deals  in  so  central  a  way 
with  partial  information  and  constraints. 

The  LIBRA  and  Protosystem-I  projects  are  concerned  with  the  efficiency 
of  the  target-language  implementation.  LIBRA  uses  an  AI  approach,  while 
Protosystem  I  uses  a  combination  of  some  AI  with  primarily  the  mathematical 
approach  of  dynamic  programming.     Dynamic  programming,   modified  by 


A  Overview  305 

approximations  and  heuristics,  produces  an  optimized  target-language  imple- 
mentation. On  the  other  hand,  LIBRA  guides  the  application  of  the  trans- 
formation rules  furnished  by  the  PECOS  subsystem  of  PSI  and  directs  the 
growth  of  the  resulting  tree  (see  the  discussion  of  PECOS,  above)  with  the 
goal  of  finding  an  efficient  target  implementation.  LIBRA  determines  and  uti- 
lizes estimates  of  what  it  is  likely  to  achieve  by  exploring  the  development 
of  a  particular  node.  LIBRA  has  knowledge  about  how  its  own  allocation 
of  space  and  time  should  influence  its  strategy  in  searching  for  an  efficient 
implementation.  Though  both  Protosystem  I  and  LIBRA  are  concerned  with 
producing  efficient  implementations,  they  approach  the  problem  in  different 
contexts.  The  first  explores  configurations  of  a  data-processing  program  and 
the  second  explores  applications  of  transformation  rules. 

The  Programmer's  Apprentice  is  not  necessarily  intended  to  write  pro- 
grams automatically  but,  instead,  to  function  as  an  apprentice  to  the  user, 
assisting  with  such  tasks  as  writing  parts  of  the  program,  checking  for  con- 
sistency, explaining  pieces  of  the  program,  and  helping  the  user  modify  pro- 
grams. The  central  concern  of  this  project  is  understanding,  through  the 
explicit  device  of  plans.  A  plan  may  be  thought  of  as  a  template  that  expresses 
a  viewpoint.  Matching  the  plan  to  a  part  of  a  program  description  corresponds 
to  understanding  the  part  in  that  way.  Several  plans  can  match  the  same  part 
of  a  program,  corresponding  to  different  ways  of  understanding  that  part. 
Plans  can  also  be  built  up  in  a  hierarchical  fashion.  The  goal  is  that  the 
Programmer's  Apprentice,  with  the  understanding  gained  through  plans,  can 
assist  the  programmer  in  correcting  mistakes,  writing  parts  of  the  program, 
and  making  modifications. 

All  of  these  are  still  research  projects:  Much  work  remains  before  most  of 
these  systems  can  be  of  use  to  programmers. 

References 

See  Balzer  (1973b),  Biermann  (1976a),  Green  (1975b,  1976b),  Green  and 
Barstow  (1977a),  Hammer  and  Ruth  (1979),  and  Heidorn  (1976,  1977). 


B.     METHODS  OF  PROGRAM  SPECIFICATION 

THE  MEANS  or  method  employed  to  convey  to  the  AP  system  the  kind  of 
program  the  user  wants  is  called  program  specification.  The  specification 
of  the  desired  program  might  entail  describing  the  program  fully  in  some 
formal  programming  language  or  possibly  just  specifying  certain  properties  of 
the  program  from  which  the  AP  system  can  deduce  the  rest.  Alternately,  it 
might  involve  providing  examples  of  the  input  and  the  output  of  the  desired 
program,  giving  formal  constraints  on  the  program  in  the  predicate  calculus, 
or  interactively  describing  the  program  in  English  at  increasing  levels  of  detail. 

Specification  by  Examples 

Some  simple  programs  are  most  easily  described  by  giving  examples  of 
what  the  program  is  supposed  to  do. 

Examples  of  input/output  pairs.  In  this  specification  method,  the 
user  gives  examples  of  typical  inputs  to  the  program  he  (or  she)  desires 
along  with  the  corresponding  outputs  he  expects.  Consider  describing,  to 
someone  who  is  unfamiliar  with  the  concept  of  concatenation,  a  program  that 
concatenates  two  lists.  It  might  be  most  straightforward  to  use  an  example, 

CONCAT[(ABC),  (DE)}  =  (ABODE), 

which  states  that  when  the  input  of  the  function  CONCAT  consists  of  the  two 
lists  (ABC)  and  (D E),  the  corresponding  output  is  (ABC DE). 

Given  certain  commonsense  assumptions,  this  sample  input/output  pair 
should  suffice  to  specify  what  it  is  that  the  desired  program  is  to  do.  In 
slightly  more  complicated  cases,  where  the  commonsense  assumptions  are  not 
sufficient,  more  examples  must  be  given  to  specify  the  program  uniquely.  For 
instance,  the  example  above  could  be  misinterpreted  as  a  "constant"  program 
that  always  gives  (ABC DE)  as  output: 

CONCAT[x,2/]  =  (ABCDE). 

In  such  a  case,  giving  an  additional  example 

CONCAT[(LM),  (NOP)}  =  (LMNOP), 

would  probably  clear  up  any  confusion. 

306 


B  Methods  of  Program  Specification  307 

Another  type  of  specification  by  examples  is  illustrated  by  the  following 
specification  of  the  function  PRIME  using  a  subset  of  its  input/output  pairs: 

PRIME(l)  =  1 
PRIME(2)  =  2 
PRIME(3)  =  3 
PRIME(4)  =  5 
prime(5)  =  7 
prime(6)  =  11. 

Generic  examples  of  input/output  pairs.  In  certain  cases,  generaliza- 
tions of  specific  examples,  or  generic  examples,  are  more  useful  in  avoiding  the 
problems  inherent  in  partial  specifications.  For  instance,  the  generic  example 

REVERSE [(x  1X2X3  .  .  .  xn)]  =  (xn  . .  .  X3X2X1) 

describes  a  list-reversal  function.  Here,  the  x\ ,  X2, . . . ,  xn  are  variables  and  the 
list  (X1X2X3  . . .  xn)  corresponds  to  any  list  of  arbitrary  length — a  generic  list. 
This  specification  is  still  partial  but  is  more  complete  than  any  specification 
of  this  function  given  by  nongeneric  examples  of  input/output  pairs. 

Specification  by  program  traces.  Traces  of  the  desired  program's 
operation  on  sample  data  allow  more  imperative  specifications  than  do  sample 
input/output  pairs  alone.  A  sorting  program,  for  example,  may  be  specified 
with  input/output  pairs  (e.g.,  Green  et  al.,  1974),  as  in 

SORT[(314  2)]  =  (12  3  4), 

but  it  would  be  hard  to  specify  a  program  that  specifically  uses,  say,  an 
insertion  sort  algorithm  in  the  same  way.  However,  a  program  trace  could 
express  such  a  program  as  follows: 

SORT[(314  2)]  -+  () 
(14  2) -(3) 
(4  2) -(13) 
(2) -(13  4) 
()-(1234). 

Another  example  of  specification  by  traces  might  be 

GCD(12,  18)  — 
(6,12)- 
(0,6)- 
6 


308  Automatic  Programming  X 

illustrating  the  operation  of  a  program  that  uses  the  Euclidean  algorithm  to 
compute  the  greatest  common  divisor.  An  example  of  using  a  trace  to  specify 
part  of  a  concept-formation  program  is  presented  in  Article  X.D1. 

More  formally,  a  trace  may  be  defined  as  follows.  A  programming  domain 
can  be  thought  of  as  consisting  of  a  set  of  abstract  objects,  a  set  of  possible 
representations  (called  data  structures)  for  these  abstract  objects,  a  basic  set 
of  operators  to  transform  these  representations,  and  a  class  of  questions  or 
predicates  that  can  be  evaluated  on  these  data  structures.  A  programming 
domain  thus  characterizes  a  class  of  programs  that  might  be  constructed  to 
operate  on  representations  of  the  set  of  abstract  objects  in  the  domain.  For 
a  given  program  operating  on  some  data  objects  in  the  domain,  a  trace  is  a 
sequence  of  changes  of  these  data  structures  and  control-flow  decisions  that 
have  caused  these  changes  during  execution  of  the  program. 

Traces  are  usually  expressed  in  terms  of  domain  operators  and  tests 
(or  functional  compositions  of  these).  Traces  are  classified  as  complete  if 
they  carry  all  information  about  operators  applied,  data  structures  changed, 
control  decisions  taken,  and  so  forth;  otherwise,  they  are  incomplete.  An 
interesting  subclass  of  the  latter  is  the  class  of  protocols,  in  which  all  data 
modifications  are  explicit  but  all  control  information  (e.g.,  predicate  evalua- 
tions that  determine  control  flow)  is  omitted.  A  protocol  is  then  a  sequence 
of  data-structure  state  snapshots  and  operation  applications  (for  a  more  com- 
plete definition,  see  Article  X.C). 

Generic  traces.  Like  generic  examples  of  input/output  pairs,  generic 
traces  of  program  operation  can  be  used  for  specification.  In  general,  there  is  a 
whole  spectrum  of  trace  specifications  for  a  given  program,  depending  on  how 
much  imperative  information  and  descriptive  information  is  presented.  For 
instance,  the  traces  above  are  completely  descriptive,  while  traces  that  contain 
function  applications  or  sequencing  information  tend  to  be  more  imperative. 

Advantages  and  disadvantages  of  specification  by  examples.  As 
stated  above,  generic  examples  are  less  ambiguous  than  are  nongeneric  exam- 
ples. Traces  are  less  ambiguous  than  input/output  pairs  and  allow  some 
imperative  specification  of  the  flow  of  control.  On  the  other  hand,  to  specify  a 
trace,  the  user  must  have  some  idea  of  how  the  desired  program  is  to  function. 

Specification  by  examples  can  be  natural  and  easy  for  the  user  to  for- 
mulate (Manna  and  Waldinger,  1977).  Examples  have  the  limitations  inherent 
in  informal  program  specifications:  The  user  must  choose  examples  so  as  to 
specify  unambiguously  the  desired  program.  The  AP  system  must  be  able  to 
determine  when  the  user's  specification  is  consistent  and  complete  and  that 
the  system's  "model"  of  what  the  user  wants  is  indeed  the  right  program. 

Formal  Specifications 

Formal  methods  of  specifying  programs  are  often  used  in  conjunction  with 
the  theorem-proving-based  approach  to  AP  (Article  X.C;  see  also  Article  III.Cl, 


B  Methods  of  Program  Specification  309 

in  Vol.  i).  Here  one  might  specify  a  program  as 

V«i.(P(«i)Dl|.fl(«i,<i)),  (1) 

which  states  that  for  all  values  of  input  variables  to  the  program,  si ,  for  which 
the  predicate  P(s\)  is  true,  there  are  output  variables,  82,  such  that  Q(s\,  82) 
is  true.  The  input  predicate  (or  input  specification)  P(s\)  gives  the  conditions 
that  the  inputs,  Si,  can  be  expected  to  satisfy  at  the  beginning  of  program 
execution.  The  output  predicate  Q(s2)  gives  the  conditions  that  the  outputs, 
S2,  of  the  desired  program  are  expected  to  satisfy. 

For  example,  a  program  that  computes  the  greatest  common  divisor  of 
two  integers  x  and  y  might  be  specified  by  taking  P(x,  y)  as  the  condition 
that  x  and  y  are  positive,  and  Q(x,  y,  z)  as  the  condition  that  z  is  the  greatest 
common  divisor.  P(x,  y)  could  be  written  as 

x  >  0     and     y  >  0 , 

and  Q(x,  y,  z)  could  be  written  as 

DIVIDE(z,  x)  and  DIVIDE^,  y)  and 

Vr.  ((r  >  0  and  DIVIDE(r,  x)  and  DIVIDE(r,  y))  D  z  >  r) ; 

that  is,  z  divides  both  x  and  y  and  any  r  that  also  divides  them  is  smaller 
than  z. 

Substituting  these  values  for  the  predicates  P  and  Q  in  expression  (1) 
would  produce  a  formula  stating  that  for  all  positive  integers  x  and  y,  there 
is  a  z  such  that  z  is  their  greatest  common  divisor.  This  expression  would 
then  be  given  to  a  theorem  prover  that  produces  a  proof  of  the  statement 
from  which  a  program  can  be  extracted  as  a  side  effect  (see  Chap.  XII,  in 
Vol.  III).  One  is  required  to  give  to  the  theorem  prover  enough  facts  concerning 
any  predicates  and  functions  that  occur  in  P  and  Q  so  that  expression  (1)  is 
provable.  Thus,  in  the  above,  one  would  have  to  specify  a  number  of  facts 
concerning  the  predicates  DIVIDE,  <,  and  >  over  the  integers. 

A  similar  method  of  specification  is  used  with  the  program-transformation 
and  very  high  level  language  approaches  to  AP  (see  Article  X.c).  This  specifica- 
tion method  stresses  the  use  of  entities  that  are  not  immediately  imple- 
mentable  on  a  computer,  or  at  least  not  implementable  with  some  desired 
degree  of  efficiency.  There  is  considerable  leeway  in  this  classification.  For 
instance,  in  some  program-transformation  systems  the  entities  may  be  quite 
abstract,  without  any  hint  of  the  desired  algorithm.  In  other  systems,  the 
algorithm  most  naturally  suggested  by  the  specification  of  the  program  could 
be  inefficient,  but  the  AP  system  will  produce  an  efficient,  if  perhaps  con- 
voluted, program. 

One  example  of  a  specification  in  program  transformation  is 

GCD(x,  y):   compute  MAX{z:   DIVIDE^,  x)  and  DIVIDE^,  y)} 

where  x  and  y  are  nonnegative  integers  greater  than  zero. 


310  Automatic  Programming  X 

This  expression  states  that  the  greatest  common  divisor  of  x  and  y  is  the 
maximum  of  all  those  z  such  that  z  divides  x  and  y.  Furthermore,  it  is 
assumed  that  x  and  y  are  nonnegative  integers,  one  of  which  is  nonzero.  By 
successive  transformations  of  this  definition  of  GCD,  the  system  would  produce 
an  efficient  recursive  program  (see  Article  X.D5).  Another  example  (Darlington 
and  Burstall,  1973,  p.  280)  is 

FACTORIAL(x):   if  (x  =  1)  then  1  else  TIMES(x,  FACTORIAL^  -  1))  . 

The  system,  then,  by  various  transformations  produces  a  more  efficient  non- 
recursive,  though  more  tortuous,  program. 

Advantages  and  disadvantages  of  formal  specifications.  Specifi- 
cation by  input  and  output  predicates  based  on  formal  logic  is  completely 
general:  Anything  can  be  specified.  On  the  other  hand,  the  user  must  have 
a  sufficient  understanding  of  the  desired  behavior  of  the  program  to  give  a 
complete,  formal  description  of  the  input  and  output.  This  understanding  can 
sometimes  be  difficult  to  attain,  even  for  simple  programs.  Also,  the  present 
state  of  theorem  provers  and  problem-reduction  methods  makes  synthesis  of 
longer  programs  difficult. 

The  second  type  of  formal  specification,  which  is  used  with  the  program- 
transformation  approach,  does  not  have  such  arbitrary  generality.  However, 
the  terminology  in  the  specification  often  is  closer  to  our  way  of  thinking  about 
a  particular  subject,  and  so  it  should  be  easier  to  create  such  specifications. 

While  some  formal  methods  are  arbitrarily  general  and  others  are  not, 
they  all  are  complete:  The  specification  of  the  desired  program  fully  and 
completely  specifies  what  the  program  is  to  do.  This  is  not  true  of  some 
of  the  other  methods,  like  specification  by  examples,  where  the  specification 
does  not  uniquely  determine  what  the  program  is  to  do.  With  such  methods  it 
becomes  a  concern  whether  the  program  produced  by  the  system  is  actually 
what  the  user  desires.  Sometimes  a  system  employing  such  a  specification 
method  may  need  to  verify  whether  the  program  it  produces  is  the  program 
that  the  user  wants  (see  Sibel,  Furbach,  and  Schreiber,  1978). 

Natural- language  Specifications 

Given  an  appropriate  conceptual  vocabulary,  English  descriptions  of  algo- 
rithms are  often  the  most  natural  method  of  specification.  Part  of  the  reason  is 
that  natural  language  allows  greater  flexibility  in  dealing  with  basic  concepts 
than  do,  say,  very  high  level  languages.  This  flexibility  requires  a  fairly 
sophisticated  representational  structure  for  the  model,  with  capabilities  for 
representing  the  partial  (incomplete)  and  often  ambiguous  descriptions  that 
users  provide.  In  addition,  it  may  be  necessary  to  maintain  a  database 
of  domain-dependent  knowledge  for  certain  applications.  Experience  with 
implemented  systems,  such  as  SAFE  (Article  X.D2),  suggests  that  the  relevant 


B  Methods  of  Program  Specification  311 

issues  are  not  in  the  area  of  natural-language  processing  but  in  how  the 
specifications  are  modeled  in  the  system  and  what  "programming  knowledge" 
the  system  must  have. 

Specification  by  Mixed-initiative  Dialogue 

A  generalization  of  the  entire  concept  of  program  specification  involves  an 
interaction  between  the  user  and  the  system  as  the  system  builds  a  model  of 
what  the  user  wants  and  tries  to  fill  in  the  details  of  the  algorithm.  In  addition 
to  maintaining  a  model  of  the  algorithm,  interactive  systems  sometimes  will 
even  maintain  a  kind  of  model  of  the  user  to  help  the  system  tailor  the 
dialogue  to  a  particular  user's  idiosyncracies.  Various  techniques  mentioned 
previously,  such  as  examples  or  traces,  could  be  incorporated  into  the  dialogue 
as  a  description  of  some  part  of  the  algorithm.  The  system  might  be  designed 
to  allow  users  to  be  as  vague  or  ambiguous  as  they  please  in  the  initial 
specification,  since  it  ultimately  takes  the  initiative  and  asks  enough  questions 
to  fill  in  the  model. 

This  method  is  probably  the  closest  to  the  usual,  natural  method  of  pro- 
gram specification,  allowing  both  the  specifier  and  the  programmer  to  make 
comments  and  suggestions.  Users  do  not  have  to  keep  every  detail  in  mind,  nor 
need  they  present  the  specification  in  a  certain  order.  The  system  will  even- 
tually question  the  user  for  missing  details  or  ambiguous  specifications.  On 
the  other  hand,  this  method  requires  a  system  that  deals  with  many  problems 
of  natural-language  translation,  generation,  and  representation.  A  versatile 
representation  is  also  required  for  the  system's  model  of  the  desired  program. 

The  PSI  system  (Article  X.Dl)  and  the  NLPQ  system  (Article  X.D7)  explore 
interactive  program  specification.  Floyd  (1972)  and  Green  (1977)  give  hypo- 
thetical dialogues  with  such  a  system,  illustrating  the  problems  that  research- 
ers have  encountered  with  this  approach. 

References 

See  Biermann  (1976a)  and  Heidorn  (1977). 


C.     BASIC  APPROACHES 


THIS  ARTICLE  describes  the  basic  approaches  of  automatic-programming 
systems  to  synthesizing  desired  programs  from  user  specifications.  There  is 
not  always  a  clear  distinction  between  synthesis  and  specification  paradigms. 
Furthermore,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  articles  in  Section  X.D  describing  important 
AP  systems,  some  follow  primarily  one  approach,  while  others  have  more 
elaborate  paradigms  that  involve  several  approaches. 

Theorem  Proving 

The  theorem-proving  approach  is  appropriate  for  the  synthesis  of  pro- 
grams whose  input  and  output  conditions  can  be  specified  in  the  formalism 
of  the  predicate  calculus.  As  described  in  Article  X.B,  the  user  specifies  the 
desired  program  as  an  assertion  to  be  proved,  which  might  take  the  following 
form  (Green,  1969): 

VSl.(P(5l)  D  3s2.Q(Sl,s2)), 

where  P  is  a  condition  that  the  input  variables  to  the  program,  Si,  will 
satisfy  and  Q  is  the  predicate  that  the  output  variables,  52,  are  to  satisfy 
after  execution.  The  theorem  prover  must  also  have  enough  axioms  about 
any  other  predicates  appearing  in  this  expression  to  be  able  to  prove  it. 

The  desired  program  is  extracted  as  a  by-product  of  the  proof  produced 
by  the  theorem  prover.  For  instance,  certain  constructs  in  the  proof  will 
produce  conditional  statements,  others  will  give  sequential  statements,  and 
occurrences  of  induction  axioms  may  produce  loops  or  recursion.  There  are 
several  variant  methods  of  accomplishing  these  results  (see  Waldinger  and 
Levitt,  1974;  Kowalski,  1977;  Clark  and  Sickel,  1977). 

Although  any  interesting  example  would  be  far  too  long  to  work  out  in  full 
detail  here,  it  may  be  worthwhile  to  show  how  such  a  problem  is  set  up.  The 
interested  reader  is  referred  to  Green  (1969)  for  a  more  complete  development 
of  the  following  example.  Consider  the  very  simple  problem  of  sorting  in  LISP 
the  dotted  pair  of  two  distinct  numbers  (see  Article  VI. B  on  LISP).  The  axioms 
about  LISP  expressions  that  would  prove  useful  for  this  synthesis  would  be: 

1.  x  =  CAR(CONS(x,  y)) 

2.  y  =  CDR(CONS(z,  y)) 

3.  x  =  NIL   D   COND(x,  y,  z)  =  Z 

4.  x  ?£  NIL   D   COND(x,  y,z)  =  y 

5.  Vx,  y.  (LESSP(x,  y)  7^  NIL  =  x  <  y) . 

312 


C  Basic  Approaches  313 

The  specification  of  the  desired  sorting  program,  that  is,  the  theorem  to 
be  proved,  would  be: 

Vx.  3y.  [CAR(x)  <  CDR(x)  D  y  —  x]  A 

[CAR(x)  >  CDR(x)  D  CAR(x)  =  CDR(y)  A  CDR(x)  =  CAR(y)}  , 

which  says  that  for  every  dotted-pair  input,  x,  there  is  a  dotted-pair  output, 
y,  such  that  if  x  is  already  sorted,  then  y  is  the  same  as  x,  and  if  x  is  not 
sorted,  then  y  is  the  interchange  of  the  two  elements  of  x.  Using,  for  example, 
a  resolution  theorem  prover  (see  Article  XII. B,  in  Vol.  Ill),  we  would  obtain  the 
following  program: 

y  =  COND(LESSP(CAR(x),  CDR(x)),  x,  CONS(CDR(x),  CAR(x)))  . 

One  of  the  major  problems  that  synthesizing  less  trivial  programs  intro- 
duces is  that  some  form  of  iteration  or  recursion  is  required.  To  form  a 
recursive  program,  one  needs  the  proper  induction  axioms  for  the  problem. 
A  general  schema  for  the  induction  axiom  sufficient  for  most  programs  is  that 
of  Green  (1969): 

[P(/i(NIL),  NIL)  A  Vx.  [ATOM(x)  A  P(/i(CDR(x)),  CDR(x))  D  P{h(x),  x)]] 

DVz.[P(h(z),z)], 

where  P  is  any  predicate  and  h  is  any  function.  Somehow,  this  predicate 
and  function  must  be  determined.  Requiring  the  user  to  supply  the  induc- 
tion axioms  for  each  program  to  be  synthesized  somewhat  defeats  the  pur- 
pose of  automating  the  synthesis,  since  it  might  be  a  lot  easier  to  specify 
the  entire  program  some  other  way.  Because  having  the  system  randomly 
generate  induction  axioms  until  one  of  them  works  is  out  of  the  question, 
combinatorially,  AP  systems  with  this  approach  usually  attempt  to  determine 
P  and  h  by  means  of  various  heuristics  that  limit  search  (see  Chap.  II,  in 
Vol.  I). 

There  are  several  constraints  inherent  in  the  theorem-proving  approach. 
First,  for  more  complicated  programs,  it  is  often  more  difficult  to  specify 
correctly  the  input  and  output  predicates  of  the  program  in  the  predicate 
calculus  than  it  is  to  write  the  program  itself.  Second,  the  domain  must  be 
axiomatized  completely;  that  is,  one  must  give  enough  axioms  to  the  theorem 
prover  to  make  it  possible  for  any  statement  that  is  true  of  the  various  func- 
tions and  predicates  in  the  specification  of  the  program  to  actually  be  proved 
from  the  axioms — otherwise,  the  theorem  prover  may  fail  to  produce  a  proof 
and  thereby  fail  to  produce  the  program.  Third,  present  theorem  provers 
lack  the  power  to  produce  proofs  for  the  specification  of  very  complicated 
programs. 

It  should  be  noted  that  this  approach  does  not  lend  itself  to  partial 
specification:  Users  cannot  specify  the  program  partially  and  have  the  sys- 
tem help  them  fill  in  details.    On  the  other  hand,  when  a  theorem  prover 


314  Automatic  Programming  X 

does  succeed  in  producing  a  proof  of  the  specification,  the  correctness  of 
the  extracted  program  is  guaranteed.  Thus,  AP  systems  might  incorporate 
theorem  proving  either  where  it  is  convenient  or  where  correctness  is  an  impor- 
tant requirement. 

The  Program-transformation  Approach 

The  transformation  approach  is  suitable  for  converting  automatically  an 
easily  written,  easily  understood  program  into  a  more  efficient,  but  perhaps 
convoluted  program.  One  such  system,  described  by  Darlington  and  Burstall 
(1973),  removes  recursion,  eliminates  redundant  computation,  expands  proce- 
dure calls,  and  takes  discarded  list  cells  into  use. 

Recursion  removal  transforms  a  recursive  program  into  an  iterative  one, 
which  is  generally  more  efficient,  avoiding  the  overhead  of  the  stacking  mech- 
anism. Candidates  for  recursion  removal  are  determined  by  performing  pat- 
tern matching  of  the  parts  of  the  program  against  a  recursive-schema  input 
pattern.  If  the  match  is  successful  and  if  certain  preconditions  are  met,  the 
program  is  replaced  by  an  iterative  schema.  A  simple  example  of  such  a 
transformation  rule  is  the  following: 

input  pattern:  f(x):  if  a  then  b  else  h(d,  /(e)) ; 

precondition:  h  is  associative,  x  does  not  occur  free  in  h ; 

result  pattern:  f(x):  if  a 

then  result  <—  b 
else  begin 
result  <—  d ; 
x  <—  e; 
while  not  a 
do  begin 

result  +—  h  (result, d); 
x  «—  e 
end; 
result  <—  h  (result, b) 
end 

where  a,  6,  d,  e,  /,  and  h  in  the  input  pattern  are  matched  against  arbitrary 
expressions  in  the  candidate  functions.  For  example,  the  function 

FACTORIAL(x):   if  (x  =  1)  then  1  else  TIMES(x,  FACTORIAL^  -  1)) 

would  match  the  above  input  pattern  with  /  <—  FACTORIAL,  a  <—  (x  =  1), 
b  <—  1,  h  <—  TIMES,  d  <—  x,  and  e  <—  (x  —  1). 

Eliminating  redundant  computations  includes  traditional  subexpression 
elimination  as  well  as  combining  loops  that  iterate  over  the  same  range. 


C  Basic  Approaches  315 

Implicit  iteration  is  part  of  the  latter.  Thus,  if  A,  B,  and  C  are  represented 
as  linked  lists,  the  sequence 

X  +-  INTERSECTION^,  B) 
Y  «-  INTERSECTION^,  C) , 

is  really  two  implicit  iterations,  each  over  the  set  A.  A  suitable  transformation 
rule  would  convert  these  into  a  single  iteration  over  the  set  A. 

Expanding  procedure  calls  generally  involve  substituting  the  body  of  a 
procedure  for  each  of  the  calls  to  it.  The  potential  benefit  arises  from  simpli- 
fications made  possible  by  use  of  the  local  context.  This  technique  is  the 
starting  point  for  a  general  class  of  transformations  explored  by  Burstall  and 
Darlington  (1975)  and  Wegbreit  (1975a). 

Program  transformation  also  converts  very  high  level  specifications  into 
target-language  implementations  (see  Articles  X.D4  and  X.D5). 

Knowledge  Engineering 

AP  systems  are  said  to  be  knowledge  based  when  they  are  built  by  iden- 
tifying the  knowledge  or  expertise  that  is  appropriate  for  program  synthesis 
and  understanding  (i.e.,  the  ability  to  manipulate  and  analyze  programs) 
and  by  encoding  this  knowledge  explicitly  in  some  knowledge  representation. 
Many  of  these  systems  use  large  amounts  of  many  kinds  of  knowledge  to 
analyze,  modify,  and  debug  large  classes  of  programs.  While  the  distinction  is 
relative,  it  is  possible  to  divide  this  knowledge  into  two  types:  programming 
knowledge  and  domain  knowledge. 

Programming  knowledge  includes  both  programming-language  knowledge 
about  the  semantics  of  the  target  language  in  which  the  system  will  write 
the  desired  program  and  general  programming  knowledge  about  such  general 
computation  mechanisms  as  generators,  tests,  initialization,  loops,  sorting, 
searching,  and  hashing.  Programming  knowledge  includes  optimization  tech- 
niques, high-level  programming  constructs  (loops,  recursion,  branching),  and 
strategy  and  planning  techniques. 

Domain  knowledge  is  the  information  required  for  a  system  to  infer  how 
to  go  from  the  problem  description  or  specification  of  a  program  in  a  certain 
program  class  (e.g.,  symbolic  computation)  to  what  needs  to  be  done  to 
solve  the  problem.  This  know-how  includes  how  to  structure  the  concepts 
in  the  domain  or  problem  area  and  find  their  interrelationships.  It  must  also 
include  knowledge  about  how  to  achieve  certain  results  in  the  problem  domain 
(cf.  HACKER's  learning  of  procedures,  Article  XIV.D5c,  in  Vol.  III).  Moreover, 
it  should  be  able  to  find  alternative  ways  to  define  the  problem  and  to  solve 
the  task — such  knowledge  represents  an  "understanding'1  of  the  domain. 

Knowledge-based  systems  need  a  method  of  reasoning.  Since  they  are  not 
restricted  to  the  traditional  formalisms  of  logic,  they  often  supply  their  own 


316  Automatic  Programming  X 

flexible  reasoning  techniques  for  guiding  the  synthesis.  Some  of  these  tech- 
niques are  inference,  program  simplification,  illustration  and  simplification  for 
the  user,  decision  trees,  problem-solving  techniques,  and  refinement. 

The  basic  concern  in  representing  the  knowledge  is  that  it  be  structured 
in  such  a  way  that  the  search  for  relevant  facts  not  cause  a  combinatorial 
explosion.  Various  appropriate  representations  include — 

1.  PLANNER-like  procedural  experts  (Article  VI.C2); 

2.  Refinement  rules  (Article  X.D4); 

3.  Modular,  frame-like  experts  (OWL,  Martin,  1974;  BEINGS,  Lenat,  1975); 

4.  Semantic  nets  (Article  X.D7); 

5.  Amorphous  systems  that  try  several  ad  hoc  techniques  (BiggerstafT,  1976). 

Methods  of  accessing  knowledge  bases  include — 

1.  Pattern  invocation  (Article  X.D4); 

2.  "When  needed"  (Sussman,  1975); 

3.  Frame  relations  and  assertions,  including  filling  in  process  models  (Mar- 
tin, 1974;  Green,  1969;  Lenat,  1975;  see  Articles  X.D7,  X.D1,  and  X.D2); 

4.  Subgoal  or  case  analysis  (Green,  1977;  see  Article  X.D5). 

Automatic  Data- structure  Selection 

Automatic  data-structure  selection  refers  to  the  selection  of  efficient,  low- 
level  data-structure  implementations  for  a  program  specified  in  terms  of  high- 
level,  abstract  information  structures  (e.g.,  sets,  real  numbers).  Generally, 
programming  languages  with  abstract  data  types  employ  default  implemen- 
tations that  are  a  compromise  between  all  likely  uses  of  the  data  type;  these 
choices  may  be  far  from  efficient  in  any  particular  program.  But  a  system 
with  automatic  data  selection  would  choose,  from  a  collection  of  possible 
implementations,  one  that  is  most  efficient  for  the  particular  program  under 
consideration. 

For  example,  the  abstract  data-type  set  could  be  represented  in  low-level 
implementations  as  a  linked  list,  a  binary  tree,  a  hash  table,  a  bit  string, 
or  property-list  markings.  Some  operations  on  sets  are  easier  in  one  repre- 
sentation than  in  another — for  example,  the  intersection  of  sets  represented 
with  bit  strings  is  simply  a  logical  AND  operation,  while  iteration  over  a  set  is 
easier  when  it  is  represented  as  a  linked  list.  Some  implementations  may  not 
even  be  applicable  in  a  given  case  (e.g.,  bit  strings  require  that  the  domain  of 
set  elements  be  fixed  and  reasonably  small,  since  one  bit  position  is  used  for 
each  possible  element).  Also,  some  representations  may  not  permit  all  needed 
operations  (e.g.,  the  only  way  to  enumerate  the  items  in  a  set  represented  with 
property  markings  is  to  go  through  all  the  data  in  the  system  looking  for  ones 


C  Basic  Approaches  317 

with  the  appropriate  property  markings).  By  tailoring  the  representation  to 
the  particular  programmer's  intention,  it  is  possible  to  produce  much  better 
code. 

One  such  system  that  performs  data-structure  selection  for  the  user  is 
described  by  Low  (1974,  1978).  This  system  handles  simple  programs  written 
in  LEAP,  a  sublanguage  of  SAIL  (Article  VI. C4).  It  selects  representations  for 
sets,  sequences,  and  relations  from  the  fixed  library  of  low-level  data  structures 
available  in  LEAP.  The  selection  is  guided  by  the  goal  of  minimizing  the 
product  of  the  memory  and  time  required  to  execute  the  resulting  program. 

Low's  system  begins  with  an  information-gathering  phase  that  searches 
out  the  relevant  characteristics  of  the  program's  data  structures,  such  as  their 
expected  size,  their  number,  the  operations  performed  on  them,  and  their 
interactions.  Some  of  this  information  is  obtained  by  questioning  the  user  and 
some  by  monitoring  the  actual  execution  of  the  program  on  typical  data,  with 
default  representations  for  each  structure.  Then  the  system  partitions  into 
equivalence  classes  the  variables  whose  values  will  be  of  the  same  type  of  data 
structure.  The  system  employs  a  method  similar  to  hill  climbing  to  determine 
a  (locally)  optimal  assignment  of  data  structures  to  the  equivalence  classes 
(i.e.,  the  representations  assigned  to  the  equivalence  classes  are  repeatedly 
varied,  one  at  a  time,  to  see  if  an  improvement  will  result). 

Other  AP  systems  are  also  concerned  with  the  selection  of  an  efficient  set 
of  data  structures  or  file  structures,  but  this  concern  is  part  of  the  general 
goal  of  writing  an  efficient  program  (see  Articles  X.D6  and  X.D8). 

Traditional  Problem  Solving 

Traditional  problem  solving  refers  to  using  subgoals  to  direct  the  applica- 
tion of  operations  in  a  problem-reduction  space  (see  Chap.  II,  in  Vol.  i).  The 
Heuristic  Compiler  (Simon,  1972)  regards  the  task  of  writing  a  program  as  a 
problem-solving  process  that  applies  heuristic  techniques,  like  those  of  GPS 
(Article  II. D2,  in  Vol.  I).  This  pioneering  work  recognized  the  value  of  both  a 
state  language,  to  describe  problem  states  and  goals,  and  a  process  language, 
to  represent  the  solver's  actions. 

In  the  Heuristic  Compiler,  the  State  Description  Compiler  is  quite  similar 
to  later  work  on  synthesis  from  examples.  The  program  being  synthesized 
is  defined  by  specifying  input/output  conditions  on  the  memory  cells  that 
it  affects.  The  difference  between  the  current  state  and  the  desired  state  is 
looked  up  in  a  table  that  specifies  which  operators  to  apply  to  transform  the 
contents  of  the  cells  appropriately.  The  Functional  Description  Compiler  is  an 
important  precursor  to  later  work  in  automatic  modification  and  debugging 
of  programs.  It  uses  a  means-ends  analysis  to  transform  a  known  (compiled) 
routine  into  a  new  (desired)  routine. 

HACKER,  a  system  built  by  Sussman  (1975),  adds  to  Simon's  work, 
detecting  and  generalizing  new  differences  (bugs)  and  defining  appropriate 


318  Automatic  Programming  X 

operators  to  resolve  them  (patches).  This  system  uses  many  significant  AI 
techniques  and  language  features:  learning  through  practice  how  to  write 
and  debug  programs;  modular,  pattern-invoked  expert  procedures  (chunks  of 
procedural  knowledge);  and  hypothetical  world  models  for  subgoal  analysis. 
Sussman's  emphasis  on  generalizing  from  experience  (trying  old  techniques  in 
new  situations),  acceptance  of  the  fact  that  users  have  an  incomplete  under- 
standing of  the  desired  program,  and  his  goal-purpose  annotation  technique 
are  all  interesting  directions  in  the  development  of  automatic  programming 
and  learning  systems  (see  Article  XTV.D5c,  in  Vol.  III). 

However,  HACKER 's  preference  for  ruthless  generation  of  "buggy"  code 
without  detailed  planning  led  to  inadequate  handling  of  subgoal  conflicts. 
Training  sequences  had  to  be  carefully  ordered  and,  even  so,  the  system 
exhaustively  searched  its  base  of  world  facts  and  programming  knowledge. 
Such  systems  must  constrain  the  problem  of  searching  large  knowledge  bases. 
Other  attempts  to  distribute  knowledge  among  interacting  specialists  have 
encountered  the  same  difficulty  (Lenat,  1975). 

Systems  such  as  HACKER,  which  have  been  designed  to  operate  like 
human  programmers,  promise  a  moderate  degree  of  success  compared  to 
knowledge-impoverished  formal  methods.  However,  these  systems  are  still 
often  hampered  by  the  rigid  formalism  that  governs  their  application:  In 
what  order  are  operators  to  be  applied?  How  can  domain-specific  information 
be  specified  as  differences?  The  formalisms  used  to  incorporate  the  various 
knowledge  sources  in  these  systems  seem  too  methodical;  the  method  is  space 
and  time  bound  because  it  is  based  on  search. 

Induction 

Induction,  or  inductive  inference,  is  the  system's  "educated  guess"  at 
what  the  user  wants  on  the  basis  of  program  specifications  that  only  partially 
describe  the  program's  behavior.  Such  specifications  are  often  the  examples  of 
input/output  pairs  and  the  program  traces,  in  both  regular  and  generic  form 
(see  Article  X.B).  For  each  of  these  kinds  of  specification,  the  corresponding 
AP  system  must  determine  the  general  rules  on  the  basis  of  a  specification 
that  contains  only  a  few  examples  (or  in  the  generic  specifications,  a  limited 
class  of  examples)  of  the  program  behavior. 

The  work  in  program  synthesis  from  examples  had  its  origin  in  research 
dealing  with  grammatical  inference,  in  which  the  objective  was  to  infer  a 
grammar  that  described  a  language,  given  several  examples  of  strings  of  the 
language  (Feldman  et  al.,  1969;  Biermann  and  Feldman,  1970).  In  a  natural 
way,  this  research  was  associated  with  the  inference  of  finite-state  machines 
from  the  sequence  (string)  of  states  that  the  machine  passes  through  dur- 
ing execution.  The  association  was  natural  in  that  finite-state  machines  are 
intimately  related  to  the  grammar  that  generates  the  strings  of  states  repre- 
senting legal  behavior  of  the  machine  (Biermann  and  Krishnaswamy,  1974; 


C  Basic  Approaches  319 

also  Article  IV.Cl).  This  research  opened  up  two  new  avenues  of  investigation 
in  automatic  programming:  synthesis  from  examples  and  synthesis  from  traces. 

The  crucial  issue  for  program  synthesis  from  examples  is  the  development 
of  a  generalized  program,  that  is,  one  that  can  account  for  more  than  the 
examples  given  in  the  program  specification.  To  do  this,  these  programs  break 
down  the  input,  looking  for  recursively  solvable  subparts  (Shaw,  Swartout, 
and  Green,  1975)  or  computation  repetitions  that  can  be  fitted  into  a  known 
program  scheme  (Hardy,  1975). 

The  work  in  program  synthesis  from  trace  specifications  seeks  to  invert 
the  transformations  observed  in  a  trace  protocol  to  create  abstractions  that 
generalize  into  loops  and  variables  (Bauer,  1975).  Of  all  the  induction-based 
synthesis  paradigms,  this  is  the  one  that  is  closest  to  grammatical  inference. 
Biermann  and  Krishnaswamy  (1974)  have  built  a  system  that  interprets  traces 
as  directions  through  a  developing  flowchart.  Phillips  (1977)  has  implemented 
a  system  for  the  inference  of  very  high  level  program  descriptions  from  a 
mixture  of  traces  and  example  pairs  in  the  context  of  a  large  automatic- 
programming  system  (see  Article  X.Dl). 

All  inductive  inference  systems  rely  on  a  good  axiomatization  of  opera- 
tions. In  other  words,  the  system  must  know  about  all  the  possible  primitive 
operations  that  can  be  applied  to  the  data  structures  if  it  is  to  construct, 
by  composition  of  these  primitives,  the  desired  program.  Furthermore,  a  har- 
monious relation  between  the  nature  of  the  constructs  in  the  specification  and 
the  most  basic  constructs  in  the  target  language  is  essential;  for  example, 
in  Siklossy  and  Sykes  (1975),  the  tasks  of  tree  traversal  and  repetitive  robot 
maneuvers  are  directly  translatable  into  LISP  recursion.  Moreover,  these  pro- 
grams are  required  to  know  quite  a  bit  about  generalization.  After  synthesiz- 
ing the  program,  they  test  it  on  other  examples,  sometimes  by  generating  test 
cases  and  sometimes  by  asking  the  user  for  approval. 

The  importance  of  induction  from  examples  and  from  traces  lies  in  the  fact 
that,  for  certain  classes  of  programs,  examples  and  traces  provide  a  natural 
way  for  the  user  to  specify  what  the  desired  program  is  to  do.  These  induction 
techniques  are  described  in  more  detail  below. 

Program  Induction  from  Examples  of  Input/ Output  Pairs 

The  synthesis  of  programs  from  a  specification  consisting  of  instances  of 
input/output  pairs  strongly  depends  on  the  problem  domain  to  which  these 
programs  belong  (e.g.,  sorting,  concept  formation).  A  set  of  program  schemas 
characterizes  the  entire  class  of  programs  for  the  domain.  These  schemas  are 
like  program  skeletons  and  define  the  general  structure  of  a  program,  omitting 
some  details.  The  synthesis  of  a  program  thus  amounts  to  (a)  selecting  a 
given  schema  that  is  representative  of  the  program  specified  by  the  set  of 
example  pairs  and  then  (b)  using  the  information  present  in  the  examples 
to  instantiate  the  unfilled  slots  of  the  schema.    Thus,  there  are  two  steps: 


320  Automatic  Programming  X 

a  classification  process,  which  selects  the  general  structure  (schema)  of  the 
target  program,  and  an  instantiation  process,  which  completes  the  details  of 
the  target  program. 

What  does  the  classification  process  require?  Every  schema  defines  a 
subclass  of  programs  in  the  problem  domain.  Every  set  of  example  pairs 
defines  a  family  of  programs  in  the  domain.  Thus,  the  classification  process 
must  associate  this  set  of  example  pairs  with  one  of  the  subclasses  of  programs 
in  the  domain.  To  accomplish  this  task,  a  set  of  characteristics  is  associated 
with  each  schema  (subclass)  that,  if  present  in  the  set  of  example  pairs, 
guarantees  that  the  set  specifies  a  program  of  this  type.  Usually  this  task 
is  accomplished  by  (a)  providing  a  set  of  difference  measures  to  be  applied 
to  the  inputs  and  outputs  of  an  example  pair,  as  well  as  to  different  example 
pairs  in  the  input  collection  (if  it  consists  of  more  than  one),  and  (b)  providing 
a  set  of  heuristics  for  each  program  schema  that  determine  a  fit  measure  of 
the  example  set  that  accompanies  it.  The  task  of  classifying  the  example  set 
is  then  reduced  to  choosing  the  schema  with  the  highest  value  for  fit. 

During  the  instantiation  process,  in  addition  to  the  difference  and  fit 
metrics  described  above,  every  schema  has  an  associated  set  of  rules  for  filling 
its  empty  slots  through  the  extraction  of  necessary  features  from  the  examples. 
For  instance,  in  the  domain  of  list-manipulation  functions,  cases  in  which  the 
output  list  contains  all  elements  in  the  input  and  cases  where  the  output  list 
contains  only  every  other  element,  and  so  on,  suggest  different  methods  of 
constructing  the  output  incrementally  from  the  input.  In  the  first  case,  the 
function  maps  down  the  input  list;  in  the  second  case,  it  maps  down  the  input 
with  the  LISP  CDDR  function.  Slots  are  instantiated  by  these  rules  in  terms 
of  primitive  operators  of  the  domain  and  their  functional  compositions  (in  the 
above  case,  the  basic  LISP  functions  and  their  compositions). 

Once  a  schema  has  been  selected  and  instantiated,  the  synthesis  algorithm 
must  validate  its  hypothesis.  This  task  is  usually  done  either  by  generating 
some  new  examples  for  the  program,  evaluating  the  synthesized  program  on 
the  example  set,  and  checking  the  results  with  the  user,  or  by  presenting  the 
program  to  the  user  and  letting  him  (or  her)  verify  its  correctness. 

In  summary,  the  basic  algorithm  is  as  follows: 

1.  Apply  the  difference  measures  to  the  example  set; 

2.  Based  on  this  application,  classify  the  set  into  a  particular  schema  class; 

3.  Using  heuristics  associated  with  the  particular  schema,  hypothesize  a 
complete  instantiation  of  the  selected  schema; 

4.  Validate  this  hypothesis. 

In  this  basic  algorithm,  if  there  is  a  single  input/output  pair  in  the  specifica- 
tion, the  difference  measures  are  just  a  set  of  feature-detecting  heuristics. 
If  there  are  more  than  one  pair,  the  pairs  may  be  ordered  according  to  the 
complexity  of  the  input.  Difference  measures  will  fall  into  two  classes:  those 


C  Basic  Approaches  321 

that  associate  the  structure  of  a  pair  with  a  schema  class  and  those  that 
find  differences  between  pairs.  The  latter  are  perhaps  more  crucial  in  the 
inference  of  a  program.  From  these  differences,  a  theory  for  the  operation 
of  the  program  is  inductively  inferred  or,  what  is  the  same,  a  formation  rule 
is  derived.  This  operational  theory  might  take  the  form  of  a  certain  schema 
class  or  of  a  recurrence  equation  that,  in  turn,  specifies  a  schema  class.  In 
the  classification  phase  it  may  be  necessary  to  apply  the  classification  rule  to 
all  pairs  to  infer  the  corresponding  schema  correctly.  When  several  different 
schemas  have  been  inferred,  a  decision  rule  is  required  to  select  the  correct 
one. 

An  alternate  approach  is  to  reduce  the  whole  problem  to  another  para- 
digm for  synthesizing  programs.  For  example,  if  the  problem  domain  has 
been  formalized,  so  that  there  is  a  set  of  operators  for  the  domain,  it  is 
possible  to  use  a  traditional  problem  solver  to  generate  a  solution  to  the 
input/output  pair  (considered  as  initial-state,  goal-state)  in  the  form  of  a 
sequence  of  operators  that  carry  the  input  into  the  output.  The  solution  so 
obtained  can  be  considered  a  trace  of  the  program  to  be  synthesized  and  a 
trace-based  paradigm  may  be  employed  (see  below). 

Specification  by  examples  is  suitable  for  synthesizing  a  program  only  in 
those  cases  where  the  task  domain  is  small  and  easily  axiomatized.  It  may 
also  be  a  feasible  approach  in  cases  where  the  domain  is  repetitious  enough 
that  a  small  set  of  pairs  is  sufficient  to  specify  the  program,  which  is  almost 
never  the  case  in  practical  programming  domains.  Such  a  specification  method 
tends  to  be  quite  limited  and  does  not  lend  itself  to  useful  generalization  to 
large  domains.  Nevertheless,  the  power  of  examples  for  clarifying  concepts 
is  unquestionable.  It  seems  that  the  main  application  that  this  specification 
formalism  will  have  in  future  automatic-programming  systems  is  restricted  to 
the  annotation  and  clarification  of  more  formal  program  descriptions. 

Program  Induction  from  Traces 

Inferring  a  program  from  a  set  of  traces  is,  as  mentioned  earlier,  very 
similar  to  inferring  a  description  of  a  finite-state  machine  from  a  set  of  sequen- 
tial states  that  the  machine  might  pass  through.  The  basic  approach  for  syn- 
thesizing a  program  from  a  set  of  traces  is  to  generate,  in  order  of  increasing 
complexity,  the  possible  programs  constructed  from  the  programming-domain 
operators  and  tests  and  their  functional  compositions  and  then,  after  each 
new  program  is  generated,  to  validate  the  given  traces  against  the  program. 
If  the  generated  program  accounts  for  the  traces,  it  is  the  required  solution. 
Notice  that  some  kind  of  complexity  measure  is  needed  for  the  enumeration, 
such  as  program  size  (e.g.,  number  of  instructions  in  the  program). 

This  basic  approach  suffers  from  the  problems  inherent  to  search  in  a  large 
search  space  and  thus  admits  improvement,  in  the  form  of  reduction  of  the 
combinatorial  explosion,  by  the  use  of  heuristics  to  prune  and  guide  the  search 


322  Automatic  Programming  X 

process.  It  is  thus  not  generally  practical  and  suited  only  to  the  inference  of 
small  programs  in  very  simple  domains.  Nevertheless,  it  has  been  applied 
with  moderate  success  to  the  inference  of  programs  from  memory  traces. 
Usually  consisting  of  register  assignments,  tests,  and  memory-modification 
instructions,  such  programs  and  their  traces  are  not  very  complex.  Programs 
as  complex  as  Hoare's  FIND  algorithm  have  been  synthesized  in  this  manner 
(Petry  and  Biermann,  1976).  Though  these  systems  tend  to  be  knowledge 
impoverished,  Phillips  (1977)  incorporates  a  methodology  to  compensate  for 
this  by  utilizing  problem-domain  knowledge  in  the  inference  process.  There 
are  certain  other  special  inference  paradigms  for  particular  classes  of  traces. 
Program  inference  from  protocols.  Usually,  traces  mix  information 
about  operations  applied  to  data  objects,  results  of  tests  as  to  whether  predi- 
cates hold  at  certain  points  during  program  execution,  state  snapshots  of  data 
values,  and  other  information.  Different  classes  of  traces  arise  if  restrictions 
are  placed  on  the  kind  of  information  that  may  appear  in  them.  Protocols 
are  one  such  class,  in  which  only  operation  applications  and  data-structure 
changes  may  appear  and  in  which  there  is  no  information  about  control  deci- 
sions that  have  been  taken  during  the  particular  program  execution  reflected 
in  the  trace.  An  example  of  a  typical  protocol  for  a  function  that  reverses  a 
list  would  be: 

input  X 
X  =   (ABC) 

Y  =    (A) 

X  =    (B  C) 

Y  =    (B  A) 
X  =    (C) 

Y  =    (C  B  A) 
output  Y    . 

Notice  that  the  only  information  present  in  the  protocol  is  operation  applica- 
tions and  variable-state  changes.  All  control  information  is  omitted. 

The  inference  of  a  program  from  a  collection  of  protocols  involves  two 
phases:  (a)  constructing  a  program  description  that  captures  the  nature  of  a 
program  that  could  have  generated  a  subset  of  the  input  protocols  and  then 
(b)  modifying  the  program  description  as  more  protocols  become  available  in 
order  to  validate  them. 

A  natural  algorithm  would  then  be  to  hypothesize,  by  some  feature- 
classification  process  or  with  the  aid  of  a  domain  knowledge  base,  an  initial 
description  and  debug  it  by  forcing  a  unification  of  the  protocol  family  with 
the  description.  The  construction  of  the  initial  program  description  can  be 
described  as  follows: 

1.    Match  the  protocols;  that  is,  find  common  segments  as  well  as  differences 
by  matching  their  structure. 


Basic  Approaches  323 

Find  substitutions  that  unify  these  protocols.  Protocols  may  differ  in 
variables  that  have  different  names,  in  the  same  data  objects  (at  the 
same  place  in  the  protocols)  having  different  values,  and  in  differences  in 
the  operations  that  occur.  The  matching  phase  produces  a  set  of  such 
differences.  The  substitution  phase  finds  substitutions  that  remove  these 
differences.  For  example,  if  two  protocols  refer  with  different  variable 
names  to  the  same  data  object,  this  phase  would  propose  a  common 
name  for  the  two  variables.  Such  substitutions  usually  take  the  form: 
constant  — ►  variable  or  variable-name  — ►  variable-name. 

Inductively  form  loops  by  detecting  repeated  equivalent  subprotocols. 
Loop  formation  is  the  basic  inductive  step  of  this  approach.  For  example, 

protocol   string:    ABCDABCD. 
hypothesized  loop: 

while   <condition> 
do  begin 
A; 
B; 
C, 
D 
end, 


Since  there  are  infinitely  many  loop  hypotheses  for  a  given  protocol,  one 
of  the  tasks  of  the  system  designer  is  to  provide  a  good  set  of  heuristics 
to  guide  the  search  process  during  loop  formation.  For  example,  one 
such  possible  heuristic  could  be  to  consider  first  the  loops  with  minimal 
nesting  level. 

4.    Generalize  remaining  constants  to  variables. 

At  this  stage,  then,  a  description  has  been  generated  where  all  data-object 
snapshots  have  an  associated  variable  name  and  where  loop  structures  in  the 
program  have  been  inferred.  The  result  of  this  matching,  unification,  and 
abstraction  (generalization)  process  is  a  semantic-net  representation  of  the 
program. 

The  next  stage  is  to  verify  that  the  hypothesized  program  description 
agrees  with  any  additional  protocols  and,  if  this  is  not  the  case,  to  modify  it. 
This  correction  (debugging)  phase  can  be  described  as  follows: 

1.  Try  to  validate  new  protocols  against  the  program  representation — that 
is,  to  symbolically  execute  the  program  description  to  see  if  it  can  account 
for  the  given  protocol. 

2.  Find  any  differences  between  predicted  and  actual  protocol.  The  process 
of  symbolic  evaluation  generates  a  set  of  differences  that  are  due  to  the 
protocol's  not  matching  the  program  description.  This  set  of  differences 
suggests  the  kinds  of  modifications  that  must  be  made  to  the  description. 


324  Automatic  Programming  X 

3.  Form  a  theory  for  the  difference;  that  is,  hypothesize  a  suitable  change 
to  the  program  description  that  removes  the  particular  difference.  One 
way  of  accomplishing  this  is  to  use  a  classification  process  similar  to  the 
basic  algorithm  for  inference  from  examples. 

4.  Modify  the  program  representation  accordingly. 

This  synthesis  paradigm  works  only  for  complete  protocols,  that  is,  proto- 
cols in  which  all  data-structure  changes  appear  explicitly.  Phillips  (1977)  has 
proposed  a  procedure  for  handling  incomplete  protocols  in  a  unified  framework 
for  synthesis  from  examples  and  synthesis  from  traces  or  protocols.  This 
procedure  is  basically  as  follows:  For  those  segments  of  a  protocol  in  which 
operations  are  missing,  that  is,  in  which  two  states  of  a  data  structure  appear 
without  intervening  operations,  the  examples  component  of  the  system  infers 
a  piece  of  program  description  (i.e.,  a  sequence  of  operations)  that  can  take 
the  data  object  from  one  state  to  the  other.  This  program  description  is 
nothing  but  the  sequence  of  missing  operation  applications.  Merging  all  such 
sequences  with  the  original  incomplete  protocol  transforms  it  into  a  complete 
protocol,  and  the  algorithm  given  above  for  dealing  with  complete  protocols 
can  be  used. 

Problem-solver-generated  traces.  If  the  domain  is  fully  axiomatized, 
as  may  be  the  case  for  simple  domains  like  those  for  robots,  it  may  be  possible 
to  synthesize  programs  from  example  pairs  by  using  a  problem  solver  that 
produces  a  solution  to  the  input  pair  in  the  form  of  a  trace: 

1.  With  the  problem  solver,  synthesize  a  trace  from  an  example  pair. 

2.  Using  the  trace,  a  set  of  program  schemas  for  the  domain,  and  a  set 
of  schema-selection  and  schema-instantiation  heuristics  that  operate  on 
trace  steps,  produce  a  program  in  terms  of  domain  operators  and  domain 
predicates  that  explain  the  example  pair. 

All  these  paradigms  work  only  for  complete  traces  and  protocols.  The 
problem  of  program  inference  from  incomplete  specifications  is  still  under 
investigation.  It  is  possible  that  the  techniques  outlined  may  be  extended  to 
cover  the  incomplete  case  by  coupling  the  program  synthesizer  to  a  domain- 
based  theory-formation  module  that  could,  so  to  speak,  fill  in  the  missing 
elements  from  the  original  specification.  At  this  point,  then,  the  methodology 
discussed  above  could  be  used. 

Traces  have  the  limitations  inherent  in  informal  program  specifications, 
namely,  the  difficulty  of  specifying  the  required  program  uniquely  with  respect 
to  the  limited  amount  of  information  conveyed  to  the  synthesizer.  Thus, 
the  problem  of  choosing  a  good  description  is  left,  as  a  burden,  to  the  user. 
This  problem  might  be  alleviated  by  providing  greater  domain  expertise — to 
produce  the  program  that  more  nearly  resembles  the  user's  desired  result. 

Traces,  and  informal  specification  methods  in  general,  promise  to  be  useful 
for  algorithm  description  and  correction  in  future  automatic-programming 


C  Basic  Approaches  325 

systems.  The  reason  is  clearly  that  these  methods  reflect  closely  the  form  in 
which  humans  understand  and  describe  programs. 

References 

For  theorem  proving,  see  Green  (1969),  Waldinger  and  Levitt  (1974), 
Kowalski  (1977),  and  Clark  and  Sickel  (1977);  for  program  transformation, 
Darlington  and  Burstall  (1973)  and  Wegbreit  (1975a);  for  knowledge  engineer- 
ing, Martin  (1974),  Lenat  (1975),  Biggerstaff  (1976),  Sussman  (1975),  and 
Green  (1977);  for  automatic  data  selection,  Low  (1978);  for  traditional  prob- 
lem solving,  Simon  (1972)  and  Sussman  (1975);  for  induction  from  input/ 
output  pairs,  Amarel  (1972),  Green  (1975a),  Hardy  (1975),  Shaw,  Swartout, 
and  Green  (1975),  Siklossy  and  Sykes  (1975),  and  Summers  (1977);  for  induc- 
tion from  traces,  Bauer  (1975),  Biermann  (1972a,  1976a),  Petry  and  Biermann 
(1976),  Phillips  (1977),  and  Siklossy  and  Sykes  (1975);  and  for  induction  from 
examples,  Biermann  and  Feldman  (1970)  and  Feldman,  Gips,  Horning,  and 
Reder  (1969). 


D.     AUTOMATIC  PROGRAMMING  SYSTEMS 
Dl.     PSI  and  CHI 


THE  PSI  system  was  developed  by  Cordell  Green  and  his  colleagues  at 
Stanford  University  and  at  Systems  Control,  Inc.  The  design  goal  of  PSI 
was  the  integration  of  the  more  specialized  methods  of  automatic  program- 
ming into  a  total  system.  This  system,  then,  would  incorporate  knowledge 
engineering,  model  acquisition,  program  synthesis,  efficiency  analysis,  and 
specification  by  examples,  traces,  or  interactive  natural-language  dialogue. 
The  research  was  directed  toward  determining  the  organization  of  such  a  sys- 
tem, the  amount  and  type  of  knowledge  such  a  system  would  require,  and  the 
representation  of  this  knowledge.  This  research  is  continuing  at  the  Kestrel 
Institute  in  Palo  Alto  where  a  successor  system,  CHI,  has  been  developed  by 
Green  and  his  colleagues  to  extend  the  work  in  the  direction  of  a  supportive 
programming  environment  (see  below). 

PSI 

In  PSI,  a  program  is  specified  by  means  of  an  interactive,  mixed- initiative 
dialogue,  which  may  include  partial  specifications  by  examples  of  input/output 
pairs  or  by  traces  (see  Article  X.B).  It  is  planned  also  to  allow  program 
specification  by  means  of  a  loose,  very  high  level  language.  When  the  specifi- 
cation method  is  an  interactive  dialogue,  the  user  furnishes  both  a  description 
of  what  the  desired  program  is  to  do  and  an  indication  of  the  overall  control 
structure  of  the  program. 

The  PSI  system  deals  with  programs  in  the  general  class  of  symbolic 
computation,  including  list  processing,  searching  and  sorting,  data  storage  and 
retrieval,  and  concept  formation  programs.  It  is  a  knowledge-based  system 
organized  as  a  set  of  closely  interacting  modules,  called  experts.  At  present, 
these  experts  are  the  following: 

1.  PARSER/INTERPRETER 

2.  DIALOGUE  MODERATOR 

3.  EXPLAINER 

4.  EXAMPLE/TRACE  INFERENCE 

5.  TASK  DOMAIN 

6.  PROGRAM-MODEL  BUILDER 

7.  CODING 

8.  EFFICIENCY. 

326 


Dl  PSI  and  CHI  327 

The  overall  operation  of  the  system,  illustrated  in  Figure  Dl-1,  may  be 
divided  into  two  phases:  (a)  acquisition  of  a  specification  of  the  desired  pro- 
gram and  (b)  synthesis  of  the  program  code.  During  the  acquisition  phase, 
several  modules  of  the  system — including  the  PARSER/INTERPRETER, 
EXPLAINER,  DIALOGUE  MODERATOR,  and  EXAMPLE/TRACE  INFERENCE— will 
jointly  interact  with  the  user  to  construct  a  network  data  structure,  called  the 
program  net,  that  describes  the  desired  program.  Then  the  PROGRAM-MODEL 
BUILDER  module  converts  the  net  into  a  complete,  consistent  description  of  the 
program,  called  the  program  model.  Afterwards,  during  the  synthesis  phase, 
the  CODING  and  EFFICIENCY  modules,  interacting  with  each  other,  convert 
the  program  model,  through  repeated  transformations,  into  an  efficient  imple- 
mentation in  the  target  language. 

There  were  three  reasons  for  separating  the  operation  into  acquisition 
and  synthesis  phases.  First,  the  problems  of  designing  such  a  system  are 
more  tractable  with  such  a  separation.  Second,  it  was  thought  that  code 
generators  for  different  target  languages  and  domain  experts  for  different 
problem  areas  could  be  implemented  to  achieve  a  versatile,  modular  system. 
Third,  acquisition  requires  interaction  with  the  user,  whereas,  in  PSI,  synthesis 
does  not. 

In  the  overall  operation,  two  of  the  primary  interfaces  within  the  PSI 
system  are  the  program  net  and  the  program  model.  Both  are  very  high 
level  languages  for  describing  programs  and  data  structures.  The  program 
net  forms  a  looser  description  of  the  program  than  does  the  program  model. 
Fragments  of  the  program  net  can  be  accessed  in  order  of  occurrence  in  the 
dialogue,  rather  than  in  order  of  eventual  execution,  which  allows  a  less 
detailed,  local,  and  partial  specification  of  the  program.  Since  these  frag- 
ments correspond  rather  closely  to  what  the  user  says,  they  ease  the  burden 
of  the  PARSER/INTERPRETER  as  well  as  of  the  EXAMPLE/TRACE  INFERENCE 
module.  The  PROGRAM-MODEL  BUILDER,  on  the  other  hand,  includes  com- 
plete, consistent,  and  interpretable,  very  high  level  algorithmic  and  informa- 
tion structures. 

The  remainder  of  this  article  describes  briefly  the  PSI  modules  and  then 
goes  through  several  examples  (Figs.  Dl-2  through  Dl-5)  of  the  acquisi- 
tion phase,  including  a  specification  by  interactive  natural-language  dialogue, 
showing  the  resulting  program  net  and  program  model,  and  a  specification  by 
trace. 

The  PARSER/INTERPRETER  expert.  In  the  acquisition  phase,  the 
PARSER/INTERPRETER  expert  (Ginsparg,  1978)  first  parses  sentences  and  then 
interprets  these  parses  into  less  linguistic  and  more  program-oriented  terms, 
which  are  then  stored  in  the  program  net.  This  expert  efficiently  handles  a 
very  large  English  grammar  and  has  knowledge  about  data  structures  (sets, 
records,  etc.),  control  structures  (loops,  conditionals,  procedures,  etc.),  and 
more  complicated  algorithm  ideas  (interchanges  between  the  user  and  the 
desired  program,  set  construction,   quantification,  etc.).     It  can  sometimes 


328 


Automatic  Programming 


English  Sentences 


Parser 


Explainer . 


Parses 


User 

Loose,  Very  High-Level 
Language  Statements 


Interpreter 
Dialogue  Moderator 


Loose,  Very 
High-Level 
Language 
Expert 


Program  Net 


Program  Model 


Input-Output  Pairs 
and  Traces 


•Trace  and  Example 
Inference  Expert 


Domain 
'     Expert 


•Program  Model  Builder 


Coder 


■\ 


Efficiency  Expert 


High-Level  Language  Program 


•Conventional 
Compiler 


Machine  Language  Program 


Figure  Dl-1.     Major  paths  of  information  flow  in  PSI. 


Dl  PSI  and  CHI  329 

assign  a  concept  to  an  unknown  word  on  the  basis  of  the  context  in  which  the 
word  appears. 

The  DIALOGUE  MODERATOR  expert.  This  expert  (Steinberg,  1980) 
models  the  user,  the  dialogue,  and  the  state  of  the  system  and  selects  appro- 
priate questions  and  statements  to  present  to  the  user.  It  also  determines 
whether  the  user  or  the  system  has  the  initiative,  and  at  what  level  on  what 
subject,  and  attempts  to  keep  PSI  and  the  user  in  agreement  on  the  current 
topic.  It  provides  review  and  preview  when  the  topic  changes.  The  DIALOGUE 
MODERATOR  decides  which  of  the  many  questions  being  asked  by  the  other 
experts  should  be  passed  on  to  the  user.  Since  experts  phrase  questions  in 
an  internal  form  based  on  relations,  the  DIALOGUE  MODERATOR  expert  gives 
questions  to  the  EXPLAINER  expert,  which,  in  turn,  converts  them  into  English 
and  presents  them  to  the  user. 

The  EXPLAINER  expert.  The  EXPLAINER  expert,  developed  by 
Richard  Gabriel  (1981),  phrases  questions  in  terms  that  the  user  finds  mean- 
ingful, that  is,  in  terms  related  to  the  problem  domain  and  the  previous  sen- 
tences in  the  dialogue,  rather  than  the  more  programming-oriented  terms  of 
the  program  net  or  the  model  builder.  For  example,  rather  than  asking  for 
the  definition  of  "A0018,"  PSI  asks  what  it  means  for  "a  trial  set  to  fit  a 
concept"  (see  Fig.  Dl-2).  The  EXPLAINER  also  generates  English  descriptions 
of  the  program  net. 

The  EXAMPLE/TRACE  expert.  PSI  also  allows  specification  by  traces 
and  examples,  since  these  are  useful  for  inferring  data  structures  and  simple 
spatial  transformations.  This  expert,  developed  by  Jorge  Phillips  (1977), 
handles  simple  loop  and  data  structure  inference  and  incorporates  several  of 
the  techniques  discussed  in  Articles  X.B  and  X.C  (see  also  the  example  below). 

The  TASK  DOMAIN  expert.  The  TASK  DOMAIN  expert,  also  developed 
by  Phillips,  uses  knowledge  of  the  application  area  to  help  the  PARSER/ 
INTERPRETER  and  EXAMPLE/TRACE  experts  fill  in  missing  information  in  the 
program  net. 

The  PROGRAM-MODEL  BUILDER  expert.  The  PROGRAM-MODEL 
BUILDER  (McCune,  1977)  applies  knowledge  of  what  constitutes  a  correct 
program  to  the  conversion  of  the  program  net  into  a  complete  and  consistent 
program  model,  which  then  will  be  transformed  during  the  synthesis  phase 
into  the  target-language  implementation.  The  PROGRAM-MODEL  BUILDER 
completes  the  model  by  filling  in  the  various  pieces  of  required  information 
and  by  analyzing  the  model  for  consistency;  it  checks  to  see  that  the  model's 
parts  are  legal  both  with  respect  to  each  other  and  with  respect  to  the 
semantics  of  the  program-modeling  language.  Information  is  filled  in  by 
default,  by  inference  mechanisms  (which  are  in  the  form  of  rules  and  make 
use  of  consistency  requirements),  or  by  queries  to  other  experts,  which  may 
eventually  result  in  a  query  to  the  user. 

For  example,  suppose  that  the  program  net  contains  "x  part  of  j/"  and 
that  the  PROGRAM-MODEL  BUILDER  needs  to  fill  in  whether  "part  of  is  to 


330  Automatic  Programming  X 

mean  set  membership,  subset  inclusion,  component  of  y,  or  the  image  of  x 
under  some  correspondence  relation  with  y,  or  whether  there  might  be  an 
unspecified  intervening  subpart.  Such  information  may  be  deducible  from  the 
structures  of  x  and  y,  if  and  when  these  structures  become  known. 

The  PROGRAM-MODEL  BUILDER  also  corrects  minor  inconsistencies,  adds 
cross-references,  and  generalizes  parts  of  the  program  description  so  that  the 
synthesis  phase  has  more  freedom  in  looking  for  a  good  implementation.  Thus, 
if  the  program  net  specifies  that  a  certain  object  is  to  be  a  set  of  ordered 
pairs,  the  program  model  may,  if  appropriate,  indicate  that  the  object  is  to 
be  a  correspondence  (i.e.,  a  functional  mapping). 

The  CODING  and  EFFICIENCY  experts.  These  two  experts  are 
responsible  for  the  synthesis  phase  (Barstow  and  Kant,  1977).  The  CODING 
expert's  knowledge  base  contains  rules  that  transform  parts  of  a  program 
description  to  forms  closer  to  the  target  language.  It  is  the  goal  of  the 
EFFICIENCY  expert  to  guide  the  choice  of  the  different  rules,  so  that  an  efficient 
target-language  implementation  eventually  results.  These  two  experts,  also 
known  as  the  systems  PECOS  and  LIBRA,  are  discussed  in  detail  separately 
in  Articles  X.D4  and  X.D8,  respectively. 

Example  of  Specification  by  Interactive  Dialogue 

Figure  Dl-2  illustrates  an  interactive,  natural-language  dialogue  held 
with  the  PSI  system  in  which  the  user  specifies  a  simple  program,  to  be  called 
CLASS.  It  includes  many  programming  constructs  necessary  for  more  complex 
programs. 

The  user  intends  that  the  CLASS  program  input  a  sample  set  of  items 
(e.g.,  a  list  of  job  qualifications)  and  then  repeatedly  input  a  trial  set  (e.g.,  the 
qualifications  of  an  applicant),  each  time  testing  whether  the  sample  set  is  a 
subset  of  the  trial  set  and  printing  "FIT"  or  "DIDN'T  FIT,"  accordingly.  The 
user  further  intends  that  a  person  will  be  able  to  terminate  CLASS  simply  by 
typing  the  word  "QUIT,"  instead  of  a  new  trial  set. 

Based  on  its  understanding  of  the  dialogue,  the  PARSER/INTERPRETER 
expert  produces  the  program  net,  which  is  summarized  in  Figure  Dl-3  (the 
algorithmic  part  of  the  net  is  shown  in  an  ALGOL-like  notation).  Then  the 
PROGRAM-MODEL  BUILDER  expert  creates  the  very  high  level,  complete,  and 
consistent  model  of  Figure  Dl-4.  After  repeated  application  of  transforma- 
tion rules  during  the  synthesis  phase,  the  CODING  and  EFFICIENCY  experts 
will  convert  this  model  into  an  efficient  target-language  implementation. 

An  Example  of  Program  Specification  by  Trace 

Traces  are  another  method  of  specification  allowed  by  the  PSI  system. 
Figure  Dl-5  shows  the  use  of  a  trace  to  specify  part  of  the  behavior  of 


Dl  PSI  and  CHI  331 

What  is  the  name  of  the  program  you  want  to  write? 
**  CLASS. 

Does  CLASS  have  a  special  program  type? 
**  Classification. 

Please  describe  CLASS. 

**  CLASS  first  inputs  a  concept.   Then  it  repeatedly  accepts  an 
input  trial  set  from  the  user,  classifies  it  based  on  whether 
or  not  it  fits  the  concept,  and  outputs  this  classification  to 
the  user. 

What  is  the  structure  of  the  concept? 

**  A  concept  is  a  collection  of  relations.   Each  relation  is  just 
a  string. 

What  is  the  exit  test  of  the  loop? 

**  Stop  when  the  user  types  "QUIT"  instead  of  a  trial  set. 

What  is  the  structure  of  the  trial  set? 
**  The  same  as  the  concept. 

Please  define  what  it  means  for  a  trial  set  to  fit  a  concept. 
**  A  trial  set  fits  a  concept  if  all  the  relations  in  the  concept 
are  in  the  trial  set. 

What  is  the  format  of  the  classification  output? 

**  Output  "FIT"  if  the  trial  set  fit,  "DIDN'T  FIT"  if  it  didn't. 

Are  we  finished? 
**  Yes. 

Figure  Dl-2.  Specification  by  interactive  natural-language  dialogue:  CLASS. 

a  program  called  TF  ("Theory  Formation" — a  simplified  version  of  Patrick 
Winston's  concept-formation  program;  see  Winston,  1975).  TF  builds  and 
updates  an  internal  model  of  a  concept.  A  concept  is  a  collection  of  "may"  and 
"must"  conditions.  TF  builds  and  updates  the  model  by  repeatedly  reading 
in  a  trial  set,  guessing  whether  the  trial  set  is  an  instance  of  the  concept, 


332  Automatic  Programming 


A2  is  either  a  set  whose  generic  element  is  a  string 

or  a  string  whose  value  is  "QUIT." 
Al  is  a  set  whose  generic  element  is  a  string. 
A4  is  the  generic  element  of  Al . 
A3  is  either  TRUE  or  FALSE. 


Bl  is  a  variable  bound  to  A2 
B2  is  a  variable  bound  to  Al 
B3  is  a  variable  bound  to  A4 


CLASS 

PRINT ("Ready  for  the  CONCEPT") 

Al  ♦■  READO 
L00P1 : 

PRINT ("Ready  for  the  TRIAL  SET") 

A2  «■  READO 

IF  EQUAL (A2, "QUIT")  THEN  GOTO  EXIT1 

A3  «-  FIT(A2,A1) 

CASES:    IF  A3  THEN  PRINT ("FIT") 

ELSE  IF  NOT (A3)    THEN  PRINT ("DIDN'T  FIT") 

GOTO  L00P1 

EXIT1: 

FIT(B1,B2) 

FORALL  B3  IMPLIES (MEMBER (B3.B2) .MEMBER (B3.B1) ) 


Figure  Dl-3.     Summary  of  the  program  net. 


verifying  with  the  person  using  TF  whether  the  guess  was  correct  or  incorrect, 
and  updating  the  model  of  the  concept  accordingly.  The  trace  in  Figure  Dl-5 
shows  the  specification  for  only  a  part  of  the  behavior  of  TF,  the  part  that 
describes  how  TF  is  to  update  the  model,  given  that  a  trial  set  does  or  does  not 
fit  a  concept.  The  other  parts  of  TF  can  be  specified  by  trace  or  by  natural- 
language  dialogue.  From  this  specification,  the  EXAMPLE/TRACE  INFERENCE 
expert  generates  the  following  information  about  the  desired  program:  If  the 
trial  set  fits  the  concept,  add  to  the  concept  all  relations  in  the  trial  set  but 
not  present  in  the  concept  and  mark  them  with  "may."  Otherwise,  if  the  trial 
set  does  not  fit  the  concept,  change  the  marking  of  all  relations  marked  "may" 
in  the  concept  and  not  appearing  in  the  trial  set  from  "may"  to  "must." 


Dl  PSI  and  CHI  333 


program  CLASS  ; 
type 

a0032  :  set  of  string  , 

a0053  :  alternative  of  [string  =  "QUIT"  ,  a0032]  ; 
vara 

aOOll  ,  a0014  ,  a0035  ,  a0036  :  a0032  , 
a0055  ,  m0080  :  a0053  , 
m0095  :  string  =  "DIDN'T  FIT"  , 
m0092  :  string  =  "FIT"  , 
m0091  :  Boolean  , 
m0081  :  string  =  "QUIT"  ; 
procedure  a0067(a0036  ,  a0035  :  a0032)  :  Boolean  ; 

a0035  C  a0036  ; 
procedure  a0065(a0055  :  a0053)  :  Boolean  ; 
a0055  =  "QUIT"  ; 
begin 

aOOll  *-  input(a0032  ,  user  ,  "READY  FOR  CONCEPT"  , 
"Illegal  input.  Input  again:  ")  ; 
until  A0051 
repeat 
begin 

mOOSO  «-  input(a0053  ,  user  ,  "READY"  ,  "Illegal  input.  Input  again:  ") 
if  a0065(m0080)  then  assert- exit- condition(A0051)  ; 
aOOU  <-  m0080  ; 
m0091  <-  a0067{a0014  ,  aOOll)  ; 
case 

^m0091  :  inform-user( "DIDN'T  FIT")  ; 
m0091  :  inform-user {"FIT")  ; 
endcase 
end 
finally 
A0051  : 
endloop 
end  ; 


Figure  Dl-4.     The  program  model. 


CHI 


Work  on  the  PSI  system,  which  included  developing  a  fully  operational 
system  that  could  produce  LISP  code  from  some  English  specifications,  has  led 
to  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  CHI  knowledge-based  programming 
system  at  the  Kestrel  Institute.  Automatic-programming  research  in  general, 


334  Automatic  Programming 


Concept: 

Trial  set:  [(block  a)(block  b)(on  a  b)] 

Result  of  fit:  True 

Updated  concept:  [((block  a)  may)((block  b)  may)((on  a  b)  may)] 

Concept:  [((block  a)  may)((block  b)  may)((on  a  b)  may)] 

Trial  set:  [(block  a)(block  b)] 

Result  of  fit:  False 

Updated  concept:  [((block  a)  may)((block  b)  may)((on  a  b)  must)] 

Concept:  [((block  a)  may)((block  b)  may)((on  a  b)  must)] 

Trial  set:  [(block  a)(block  b)(block  c)(on  a  b)] 

Result  of  fit:  True 

Updated  concept:  [((block  a)  may)((block  b)  may)((block  c)  may) 

((on  a  b)  must)] 


Figure  Dl-5.     A  specification  by  trace. 

including  the  PSI  project,  has  concentrated  on  methods  for  compiling  pro- 
grams expressed  in  a  very  high  level  language.  The  goal  in  CHI  is  to  provide 
not  only  a  knowledge-based  synthesis  system,  but  also  a  supportive,  high- 
level  programming  environment  that  includes  knowledge-based  specification 
acquisition,  consistency  checking,  debugging,  editing,  and  maintenance.  In 
fact,  the  idea  of  a  programming  environment  has  been  extended  to  include 
tools  for  aiding  the  human  interactions  necessary  for  the  management  of  pro- 
gramming projects.  The  CHI  system  uses  a  common  knowledge  base  about 
the  programming  process  to  support  all  of  these  activities. 

The  CHI  knowledge-based  programming  environment  emphasizes  the  use 
of  a  very  high  level,  wide-spectrum  language  called  "V"  for  specifying  both 
programs  and  programming  knowledge  and  for  interacting  with  the  program- 
ming environment.  The  V  language  includes  constructs  for  sets,  mappings, 
relations,  predicates,  enumerations,  state-transformation  sequences,  program- 
synthesis  rules,  and  control  meta-rules.  Rules  are  expressed  more  cleanly  in 
CHI  than  in  PSI. 

One  design  goal  is  that  CHI  be  a  very  adaptable  and  extensible  environ- 
ment. To  this  end,  a  self-description  of  the  CHI  environment  itself  is  being 
produced  in  its  own  high-level  language  V.  This  high-level  self-description 
is  useful  not  only  for  self-compilation  but  also  for  modifying  and  extending 
the  environment  itself.  In  particular,  the  rule-compiler  portion  of  CHI  has 
been  described  in  V,  and  CHI  has  compiled  this  description  into  efficient  code. 
The  compact,  high-level  description  of  the  rule  compiler  is  more  easily  com- 
prehended, and  is  manipulable  by  the  environment  itself  and  so  is  more  easily 
reasoned  about,  extended,  or  modified. 


Dl  PSI  and  CHI  335 

Research  has  progressed  in  developing  program-refinement  rules  for  han- 
dling data-structure  selection  and  enumeration  constructs  and  in  produc- 
ing concurrent  programs  from  very  high  level  program  descriptions.  A  new 
research  emphasis  is  on  building  tools  for  the  more  complex  and  creative 
part  of  the  programming  process,  namely,  algorithm  design.  An  example  of  a 
powerful  and  frequently  useful  principle  for  structuring  algorithm  derivations 
is  the  incorporation  of  constraints  or  other  operators  into  generators.  Methods 
for  incorporating  constraints  have  been  codified  and  applied  to  produce  hand 
derivations  of  several  prime-finding  and  shortest-path  algorithms.  Some  of 
the  methods  were  formalized  and  introduced  into  the  CHI  knowledge  base 
and  used  in  derivations  of  an  efficient  program  for  finding  even,  perfect-square 
numbers. 

Key  contributors  to  CHI,  besides  the  project  leader,  Cordell  Green,  have 
been  Jorge  Phillips,  who  developed  the  philosophy  of  adaptable,  self-described 
environments  and  shaped  the  V  language  and  the  knowledge  base;  Stephen 
Westfold,  who  implemented  a  structure-based  editor  for  V  and  described 
the  rule  compiler  in  high-level  V;  Beverly  Kedzierski,  who  is  developing  the 
project-management  and  communication  aspect  of  the  environment;  Steve 
Tappel,  who  developed  principles  of  algorithm  design  and  applied  them  to 
diverse  algorithms;  and  Tom  Pressburger,  who  implemented  some  of  those 
principles  in  CHI  and  developed  a  self-description  of  the  knowledge  base. 

References 

A  short  summary  of  the  PSI  work  is  given  in  Green  et  al.  (1979).  More 
detailed  discussions  of  PSI  are  Green  (1976b,  1977)  and  Green  and  Barstow 
(1977a);  see  also  Barstow  (1977a),  Barstow  and  Kant  (1977),  Gabriel  (1981), 
Green  and  Barstow  (1978),  Kant  (1977),  McCune  (1977),  and  Phillips  (1977). 

A  very  short  overview  of  the  CHI  research  is  found  in  Green  et  al.  (1981a). 
A  collection  of  reports  that  describe  the  research  in  more  detail  is  found  in 
Green  et  al.  (1981b).  The  self-description  of  the  rule  compiler  is  found  in 
Green  and  Westfold  (1982).  The  project-management  and  communication- 
support  aspect  is  presented  in  Kedzierski  (1982). 


D2.     SAFE 


THE  SAFE  system,  developed  at  the  Information  Sciences  Institute  (ISI)  of 
the  University  of  Southern  California  by  Robert  Balzer,  Neil  Goldman,  David 
Wile,  and  Charles  Williams,  accepts  a  program  specification  consisting  of 
preparsed  English,  with  limited  syntax  and  vocabulary,  including  terms  from 
the  problem  domain.  The  phrases  and  sentences  of  this  specification,  however, 
may  be  ambiguous  and  may  fail  to  provide  explicitly  all  the  information 
required  in  a  formal  program  specification.  Therefore,  using  a  large  number  of 
built-in  constraints  (which  must  be  satisfied  by  any  well- formed  program),  any 
specified  constraints  from  the  problem  domain,  and  an  occasional  interaction 
with  the  user,  SAFE  resolves  ambiguities,  fills  in  missing  pieces  of  information, 
and  produces  a  high-level,  complete  program  specification.  To  decide  on 
missing  pieces  of  information,  SAFE  employs  a  variety  of  techniques,  including 
backtracking  and  a  form  of  symbolic  execution. 

The  SAFE  system  views  the  task  of  automatic  programming  as  the 
production  of  a  program  from  a  description  of  the  desired  behavior  of  that 
program.  There  are  four  major  differences  between  a  conventionally  specified 
program  (a  list  of  instructions  for  a  "machine"  to  "execute" )  and  a  program 
described  in  terms  of  its  desired  behavior. 

1.  Informality:  The  behavioral  description  is  informal.  It  has  ambiguities 
(alternative  interpretations  yielding  distinct  behaviors)  and  "partial" 
constructs  (constructs  with  missing  pieces  of  information  that  must  be 
supplied  before  any  interpretation  is  possible).  A  conventionally  specified 
program,  on  the  other  hand,  is  formal;  its  meaning  is  completely  and 
unambiguously  defined  by  the  semantics  of  the  programming  language. 

2.  Vocabulary:  The  primitive  terms  in  the  behavioral  description  are  those 
of  the  problem  domain.  General-purpose  programming  languages,  on 
the  other  hand,  provide  a  primitive  vocabulary  that  is  independent  of 
particular  problem  areas. 

3.  Executability:  Informality  aside,  it  is  possible,  and  sometimes  desirable, 
to  describe  behavior  in  terms  of  relationships  between  the  desired  and 
the  achieved  states  of  a  process,  rather  than  by  rules  that  specify  how  to 
obtain  the  desired  state.  Conventionally  specified  programs  must  give 
an  algorithm  for  reaching  the  desired  state. 

4.  Efficiency:  Conventionally  specified  programs  contain  many  details  of 
operation  beyond  the  desired  input/output  behavior.  Among  these  are 
data  representation,  internal  communication  protocols,  store-recompute 
decisions,  and  so  forth,  that  affect  a  program's  efficiency  (utilization  of 
time  and  computer  resources).  In  general,  these  details  do  not  appear 
in  the  description  of  the  program's  input/output  behavior. 


336 


D2  SAFE  337 

When  one  writes  a  program  in  the  conventional  manner,  one  must  formalize 
the  behavioral  specification,  translate  the  terms  of  the  problem  domain  into 
those  of  a  general  programming  language,  guarantee  that  the  specified  algo- 
rithms actually  achieve  the  desired  results,  and  make  a  myriad  of  decisions 
for  the  sake  of  an  efficient  implementation. 

The  ISI  group  has  attempted  to  split  the  task  of  creating  a  program  into 
two  separate  parts  by  designing  a  formal,  complete  specification  language 
(Balzer  and  Goldman,  1979)  that  allows  behavioral  specifications  to  be  stated 
in  terms  specific  to  the  problem  domain  while  avoiding  efficiency  and  repre- 
sentational concerns.  This  formal  specification  language  acts  as  an  interface 
between  one  project  that  deals  with  the  first  issue,  translation  from  informal 
to  formal  specifications,  and  a  second  project  that  deals  with  the  last  issue, 
optimization  of  a  formal  specification.  The  former  project  is  the  subject  of 
this  article,  while  the  latter  is  described  elsewhere  (Balzer,  Goldman,  and 
Wile,  1976).  The  issues  of  domain-specific  vocabulary  and  executability  are 
addressed  within  the  formal  specification  language. 

The  SAFE  project  has  concentrated  on  only  the  first  of  these  specification 
issues:  producing  automatically  a  formal  description  from  an  informal  descrip- 
tion. It  is  not,  therefore,  a  complete  automatic-programming  system.  The 
user  of  the  SAFE  system  provides  a  behavioral  description  in  a  preparsed, 
limited  subset  of  English,  including  terms  from  the  problem  area.  SAFE  then 
seeks  to  determine  a  way  of  resolving  all  ambiguities  and  of  filling  in  all  missing 
information  in  a  way  that  satisfies  the  system's  knowledge  of  the  constraints 
that  all  programs  must  satisfy.  The  result  is  a  complete,  unambiguous,  very 
high  level  program  specification  in  a  language  called  AP2. 

Partial  Descriptions 

After  studying  many  examples  of  program  specifications  that  had  been 
written  in  English,  the  SAFE  research  group  concluded  that  the  main  seman- 
tic difference  between  these  specifications  and  their  formal  equivalents  is  that 
partial  descriptions  rather  than  complete  descriptions  were  used.  When  such 
partial  descriptions  were  used,  it  was  because  the  missing  information  could 
be  determined  from  the  surrounding  context.  These  partial  descriptions  have 
some  of  the  useful  properties  of  natural-language  specifications  that  are  lack- 
ing in  formal  languages.  They  focus  both  the  writer's  and  the  reader's  atten- 
tion on  the  relevant  issues  and  condense  the  specification.  Furthermore,  the 
extensive  use  of  context  almost  totally  eliminates  bookkeeping  operations  from 
the  natural-language  specification. 

A  partial  description  may  have  zero,  one,  or  more  valid  interpretations  in 
a  given  context.  If  a  single  valid  interpretation  is  found  for  a  description,  it 
is  unambiguous  in  that  context.  Multiple  valid  interpretations  indicate  that 
there  is  not  sufficient  information  from  the  context  to  complete  the  description 


338  Automatic  Programming  X 

and  that  interaction  with  the  user  is  required  to  resolve  the  ambiguity.  If  a 
partial  description  has  no  valid  interpretation,  it  is  inconsistent  within  the 
existing  context. 

The  SAFE  system  allows  the  most  prevalent  forms  of  partial  descriptions 
encountered  in  natural-language  specifications: 

1.  Partial  sequencing:  Operations  are  not  always  described  in  the  order  of 
execution.  While  sequencing  may  sometimes  be  described  explicitly,  it 
is  frequently  implicit  in  the  relationships  between  operations.  Example: 
"Output  generated  while  compiling  is  sent  to  a  scratch  file.  This  file 
must  be  opened  in  write  only  mode."  (The  file  should,  of  course,  be 
opened  before  compiling  commences.) 

2.  Missing  operands:  The  operands  of  operations  are  frequently  omitted 
because  they  are  recoverable  from  context.  Recovering  them  may  involve 
considering  the  operation's  definition,  other  operands,  and  the  proce- 
dural context.  Example:  "Do  not  mount  a  tape  for  a  job  unless  the  tape 
drive  has  been  assigned"  (to  that  job). 

3.  Incomplete  reference:  A  description  of  an  object  may  match  several 
objects,  whereas  it  was  intended  to  refer  to  only  one  or  possibly  a  subset 
of  these  objects.  A  complete  description  may  be  recovered  by  methods 
similar  to  the  one  for  missing  operands.  Example:  "When  the  mail  pro- 
gram starts,  it  opens  the  file  named  MESSAGE"  (in  the  directory  of  the 
job  running  the  program). 

4.  Type  coercions:  Often,  people  using  natural  language  do  not  precisely 
specify  the  object  intended  but  instead  specify  an  associated  object  or  a 
subpart  of  an  object.  This  situation  can  be  recognized  by  a  mismatch 
between  the  type  of  object  actually  specified  and  the  type  of  object 
expected.  Example:  "Information  messages  are  copied  to  each  logged-in 
user"  (i.e.,  to  the  terminal  of  the  job  of  each  logged-in  user). 

Operation  of  SAFE — Constraints  on  Programs 

The  goal  of  SAFE  is  to  complete  the  various  partial  descriptions  in  the 
user's  specification  to  produce  a  formal  specification  of  the  desired  program. 
SAFE  goes  through  several  phases,  but  in  all  phases  the  system  applies  a 
variety  of  constraints  to  complete  the  partial  descriptions.  These  include  the 
built-in  criteria  that  any  formal  program  must  meet  (e.g.,  information  must 
be  produced  before  it  is  consumed)  and  the  built-in  heuristics  that  "sensible" 
programs  will  meet  (e.g.,  the  value  of  a  conditional  must  depend  on  the 
program  data),  as  well  as  any  known  or  discovered  constraints  particular  to 
a  program's  domain  (e.g.,  each  file  in  a  directory  has  a  distinct  name).  In 
fact,  since  programs  are  highly  constrained  objects,  there  are  a  large  number 
of  constraints  that  any  "well-formed"  program  must  satisfy,  and  this  is  one 
reason  that  programs  are  hard  to  write. 


D2  SAFE  339 

In  general,  each  partial  description  has  several  different  possible  comple- 
tions. Based  on  the  partial  description  and  the  context  in  which  it  occurs,  an 
ordered  set  of  possible  completions  is  created  for  it.  But  one  decision  cannot 
be  made  in  isolation  from  the  others;  decisions  must  be  consistent  with  each 
other  and  the  resulting  program  must  make  sense  as  a  whole,  satisfying  all 
the  criteria  for  well-formed  programs. 

The  problem  of  finding  viable  completions  for  a  collection  of  partial 
descriptions  provides  a  classical  backtracking  situation,  since  there  are  many 
related  individual  decisions  that,  in  combination,  can  be  either  accepted  or 
rejected  on  the  basis  of  the  constraints.  SAFE  utilizes  the  constraints  so  that 
early  rejection  possibilities  can  be  realized. 

The  operation  of  SAFE  consists  of  three  sequential  phases:  linguistic, 
planning,  and  meta-evaluation.  The  cumulative  effect  of  these  phases  is 
to  produce  a  formal  specification  composed  of  declarative  and  procedural 
portions.  The  declarative  part,  or  domain  model,  specifies  the  types  of  objects 
manipulated  by  the  process,  the  different  ways  they  may  relate  to  each  other, 
the  actions  that  may  be  performed  on  various  object  types,  and  other  global 
regularities  of  the  problem  domain.  The  procedural  portion  specifies  the 
controlled  application  of  actions  to  objects. 

The  linguistic  phase,  using  production  rules,  transforms  the  parse  trees  of 
the  English  specification  into  fragments  that  retain  the  semantic  content  while 
discarding  the  syntactic  detail.  The  production  rules  capture  many  context- 
sensitive  aspects  of  natural  language,  such  as  the  various  uses  of  the  verb  to  be 
and  of  quantifiers.  The  production  rules  may  also  add  declarations  to  the 
domain  model,  with  user  approval,  when  this  is  required  for  interpretation 
of  the  input.  This  procedure  is  accomplished  by  distinguishing  two  sets  of 
conditions  on  each  rule:  those  relating  to  the  linguistic  form  of  the  phrase 
being  processed  and  those  relating  a  form  to  the  domain  model.  If  the 
linguistic-form  conditions  are  not  satisfied  (e.g.,  a  clause  with  a  transitive 
verb)  but  the  domain-model  conditions  are  (e.g.,  the  verb  names  an  action 
in  the  problem  domain  that  has  operands  of  types  compatible  with  the  verb 
arguments),  the  domain-model  conditions  are  assumed. 

The  planning  phase  determines  the  overall  sequencing  of  the  operations 
in  the  program.  It  also  determines  which  fragments  belong  together  and  how 
they  are  to  interact.  It  does  this  by  using  explicit  sequencing  information  in 
the  description,  such  as  A  is  executed  immediately  after  B  and  A  is  invoked 
whenever  the  condition  C  becomes  true,  as  well  as  static  flow  constraints  on 
well-formed  processes  such  as: 

1.  Before  information  is  consumed  (used  by  one  fragment),   it  must  be 
produced  (created  by  the  same  or  another  fragment). 

2.  Expected  outputs  of  the  whole  program  or  of  a  subprogram  must  be 
produced  somewhere  within  that  program. 


340  Automatic  Programming  X 

3.    The  results  of  each  described  operation  must  be  used  or  referenced 
somewhere. 

The  final  phase,  meta- evaluation,  uses  dynamic  constraints  to  help  deter- 
mine the  proper  completion  of  partial  descriptions.  Dynamic  constraints  are 
those  that  apply,  or  at  least  relate,  to  the  program  during  execution.  Examples 
of  such  constraints  are: 

1.  It  must  be  possible  (in  general)  to  execute  both  branches  of  a  conditional 
statement.  (Otherwise,  why  would  the  user  have  specified  a  conditional?) 

2.  The  constraints  of  a  domain  must  not  be  violated. 

Since  no  actual  input  data  are  available  for  testing  the  execution  of 
the  program  and  since  the  program  must  be  well  formed  for  all  allowable 
inputs,  inputs  are  represented  symbolically.  Instead  of  being  actually  exe- 
cuted, the  program  is  symbolically  executed  on  the  inputs,  which  provides  a 
much  stronger  test  of  the  constraints  than  would  execution  on  any  particular 
set  of  inputs.  The  result  is  a  database  of  relationships  between  the  symbolic 
values  and,  implicitly,  a  database  of  relationships  between  program  variables 
that  are  bound  to  these  values. 

All  decisions  concerning  the  proper  interpretation  of  partial  descriptions 
that  affect  the  computation  to  some  point  in  the  execution  (but  not  beyond) 
must  be  made  before  these  dynamic  criteria  can  be  tested  at  that  point  in  the 
execution.  Thus,  decisions  are  made  as  they  are  needed  by  the  computation 
of  the  program,  and  the  symbolic  state  of  the  program  is  examined  at  each 
stage  of  the  computation.  This  arrangement  allows  the  dynamic  state-of- 
computation  criteria  to  be  used  to  obtain  early  rejection  of  infeasible  alter- 
natives. 

There  is  a  further  point  worth  noting:  Representing  the  complete  state 
of  a  computation  during  symbolic  execution  is  very  difficult  (e.g.,  it  is  quite 
hard  to  determine  the  state  after  execution  of  a  loop  or  conditional  state- 
ment) and  more  detailed  than  necessary  for  testing  the  constraints.  Therefore, 
the  SAFE  system  employs  a  weaker  form  of  symbolic  interpretation,  meta- 
evaluation,  which  only  partially  determines  the  program's  state  as  the  com- 
putation proceeds  (e.g.,  loops  are  executed  only  once  for  some  "generic" 
element). 

Notice  that  symbolic  execution  requires  that  the  sequential  relationships 
between  the  fragments  be  known;  therefore,  the  meta-evaluation  phase  must 
follow  the  planning  phase. 

Finally,  the  global  referencing  constraints  (e.g.,  the  body  of  a  procedure 
must  make  use  of  the  procedure's  parameters)  test  the  overall  use  of  names 
within  the  program  and,  thus,  cannot  be  tested  until  all  decisions  have  been 
made.  These  criteria  can  be  tested  only  after  the  meta-evaluation  is  complete. 


D2  SAFE  341 

Status 

The  prototype  system  has  successfully  handled  the  7 5- to- 200- word  specifi- 
cations of  three  quite  distinct  programs.  In  these  cases,  the  SAFE  output 
of  a  completed  specification,  including  domain-structure  definition,  requires 
approximately  two  pages.  One  example  concerned  part  of  a  system  for 
scheduling  transmissions  in  a  communications  network.  Given  a  table  contain- 
ing entries  for  various  network  subscribers  (SOL)  and  for  various  unassigned 
time  slots  (RATS),  a  schedule  of  absolute  times  when  a  particular  subscriber 
could  broadcast  on  the  network  was  tabulated.  The  input  specification  to 
SAFE  is  shown  in  Figure  D2-1. 

((THE  SOL) 
(IS  SEARCHED) 
FOR 
(AN  ENTRY  FOR  (THE  SUBSCRIBER))) 

(IF  ((ONE) 

(IS  FOUND)) 
((THE  SUBSCRIBER'S  (RELATIVE  TRANSMISSION  TIME)) 
(IS  COMPUTED)  ACCORDING  TO  ("F0RMULA-1"))) 

((THE  SUBSCRIBER'S  (CLOCK  TRANSMISSION  TIME)) 
(IS  COMPUTED)  ACCORDING-TO  ("FORMULA-2")) 

(WHEN  ((THE  TRANSMISSION  TIME) 
(HAS  BEEN  COMPUTED)) 
((IT) 
(IS  INSERTED) 
AS  (THE  (PRIMARY  ENTRY)) 
IN  (A  (TRANSMISSION  SCHEDULE)))) 

(FOR  (EACH  RATS  ENTRY) 
(PERFORM) 

(:((THE  RATS'S  (RELATIVE  TRANSMISSION  TIME)) 
(IS  COMPUTED)  ACCORDING  TO  (" FORMULA- 1")) 
((THE  RATS'S  (CLOCK  TRANSMISSION  TIME)) 
(IS  COMPUTED)  ACCORDING  TO  ("FORMULA-2")))) 

((THE  RATS  (TRANSMISSION  TIMES)) 
(ARE  ENTERED) 
INTO  (THE  SCHEDULE)) 

Figure  D2-1.     Input  (in  preparsed  English)  for  network 
scheduler. 


342  Automatic  Programming  X 

In  formalizing  this  description,  SAFE  encountered  and  resolved  the  fol- 
lowing characteristics  of  informal  specifications: 

Number  of  missing  operands  =  7 

Number  of  incomplete  references  =  12 

Number  of  implicit  type-coercions  =  3 

Number  of  implicit  sequencing  decisions  =  4 

The  robustness  of  the  system  has  been  increased  by  processing  a  num- 
ber of  perturbations  of  each  of  the  major  examples.  These  have  involved 
specifying  the  same  process  but  varying  the  syntax  and  vocabulary,  the  partial 
descriptions,  and  the  formal  knowledge  about  the  problem  domain. 

Future  Developments 

The  key  technical  restrictions  of  the  prototype  system  appear  to  be  (a)  the 
sequential  application  of  the  three  phases,  which  prohibits  adequate  interac- 
tions between  the  expertise  embodied  in  each,  and  (b)  the  backtracking  within 
the  meta-evaluation  phase,  which  corresponds  to  restarting  the  symbolic  exe- 
cution from  an  earlier  point  with  much  unnecessary  search  as  a  possible  con- 
sequence. To  correct  these  limitations,  a  reformulation  of  the  SAFE  system's 
architecture,  along  the  lines  of  the  HEARSAY-II  speech-understanding  system 
(see  Article  V.Cl,  in  Vol.  i),  is  currently  in  progress.  This  framework  consists 
of  a  number  of  cooperating  knowledge  sources  or  experts  interacting  through 
a  global  blackboard  database. 

Simultaneously,  the  system  is  being  scaled  up  to  handle  larger  specifica- 
tions (approximately  20  pages).  Eventually,  the  project  will  consider  the 
formalization  of  incremental  informal  specifications,  so  that  it  can  also  provide 
help  during  both  specification  formulation  and  maintenance  activities. 

References 

See  Balzer,  Goldman,  and  Wile  (1976,  1977,  1978)  and  Balzer  and  Gold- 
man (1979). 


D3.     The  Programmer's  Apprentice 


THE  PROGRAMMER'S  APPRENTICE  is  an  interactive  system  for  helping 
programmers  with  the  task  of  programming.  It  is  being  designed  and  imple- 
mented at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  by  Charles  Rich,  Howard 
Shrobe,  and  Richard  Waters.  The  intent  of  the  Apprentice  is  that  the  pro- 
grammer will  do  the  difficult  parts  of  design  and  implementation,  while  the 
Apprentice  will  act  as  a  junior  partner  and  critic,  keeping  track  of  details 
and  assisting  the  programmer  in  the  documentation,  verification,  debugging, 
and  modification  of  his  (or  her)  program.  To  cooperate  with  the  programmer 
in  this  fashion,  the  Apprentice  must  be  able  to  "understand"  what  is  going 
on.  From  the  viewpoint  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  the  central  development  of 
the  Programmer's  Apprentice  project  has  been  the  design  of  a  representation, 
called  a  plan,  for  programs  and  for  knowledge  about  programming  that  serves 
as  the  basis  for  this  understanding.  Developing  plans  and  reasoning  about 
them  are  the  central  activity  of  the  Programmer's  Apprentice. 

The  plan  for  a  program  represents  the  program  as  a  network  of  operations 
connected  by  links  explicitly  representing  data  flow  and  control  flow.  The 
advantage  of  this  aspect  of  the  plan  formalism  is  that  it  is  a  level  of  abstraction 
away  from  the  specific  syntactic  constructs  for  control  flow  and  data  flow 
used  by  various  programming  languages.  The  most  novel  aspect  of  the  plan 
formalism  is  that  it  goes  beyond  the  specific  level  to  create  a  vehicle  for 
expressing  the  logical  relationships  in  a  program,  as  follows. 

First,  a  plan  is  not  just  a  graph  of  primitive  operations.  Rather,  it  is 
a  hierarchy  of  segments  within  segments,  where  each  segment  corresponds 
to  a  unit  of  behavior  and  has  an  input/output  specification  that  describes 
features  of  this  behavior.  The  plan  specifies  how  each  nonterminal  segment 
is  constructed  from  the  segments  contained  within  it.  This  segmentation  is 
important  because  it  breaks  the  plan  into  localities  that  can  be  understood  in 
isolation  from  each  other. 

Second,  the  behavior  of  a  segment  is  related  to  the  behavior  of  its  sub- 
segments.  This  relationship  is  represented  by  explicit  dependency  links  that 
record  the  goal-subgoal  and  prerequisite  relationships  between  the  input/ 
output  specification  for  a  segment  and  those  for  its  subsegments.  Taken 
together,  the  links  summarize  a  proof  of  how  these  specifications  for  a  seg- 
ment follow  from  the  specifications  of  its  subsegments  and  from  the  way  the 
subsegments  are  connected  by  control  flow  and  data  flow. 

A  final  aspect  of  the  plan  formalism  is  that  there  may  be  more  than 
one  plan  for  a  given  segment  of  a  program,  with  each  plan  representing  a 
different  point  of  view  on  the  segment.  The  data  structures  in  a  program  are 
represented  by  specifying  their  parts,  their  properties,  and  the  relationships 


343 


344  Automatic  Programming  X 

between  them  in  a  method  similar  to  data  abstraction  (Zilles,  1975;  Liskov 
et  al.,  1977). 

Knowledge  about  programming  in  general  is  also  represented  by  plans  and 
data-structure  descriptions.  This  knowledge  is  stored  in  the  Programmer's 
Apprentice  in  a  database  of  common  algorithms  and  data-structure  implemen- 
tations called  the  plan  library.  The  Apprentice's  understanding  of  a  program 
is  embodied  in  a  hierarchical  plan  for  it.  In  general,  the  subplan  for  each 
individual  segment  in  terms  of  its  subsegments  will  be  an  instance  of  some 
plan  stored  in  the  plan  library.  This  structure  gives  the  Apprentice  access  to 
all  of  the  information  stored  in  the  plan  library  about  the  particular  subplan 
as  soon  as  it  can  make  a  guess  as  to  what  the  subplan  is. 

A  Scenario  of  Interaction  with  the  Programmer's  Apprentice 

The  following  hypothetical  conversation  between  a  programmer  and  the 
Programmer's  Apprentice  is  presented  to  illustrate  the  intended  operation  of 
the  system.  (Currently,  most,  but  not  all,  of  the  modules  that  comprise  the 
Apprentice  system  are  running.)  Commentary  on  the  scenario  is  printed  in 
italics.  The  scenario  illustrates  the  following  four  basic  areas  in  which  the 
Apprentice  can  assist  a  programmer: 

1.  Documentation.  One  of  the  primary  services  the  Apprentice  provides  is 
automatic,  permanent,  and  in-depth  documentation  of  the  program.  It 
remembers  not  only  explicit  commentary  supplied  by  the  programmer 
with  the  code,  but  also  a  substantial  body  of  derived  information  describ- 
ing the  logical  structure  underlying  the  program,  such  as  the  dependency 
relationships  between  parts  of  the  program. 

2.  Verification.  The  development  of  a  program  is  accompanied  by  the 
construction  of  a  sequence  of  plans  at  various  levels  of  abstraction.  At 
each  step,  the  Apprentice  attempts  to  verify  that  the  current  plan  is 
both  consistent  and  sufficient  to  accomplish  the  desired  goal.  As  more 
information  is  specified,  the  Apprentice's  reasoning  about  these  plans 
approaches  a  complete  verification  of  the  program. 

3.  Debugging.  Any  discrepancy  between  the  Apprentice's  understanding  of 
the  programmer's  intent  and  the  actual  operation  of  the  program  is 
reported  to  the  programmer  as  a  potential  bug. 

4.  Managing  modification.  Perhaps  the  most  useful  aspect  of  the  Apprentice 
is  that  it  can  help  a  programmer  modify  his  program  without  introducing 
new  bugs.  Based  on  its  knowledge  of  the  logical  relationships  between 
parts  of  a  program,  the  Apprentice  is  able  to  determine  what  parts 
of  a  program  can  be  affected  by  a  proposed  change  and  how  they  can 
be  affected.  It  can  use  this  information  to  warn  the  programmer  of 
impending  difficulties. 

The  scenario  presented  below  traces  the  design,  coding,  and  subsequent 
modification  of  a  program  that  deletes  an  entry  from  a  hash  table.     The 


D3  The  Programmer's  Apprentice  345 

scenario  picks  up  in  the  middle  of  a  session,  at  a  point  where  the  program- 
mer has  already  made  many  design  choices  and  communicated  them  to  the 
Apprentice.  In  particular,  the  user  has  stated  the  input/output  specifications 
for  the  subroutine  DELETE  and  chosen  the  basic  data  structures  to  be  used. 
The  hash  table  is  implemented  as  an  array  of  linked  lists  called  buckets.  Each 
of  the  entries  in  a  bucket  is  a  dotted  pair  whose  CAR  is  the  key  for  the  entry 
(see  Article  VLB  on  LISP). 

Programmer:  The  plan  for  the  routine  DELETE  has  three  main  steps: 
The  first  one  hashes  the  input  key  to  get  an  index,  the  second  one 
fetches  the  bucket  corresponding  to  that  index  from  the  table,  and  the 
third  splices  out  the  entry  in  the  bucket  whose  key  part  is  equal  to  the 
input  key. 

The  only  feature  of  this  scenario  that  is  not  a  current  research  goal  of  the 
Programmer's  Apprentice  project  is  the  use  of  English  dialogue.  Although 
the  system  should  be  able  to  support  a  sophisticated,  natural- language 
"front  end,"  no  work  has  been  done  on  this  to  date.  As  a  result,  the 
programmer  would  actually  type  in  something  like  the  following: 

(subsegments-of -DELETE  stepl-step2-step3) 
(specif ications-for-stepl  (inputs-key 1)  (outputs -index) 
(assert- (=-index- (hash-keyl) ) ) )  ... 

From  the  programmer's  outline  of  the  design,  the  Apprentice  builds  a 
plan  representing  the  program's  intended  structure.  References  to  basic 
programming  techniques  such  as  splicing  out  (deleting  elements  from  a 
linked  list)  trigger  the  retrieval  of  possibly  appropriate  plans  from  the  plan 
library. 

Apprentice:  I  can't  verify  that  this  plan  satisfies  the  specifications  for 
DELETE.  In  particular,  when  the  input  key  is  equal  to  the  key  part 
of  the  first  entry  in  a  bucket,  I  can't  prove  that  the  entry  is  no  longer 
in  the  table  after  DELETE  is  executed.  Note  that  in  this  situation, 
the  bucket  after  splicing  out  entries  has  a  different  initial  cell  from 
the  bucket  before  splicing  out  entries  and  that  therefore  the  table  isn't 
changed. 

After  constructing  a  plan,  the  Apprentice  uses  its  reasoning  abilities  to 
check  for  bugs.  Above,  it  found  one  and  reported  it  to  the  programmer.  In 
general,  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  programmer  to  supply  corrections. 
Below,  the  programmer  corrects  the  plan  by  issuing  semantically  based 
editing  commands  to  the  Apprentice. 

Programmer:  Modify  the  plan  as  follows.  Add  a  final  step  that  compares 
the  bucket  after  splicing  with  the  bucket  before  splicing  and  stores  the 
new  bucket  in  the  table  under  the  index  if  the  two  initial  cells  are  not 
identical. 

Apprentice:     OK,  the  plan  now  seems  correct. 


346  Automatic  Programming 

The  programmer  then  types  in  the  code  for  DELETE.  In  cases  where  the 
programmer  specifies  the  plan  for  a  program  as  completely  as  he  does 
here,  he  could  ask  the  Apprentice  to  write  the  code.  It  is  expected  that  the 
programmer  will  actually  only  write  code  in  situations  where  it  is  easier 
to  write  the  code  than  to  fully  explain  the  plan. 

Programmer: 

(DEFUN  DELETE    (KEY)  ;  hash  table  delete  routine. 
(PROG    (BKT1   BKT2) 

(SETQ  BKT1    (TBL    (HASH  KEY))    BKT2    (BKT-DELETE  KEY  BKT1)) 
(COND    ((NOT    (EQ  BKT1   BKT2)) 

;  check  if  first  entry  in  bucket  deleted. 
(STORE    (TBL    (HASH  KEY))    BKT1))))) 

To  construct  a  plan,  the  Apprentice  analyzes  the  code  written  by  the 
programmer.  Comparing  this  plan  with  the  plan  directly  described  by  the 
programmer,  the  Apprentice  discovers  an  implementation  bug:  In  the  last 
line  of  code,  the  user  probably  meant  to  store  in  the  hash  table  not  the 
first  bucket,  BKT1,  but  the  second  bucket,  BKT2. 

Apprentice:  This  code  is  not  consistent  with  your  plan.  When  the  first 
entry  is  deleted,  the  code  stores  the  bucket  before  splicing,  rather  than 
the  bucket  after  splicing.  Did  you  mean 

(STORE- (TBL- (HASH-KEY) ) -BKT2)  ? 

Programmer:  Yes,  fix  the  code.  Also,  use  the  standard  list-deletion 
algorithm  to  code  BKT-DELETE,  so  that  it  splices  out  of  the  bucket 
all  entries  whose  key  equals  the  indicated  value. 

Apprentice: 

(DEFUN  BKT-DELETE    (KEY  BUCKET)   ;  list  deletion  routine  coded  by  PA. 
(PROG    (CURRENT  PREVIOUS) 

(SETQ  CURRENT  BUCKET     PREVIOUS  NIL) 
LP    (COND    ((NULL  CURRENT)    (RETURN  BUCKET)) 
((EQUAL    (CAAR  CURRENT)    KEY) 

;  if  keypart  equal,  splice  out  entry. 
(COND    (PREVIOUS    (RPLACD  PREVIOUS    (CDR  CURRENT))) 
(T    (SETQ  BUCKET    (CDR  BUCKET))))) 

;  special  if  first  element  deleted. 
(T    (SETQ  PREVIOUS  CURRENT))) 
(SETQ  CURRENT    (CDR  CURRENT)) 
(GO  LP))) 

The  Apprentice  is  able  to  code  a  program  like  this  itself,  even  though  the 
programmer  did  not  specify  a  plan  for  it,  because  it  is  an  implementation 
of  a  standard  algorithm  that  corresponds  to  a  plan  in  the  plan  library. 


D3  The  Programmer's  Apprentice  347 

Code  written  by  the  Apprentice  can  be  freely  mixed  with  code  written  by 
the  programmer,  and  each  can  edit  the  other's  work. 
Sometime  later,  it  is  necessary  to  modify  the  representation  of  the  buck- 
ets.   The  Apprentice  helps  the  programmer  (perhaps  a  different  person) 
maintain  consistency. 

Programmer:  I  want  to  make  a  change  in  the  representation  of  buckets 
in  the  hashing  programs.  A  bucket  now  has  two  parts:  a  count  field 
and  a  list  of  entries  as  before.  The  count  field  will  contain  an  integer 
equal  to  the  length  of  the  list  of  entries.  Let  a  bucket  be  a  dotted  pair 
whose  CAR  is  the  count  and  whose  CDR  is  the  list  of  entries. 

When  the  Apprentice  inspects  the  logical  dependencies  in  the  plans,  it 
discovers  that  a  type  requirement  has  been  violated. 

Apprentice:  The  proposed  change  will  affect  DELETE  as  follows:  After 
the  bucket  is  fetched,  it  is  passed  to  BKT-DELETE,  which  does  the 
actual  deletion.  However,  BKT-DELETE  requires  a  list  of  entries,  while 
in  this  new  implementation,  a  bucket  is  no  longer  just  a  list  of  entries. 

Programmer:     Explain  the  plan  for  BKT-DELETE,  please. 

Apprentice:  BKT-DELETE  is  implemented  following  the  standard  list- 
deletion  plan.  The  inputs  are  a  key  and  a  list  of  entries.  The  plan  is  a 
search  loop  with  two  pointers:  a  pointer  to  the  current  entry,  which  is 
initialized  to  the  input  list,  and  a  trailing  pointer,  which  is  initialized 
to  NIL.  On  each  iteration,  the  loop  tests  the  key  of  the  current  entry. 
If  it  is  equal  to  the  input  key,  the  element  is  spliced  out  of  the  list  by 
RPLACDing  the  trailing  pointer. 

Acting  in  its  documentation  role,  the  Apprentice  describes  the  structure 
of  BKT-DELETE  by  reporting  the  structure  of  its  plan.  The  programmer 
then  decides  how  to  modify  BKT-DELETE. 

Programmer:  Change  the  specifications  of  BKT-DELETE,  so  that  it 
expects  as  input  a  bucket  of  the  new  type,  rather  than  a  list  of  entries. 
Also  change  the  initialization  of  the  pointers  to  read: 

(SETQ-PREVIOUS-BUCKET-CURRENT- (CDR-BUCKET) )  . 

The  Apprentice  reanalyzes  the  program  to  verify  that  this  change  fixes 
the  problem  without  causing  any  other  problems.  This  analysis  reveals 
the  presence  of  inaccessible  code,  which  the  Apprentice  reports  to  the 
programmer. 

Apprentice:  OK,  this  fixes  the  problem.  However,  now  the  special-case 
tests  in  BKT-DELETE  and  DELETE  are  not  necessary,  since  PREVIOUS 
is  never  NIL  and  therefore  elements  are  always  deleted  by  side  effect. 

. . .  and  so  the  session  continues  with  the  Apprentice  looking  over  the 
programmer's  shoulder. 


348  Automatic  Programming  X 

Operation  of  the  System 

The  design  of  the  Programmer's  Apprentice  is  based  on  four  modules — 
a  surface  analyzer,  a  recognizer,  an  interactive  module,  and  a  deductive 
module — and  two  databases — the  plan  library  and  a  scratch  pad  called  the 
design  notebook.  Only  the  first  three  modules  have  been  implemented  thus 
far.  As  described  above,  the  plan  library  contains  the  Apprentice's  knowledge 
of  programming  in  general.  The  design  notebook  contains  the  Apprentice's 
evolving  knowledge  of  the  particular  program  being  worked  on  and  serves 
as  the  communication  center  for  the  system  as  a  whole.  The  modules  com- 
municate with  each  other  solely  by  making  assertions  in  the  design  notebook. 
Each  module  has  predefined  trigger  patterns  that  cause  it  to  perform  specific 
tasks  (such  as  making  a  deduction  or  querying  the  user)  whenever  appropriate 
assertions  appear  in  the  notebook.  Every  assertion  added  to  the  notebook  is 
also  accompanied  by  a  justification  of  its  presence.  These  justifications  make 
it  possible  for  the  Apprentice  to  account  for  its  actions. 

The  surface  analyzer  is  used  to  construct  simple  surface  plans  for  sections 
of  code  written  by  the  programmer.  It  is  the  only  module  whose  implementa- 
tion depends  on  the  programming  language.  To  date,  surface  analyzers  have 
been  implemented  for  both  LISP  and  FORTRAN. 

The  recognition  module  takes  over  where  the  surface  analyzer  leaves  off,  to 
construct  a  detailed  plan  for  a  piece  of  code.  It  first  breaks  up  the  surface  plan 
by  identifying  weakly  interacting  subsegments  that  can  be  further  analyzed 
in  isolation  from  each  other.  It  then  compares  these  subsegments  with  the 
plans  in  the  library  to  determine  more  detailed  plans  for  the  program. 

The  interactive  module  is  the  communication  link  between  the  Apprentice 
and  the  programmer.  It  converts  the  programmer's  input  (which  can  consist 
of  code,  direct  specification  of  a  plan,  or  various  requests)  into  assertions  in 
the  design  notebook  and  decides  what  to  say  to  the  programmer  based  on  the 
information  currently  in  the  notebook. 

The  deductive  module  operates  in  the  background  in  cooperation  with 
all  of  the  other  modules.  It  performs  the  deductions  necessary  to  verify  a 
proposed  match  between  a  program  and  a  plan,  to  detect  bugs  in  a  plan,  and 
to  determine  the  ramifications  of  a  proposed  modification  to  a  program  or 
plan. 

At  a  given  moment,  the  design  notebook  holds  the  sum  total  of  what 
the  Apprentice  knows  about  the  program  being  worked  on.  This  information 
triggers  additional  activity  by  the  modules.  If  the  recognizer  and  deductive 
modules  are  strong  enough  and  the  program  is  simple  enough,  this  process 
will  culminate  in  a  complete  understanding  and  verification  of  the  program. 
However,  this  will  typically  not  be  the  case,  and  some  questions  (such  as  the 
exact  plan  for  a  segment  or  the  correctness  of  a  specification)  will  remain  un- 
resolved in  the  notebook.  The  flexible  architecture  chosen  for  the  Apprentice 
makes  useful  partial  performance  possible  in  this  situation.   The  Apprentice 


D3  The  Programmer's  Apprentice  349 

can  ignore  what  it  does  not  understand  and  work  constructively  with  what  it 
does  understand.  The  programmer  can  be  called  upon  to  fill  in  the  gaps. 

Current  Status  of  the  Programmer's  Apprentice 

Rich  and  Shrobe  (1976)  laid  out  the  basic  idea  of  a  plan  and  the  initial 
design  of  the  Programmer's  Apprentice.  Since  that  time,  Rich,  Shrobe,  and 
Waters  have  been  working  together  on  further  aspects  of  the  theory  along 
with  design  and  implementation  of  the  Apprentice. 

Rich's  work  (1979)  centers  on  the  plan  library  and  the  recognition  process. 
Using  the  plan  representation,  he  is  codifying  a  large  body  of  common  pro- 
gramming strategies  in  the  domain  of  nonnumerical  programming.  Rich  is 
also  designing  a  recognition  module  that  will  identify  instances  of  plans  in  the 
library  as  they  occur  in  combination  in  a  programmer's  program. 

Shrobe  (1978)  has  implemented  a  prototype  deductive  module  that  can 
reason  about  programs  as  represented  by  plans.  An  important  aspect  of 
its  operation  is  that  it  maintains  a  record  of  the  dependency  relationships 
embodied  in  its  deductions.  In  doing  this,  it  builds  up  some  of  the  logical 
structure  that  is  a  vital  part  of  a  plan  for  a  program.  Shrobe  is  currently 
designing  an  improved  version  of  this  deductive  module. 

Waters  (1976,  1978)  has  implemented  a  system  that  can  analyze  the  code 
for  a  program  and  produce  the  basic  structure  of  a  plan  for  the  entire  program. 
The  system  corresponds  to  the  surface-analysis  module  and  the  initial  phase 
of  the  recognition  process.  The  basic  idea  in  Waters'  work  is  that  plans  for 
typical  programs  are  built  up  in  a  small  number  of  stereotyped  ways  and  that 
features  in  the  code  for  a  program  can  be  used  to  determine  how  the  plan  for 
the  program  should  be  built  up. 

The  immediate  goal  is  to  construct  a  prototype  system  that  can  perform 
as  shown  in  the  scenario.  To  do  this,  an  interactive  module  must  be  built, 
and  the  other  modules  must  be  connected  together  into  an  integrated  sys- 
tem. Looking  further  ahead,  additional  modules  (such  as  a  simple  program- 
synthesis  module,  and  one  dealing  with  efficiency  issues)  will  be  added  to  the 
Programmer's  Apprentice,  and  the  existing  ones  will  be  strengthened  so  that 
the  Apprentice  can  assume  an  even  larger  role  in  the  programming  process. 

References 

See  Rich  and  Shrobe  (1978);  also,  Rich  (1979),  Shrobe  (1978),  and  Waters 
(1978). 


D4.     PECOS 


DEVELOPED  by  David  Barstow  (1979)  and  based  on  ideas  presented  in  Green 
and  Barstow  (1978),  the  automatic-programming  system  PECOS  serves  as  the 
coding  expert  of  the  PSI  project  (see  Article  X.Dl)  at  Stanford  University. 
Though  it  can  act  in  conjunction  with  the  PSI  system,  PECOS  can  also  stand 
on  its  own  and  interact  directly  with  the  user.  The  original  problem  area 
of  PECOS  was  symbolic  programming,  which  includes  simple  list-processing, 
sorting,  database  retrieval,  and  concept  formation.  This  domain  has  been 
extended  to  graph  theory  and  simple  number  theory.  Programs  are  specified 
in  terms  of  very  high  level  constructs  such  as  data  structures  (e.g.,  collections, 
mappings)  and  operations  (e.g.,  testing  for  membership  in  a  collection,  com- 
puting the  inverse  image  of  an  object  under  a  mapping). 

Knowledge  about  programming  in  the  problem  area  has  been  codified 
(i.e.,  made  explicit  and  put  into  machine-usable  form)  primarily  as  transfor- 
mation rules,  which  make  up  PECOS's  knowledge  base.  Most  of  the  rules 
describe  how  constructs  and  operations  can  be  represented  or  implemented  in 
terms  of  other  constructs  and  operations  that  are  closer  to,  or  actually  in,  the 
target  language  LISP.  These  rules  can  identify  design  decisions  and  can  also 
serve  as  limited  explanations. 

The  operation  of  the  system  proceeds  by  the  repeated  selection  and  appli- 
cation of  the  transformation  rules  in  the  knowledge  base  to  parts  of  the 
program.  Also  referred  to  as  gradual  refinement,  this  transformation  process 
reduces  the  high-level  specification  to  an  implementation  fully  within  the 
target  language.  Each  application  of  a  rule  is  said  to  produce  a  partial  imple- 
mentation, or  refinement,  of  the  program,  and  the  transformation  rules  are 
called  refinement  rules. 

Conflict  Resolution 

At  some  points  during  the  transformation  process,  a  conflict  may  arise 
because  several  rules  apply  to  the  same  part  of  the  program.  The  han- 
dling of  this  conflict-resolution  situation  is  important:  The  application  of  the 
several  rules  ultimately  results  in  different  target-language  implementations 
that  often  vary  significantly  in  terms  of  efficiency.  There  are  three  ways  to 
handle  this  situation: 

1.  If  PECOS  is  interacting  directly  with  the  user,  the  user  may  select 
which  rule  should  be  applied  (and  thus  which  implementation  will  be 
constructed). 

2.  For  the  convenience  of  the  user,  PECOS  can  choose  one  of  the  applicable 
rules,  applying  about  a  dozen  heuristics  to  select  the  rule  that  leads  to 


350 


D4  PECOS  351 

the  most  efficient  implementation.    These  heuristics  handle  about  two- 
thirds  of  the  choices  that  typically  arise. 

3.  When  no  heuristic  applies  and  the  user  is  uncertain  about  which  rule 
is  "best"  for  his  or  her  purposes,  PECOS  can  apply  each  in  parallel, 
constructing  a  separate  implementation  for  each. 

When  the  PECOS  system  functions  as  the  CODING  expert  of  the  PSI  sys- 
tem, choices  between  rules  are  made  by  an  efficiency  expert  subsystem  called 
LIBRA  (Article  X.D8),  which  incorporates  more  sophisticated  analytic  tech- 
niques than  the  simple  heuristics  of  PECOS.  The  capability  of  developing 
different  implementations  in  parallel  is  used  extensively  in  the  interactions 
between  PECOS  and  LIBRA  (Barstow  and  Kant,  1977). 

The  Knowledge  Base  of  Refinement  Rules 

The  system's  knowledge  base  consists  of  about  400  rules  dealing  with  a 
variety  of  symbolic-programming  concepts.  The  most  abstract  concepts  are 
those  of  the  specification  language  (e.g.,  collection,  inverse  image,  enumerat- 
ing the  objects  in  a  collection).  The  implementation  techniques  covered  by 
the  rules  include  the  representation  of  collections  as  linked  lists,  arrays  (both 
ordered  and  unordered),  and  Boolean  mappings,  and  the  representation  of 
mappings  as  tables,  sets  of  pairs,  property-list  markings,  and  inverted  map- 
pings (indexed  by  range  element).  As  a  natural  by-product,  these  rules  also 
cover  sorting  within  a  transfer  paradigm  that  includes  simpler  sorts  such  as 
insertion  and  selection.  While  some  of  the  rules  are  specific  to  LISP,  about 
three-fourths  of  the  rules  are  independent  of  LISP  or  any  other  target  lan- 
guage. 

Internally,  PECOS's  rules  are  represented  as  condition-action  pairs  (pro- 
duction rules;  see  Article  III.C4,  in  Vol.  I).  The  conditions  are  particular 
configurations  of  abstract  operations  and  data  structures  that  are  matched 
against  parts  of  the  developing  program.  Where  the  match  is  successful,  the 
actions  replace  parts  of  the  abstract  concepts  with  refinements  of  those  parts. 

In  the  system  of  refinement  rules,  intermediate-level  abstractions  play 
a  major  role.  One  benefit  of  such  intermediate-level  concepts  is  a  certain 
economy  of  knowledge.  Consider,  for  example,  the  construct  of  a  sequential 
collection:  a  linearly  ordered  group  of  locations  in  which  the  elements  of  a 
collection  can  be  stored.  Since  there  is  no  constraint  on  how  the  linear  ordering 
is  implemented,  the  construct  can  be  seen  as  an  abstraction  (or  generalization) 
of  both  linked  lists  and  arrays.  Much  of  what  programmers  know  about 
linked  lists  is  in  common  to  what  they  know  about  arrays  and  hence  can  be 
represented  as  one  rule  set  about  sequential  collections.  A  further  benefit  of 
these  intermediate-level  concepts  is  that  they  facilitate  resolution  of  conflicts 
between  alternative  rules:  Attention  can  be  focused  on  the  essential  aspects 
of  a  choice  while  ignoring  irrelevant  details. 


352  Automatic  Programming  X 

The  Programming  Knowledge  Base 

Most  of  the  currently  available  sources  of  programming  knowledge 
(e.g.,  books  and  articles)  are  too  imprecise  for  effective  use  by  a  machine. 
The  descriptions  are  often  informal,  with  details  omitted  and  assumptions 
unstated.  Before  this  programming  knowledge  can  be  made  available  to 
machines,  it  must  be  made  more  precise — the  assumptions  must  be  made 
explicit  and  the  details  must  be  filled  in. 

PECOS 's  rules  provide  much  of  this  precision  for  the  domain  of  elementary 
symbolic  programming.  For  example,  consider  the  following  rule  (an  English 
paraphrase  of  PECOS's  internal  representation): 

A  collection  may  be  represented  as  a  mapping  of  objects  to  Boolean  values;  the 
default  range  object  is  FALSE. 

Most  programmers  know  this  fact:  that  a  collection  may  be  represented  by 
its  characteristic  function.  Without  knowing  this  rule,  or  something  similar, 
it  is  almost  impossible  to  understand  why  a  bit  string  can  represent  a  set  (or, 
for  that  matter,  why  property-list  markings  work).  Yet  this  rule  is  generally 
left  unstated  in  discussions  of  bit-string  representations.  As  another  example, 
consider  the  following  rule: 

An  association  table  whose  keys  are  integers  from  a  fixed  range  may  be  represented 
as  an  array  subregion. 

The  fact  that  an  array  is  simply  a  way  to  represent  a  mapping  of  integers  to 
arbitrary  values  is  well  known  and  usually  stated  explicitly.  The  detail  that 
the  integers  must  be  from  a  fixed  range  is  usually  not  stated.  Note  that  if  the 
integers  are  not  from  a  fixed  range,  an  array  is  the  wrong  representation  and 
something  like  a  hash  table  should  be  used. 

PECOS's  rules  also  identify  particular  design  decisions  that  are  part  of 
programming.  For  example,  one  of  the  crucial  decisions  in  building  an  enumer- 
ator of  the  objects  in  a  sequential  collection  is  selecting  the  order  in  which 
they  should  be  enumerated.  This  decision  is  often  made  only  implicitly.  For 
example,  the  use  of  the  LISP  function  MAPC  to  enumerate  the  objects  in  a 
list  assumes  implicitly  that  the  stored  (or  "natural")  order  is  the  right  order 
in  which  to  enumerate  them.  While  this  is  often  correct,  there  are  times 
when  some  other  order  is  desired.  For  example,  the  selector  of  a  selection  sort 
involves  enumerating  the  objects  according  to  a  particular  ordering  relation. 
A  second  major  decision  in  building  an  enumerator  involves  selecting  a  way 
to  save  the  state  of  the  computation  between  calls  to  the  enumerator.  The 
use  of  a  location  (e.g.,  index  or  list  cell)  to  specify  the  current  state  is  based 
on  knowing  the  following  rule: 

//  the  enumeration  order  is  the  same  as  the  stored  order,  the  state  of  an  enumera- 
tion may  be  represented  as  a  location  in  the  sequential  collection. 


D4  PECOS  353 

Were  the  enumeration  order  different  from  the  stored  order  (as  in  a  selection 
sort),  some  other  state-saving  scheme  would  be  needed,  such  as  deleting  the 
objects  or  marking  them  in  some  fashion. 

Another  interesting  aspect  of  PECOS's  rules  is  that  they  have  a  certain 
kind  of  explanatory  power.  Consider,  for  example,  a  well-known  trick  for 
computing  the  intersection  of  two  linked  lists  of  atoms  in  linear  time:  Map 
down  the  first  list  and  put  a  special  mark  on  the  property  list  of  each  atom; 
then  map  down  the  second  list,  collecting  only  those  atoms  whose  property 
lists  contain  the  special  mark.  This  technique  can  be  understood  on  the  basis 
of  the  following  four  PECOS  rules  (in  addition  to  the  rules  about  representing 
collections  as  linked  lists): 

A  collection  may  be  represented  as  a  mapping  of  objects  to  Boolean  values;  the 
default  range  object  is  FALSE. 

A  mapping  whose  domain  consists  of  atoms  may  be  represented  with  property-list 
markings. 

The  intersection  of  two  collections  may  be  implemented  by  enumerating  the  objects 
in  one  and,  while  enumerating  them,  collecting  those  that  are  members  of  the  other. 

If  a  collection  is  input,  its  representation  may  be  converted  into  any  other  repre- 
sentation before  further  processing. 

Given  these  rules,  the  trick  works  by  first  converting  the  representation  of 
one  collection  from  a  linked  list  to  property-list  markings  with  Boolean  values 
and  then  computing  the  intersection  in  the  standard  way,  except  that  a 
membership  test  for  property-list  markings  involves  a  call  to  GETPROP  rather 
than  a  scan  down  a  linked  list. 


Status 

PECOS  is  able  to  implement  abstract  algorithms  (i.e.,  a  very  high  level 
specification)  in  a  variety  of  domains,  including  elementary  symbolic  pro- 
gramming (simple  classification  and  concept-formation  algorithms),  sorting 
(several  versions  of  selection  and  insertion  sort),  graph  theory  (a  reachability 
algorithm),  and  even  simple  number  theory  (a  prime-number  algorithm).  In 
each  case,  PECOS's  knowledge  about  different  implementation  techniques  per- 
mitted the  construction  of  a  variety  of  alternative  implementations,  often  with 
significantly  different  efficiency  characteristics. 

The  success  of  PECOS  demonstrates  the  viability  of  the  knowledge-based 
approach  to  automatic  programming.  In  developing  this  approach  further, 
two  research  directions  seem  particularly  promising. 

First,  programming  knowledge  for  other  domains  must  be  codified.  In  the 
process,  rules  developed  for  one  domain  may  be  found  to  be  useful  in  other 
domains.  With  the  hope  of  verifying  the  wider  utility  of  PECOS's  rules  about 


354  Automatic  Programming  X 

collections  and  mappings,  Yale  University's  Knowledge-based  Automatic 
Programming  Project  codified  the  programming  knowledge  needed  for  some 
elementary  graph  algorithms  (Barstow,  1978). 

As  an  example,  consider  the  common  technique  of  representing  a  graph 
as  an  adjacency  matrix.  To  construct  such  a  representation,  only  one  rule 
about  graphs  need  be  known: 

A  graph  may  be  represented  as  a  pair  of  sets:  a  set  of  vertices  (whose  elements  are 
primitive  objects)  and  a  set  of  edges  (whose  elements  are  pairs  of  vertices). 

The  rest  of  the  necessary  knowledge  is  concerned  with  sets  and  mappings 
and  is  independent  of  its  application  to  graphs.  For  example,  to  derive  the 
bounds  on  the  matrix,  one  need  know  only  that  primitive  objects  may  be 
represented  as  integers,  that  a  set  of  otherwise  unconstrained  integers  may 
be  represented  as  a  sequence  of  consecutive  integers,  and  that  a  sequence 
of  consecutive  integers  may  be  represented  as  lower  and  upper  bounds.  To 
derive  the  representation  of  the  matrix  itself,  one  need  only  know  PECOS's 
rules  about  Boolean  mappings  and  association  tables,  plus  the  fact  that  a 
table  whose  keys  are  pairs  of  integers  in  fixed  ranges  may  be  represented  as  a 
two-dimensional  matrix. 

The  second  direction  indicated  by  the  PECOS  research  is  that  different 
kinds  of  programming  knowledge  need  to  be  codified.  Two  types  seem  par- 
ticularly important:  efficiency  knowledge  and  strategic  knowledge.  LIBRA 
(Article  X.D8),  which  acts  together  with  PECOS  in  PSI's  synthesis  phase, 
embodies  a  large  amount  of  efficiency  knowledge;  but  much  remains  to  be 
done.  Very  little  work  on  the  use  of  general  strategies  (e.g.,  divide  and  con- 
quer) in  program  synthesis  has  been  done.  The  latter  seems  an  especially 
important  direction,  since  such  strategies  appear  to  play  a  major  role  in  pro- 
gramming by  humans. 

References 

See  Barstow  (1979);  also,  Barstow  and  Kant  (1977)  and  Barstow  (1978). 


D5.     DEDALUS 


DEDALUS,  the  DEDuctive  ALgorithm  Ur-Synthesizer,  developed  by  Richard 
Waldinger  and  Zohar  Manna  at  SRI  International,  accepts  an  unambiguous, 
logically  complete,  very  high  level  specification  of  a  desired  program  and, 
through  repeated  application  of  transformation  rules,  seeks  to  reduce  it  to 
an  implementation  within  a  simple  LISP-like  target  language.  This  target- 
language  implementation  is  guaranteed  to  be  correct  (i.e.,  logically  equivalent 
to  the  high-level  specification)  and  to  terminate.  The  knowledge  that  ulti- 
mately relates  the  constructs  of  the  specification  language  to  those  in  the 
target  language  is  expressed  in  the  transformation  rules.  But  of  special 
importance  are  certain  rules  that  express  general  programming  principles  that 
are  independent  of  the  particular  specification  language  and  target  language. 
These  rules,  which  have  constituted  a  major  component  of  the  DEDALUS 
effort,  form  conditional  statements  and  recursive  and  nonrecursive  procedures; 
they  also  generalize  procedures,  construct  well-founded  orderings  to  guarantee 
the  termination  of  recursive  calls,  and  write  code  that  simultaneously  achieves 
two  or  more  goals.  These  general  programming  principles  are  described  below 
in  detail,  with  examples  illustrating  their  application.  As  pointed  out  below 
in  the  section  on  the  status  of  the  project,  some  of  the  principles  are  fairly 
well  understood,  while  others  require  further  study.  Not  all  the  principles  are 
implemented  in  the  current  DEDALUS  system. 

The  DEDALUS  specification  language  can  contain  constructs  that  are  close 
to  how  the  user  actually  thinks  about  the  problem.  Thus,  the  DEDALUS 
specification  of  the  program  LESSALL(x  /),  which  tests  whether  a  number  x 
is  less  than  every  element  of  a  list  /  of  numbers,  and  the  program  GCD(x  y), 
which  computes  the  greatest  common  divisor  of  two  nonnegative  integers  x 
and  y,  are  specified  as  follows: 

LESSALL(x  /)    <=  compute  X  <  ALL(Z) 

where  x  is  a  number  and  /  is  a  list  of  numbers, 

GCD(x  y)   <=  compute  MAX{  z\   z\x  and  z  \  y} 

where  x  and  y  are  nonnegative,  nonzero  integers. 

Elements  of  DEDALUS 's  specification  language,  like  the  ALL  construct  in 
P(ALL(7)),  indicating  that  the  condition  P  holds  for  all  elements  of  the  list  /, 
and  the  set  constructor  {u:  P(u)},  indicating  the  set  of  elements  for  which 
P  is  true,  will  eventually  be  converted  into  target-language  code  through  the 
repeated  application  of  transformation  rules.  The  specification  language  is 
not  fixed:  New  constructs  can  be  introduced  by  modifying  or  adding  trans- 
formation rules. 

355 


356  Automatic  Programming  X 

The  operation  of  DEDALUS  consists  of  the  repeated  application  of  trans- 
formations to  expressions  to  produce  expressions  that  are  closer  to,  or  within, 
the  target  language.  In  DEDALUS,  the  expressions  that  occur  during  the 
transformation  process  specify  not  only  programs,  but  also  conditions  to  be 
proved,  as  well  as  conditions  to  be  made  true.  All  these  expressions  are  treated 
as  goals  to  be  achieved:  For  an  expression  that  specifies  a  program,  the  goal 
is  to  convert  that  program  into  a  target-language  implementation;  for  an 
expression  that  is  a  condition  to  be  proved,  the  goal  is  to  convert  it  to  the 
logical  constant  TRUE;  for  an  expression  that  is  a  condition  to  be  made  true, 
the  goal  is  to  construct  a  program  that  will  make  that  condition  true. 

Transforming  a  subexpression  into  another  subexpression  requires  rules 
of  the  form 

t  =>  t'ifP, 

the  condition  P  being  optional,  indicating  that  the  subexpression  t  can  be 
replaced  by  t' .  If  P  is  present,  the  rule  can  only  be  applied  provided  that 
the  system  first  proves  that  P  is  true;  which  is  to  say,  before  the  rule  can  be 
applied,  the  system  must  succeed  in  achieving  the  subgoal 

Goal:     prove  P. 

For  example,  consider 

P(ALL(/))  =>  P(HEAD(/))  and  P(AIX(TAIL(/)))  if  not  empty  (/) , 

which  expresses  the  fact  that  a  property  P  holds  for  every  element  of  a 
nonempty  list  /  if  it  holds  for  the  first  element  HEAD(/)  and  for  every  element 
of  the  list  TAIL(Z)  of  the  other  elements.  Before  the  system  can  apply  this  rule 
to  some  part  of  an  expression,  it  would  have  to  succeed  in  proving  that  /  is 
not  empty. 

The  application  of  transformation  rules  results  in  a  tree  of  goals  and 
subgoals.  Initially,  the  top-level  goals  of  this  tree  are  established  by  program 
specifications.  Thus,  the  common  form  of  program  specification 

f(x)   <=  compute  P(x) 
where  Q(x) 

establishes  its  output  description  as  the  top-level  goal 

Goal:     compute  P(x) , 

and  in  trying  to  achieve  this  goal,  the  system  assumes  the  truth  of  Q(x).  If 
the  top-level  goals  of  trees  are  established  by  program  specifications,  most 


D5  DEDALUS  357 

subgoals  are  established  as  the  result  of  transformations.  Thus,  by  applying 
the  transformation  rule 

u  |  v  and  u\w   =>   u\v  and  u\w  —  v 

to  the  top-level  goal  of  the  GCD  program, 

Goal  1:      compute  MAX{z:   z\x  and  z  \  y}  , 

the  system  establishes 

Goal  2:      compute  MAX{z:   z  \  x  and  z\y  —  x} 

as  a  subgoal.  Such  transformations  express  knowledge  about  specific  con- 
structs. In  the  DEDALUS  system  there  is  also  knowledge  of  a  more  general 
sort. 

General  Programming  Principles 

This  section  describes  five  general  programming  principles  and  presents 
several  examples  to  illustrate  their  application.  The  principles  express  knowl- 
edge about  how  to  form  conditionals  and  procedures  (recursive  and  nonrecur- 
sive),  how  to  replace  two  or  more  procedures  by  a  generalized  procedure,  and 
how  to  achieve  simultaneous  goals.  (As  explained  later  in  the  article,  the 
current  implementation  of  DEDALUS  does  not  incorporate  the  generalization 
of  procedures  or  the  achievement  of  simultaneous  goals.) 

Conditional  formation.  Many  of  the  transformation  rules  impose  some 
condition  P  (e.g.,  /  is  nonempty,  x  is  nonnegative)  that  must  be  satisfied  for 
the  rule  to  be  applied.  Suppose  that,  in  attempting  to  apply  a  particular  rule, 
the  system  failed  to  prove  or  disprove  the  condition  P,  where  P  is  expressed 
entirely  in  terms  of  the  primitive  constructs  of  the  target  language;  in  such 
a  situation,  the  conditional-formation  rule  is  invoked.  This  rule  allows  the 
introduction  of  case  analysis  to  consider  separately  the  cases  in  which  P  is 
true  and  in  which  P  is  false.  Suppose  the  result  is  both  a  program  segment 
Si  that  achieves  the  goal  under  the  assumption  that  P  is  true  and  another 
program  segment  #2  that  achieves  the  goal  under  the  assumption  that  P  is 
false.  The  conditional-formation  principle  puts  these  two  program  segments 
together  into  a  conditional  expression 


if  P  then  S\  else  5; 


2  j 


which  achieves  the  goal  regardless  of  whether  P  is  true  or  false.  During  the 
generation  of  52,  the  system  could  discover  that  a  conditional  expression  was 
unnecessary:  The  generation  of  52  may  not  have  required  the  assumption  that 
P  was  false.  In  such  a  case,  the  program  constructed  would  be  simply  52- 


358  Automatic  Programming  X 

Recursion  formation.  Suppose,  in  constructing  a  program  with  specifi- 
cations 

f(x)   <=  compute  P(x) 
where  Q(x) , 
the  system  encounters  a  subgoal 

Goal:     compute  P(t) , 

which  is  an  instance  of  the  output  specification,  compute  P(x).  Because 
the  program  f(x)  is  intended  to  compute  P(x)  for  any  x  satisfying  its  input 
specification  Q(x),  the  recursion-formation  rule  proposes  achieving  the  subgoal 
above  by  computing  P(i)  with  a  recursive  call  f(t).  For  this  step  to  be 
valid,  it  must  ensure  that  the  input  condition  Q(t)  holds  when  the  proposed 
recursive  call  is  executed.  To  ensure  that  the  new  recursive  call  will  not  cause 
the  program  to  loop  indefinitely,  the  rule  must  also  establish  a  termination 
condition,  showing  that  the  argument  t  is  strictly  less  than  the  input  x  in 
some  well-founded  ordering.  (A  well-founded  ordering  is  an  ordering  in  which 
no  infinite,  strictly  decreasing  sequences  can  exist.)  This  condition  precludes 
the  possibility  that  an  infinite  sequence  of  recursive  calls  would  occur  during 
the  execution  of  the  program. 

One  example  of  recursion  formation  in  the  DEDALUS  system  is  the  pro- 
gram LESSALLfx  /),  which  tests  whether  a  given  number  x  is  less  than  every 
element  of  a  given  list  /  of  numbers.  The  specifications  for  this  program  are 

LESSALL(x  /)    <=  compute  X  <  ALL(/) 

where  x  is  a  number  and  /  is  a  list  of  numbers. 
In  deriving  this  program,  the  system  develops  a  subgoal 

Goal:      compute  X  <  ALL(TAIL(/)) , 

in  the  case  that  /  is  nonempty.  This  subgoal  is  an  instance  of  the  output 
specification  of  the  original  specification,  with  the  input  I  replaced  by  TAIL(/); 
therefore,  the  recursion-formation  principle  proposes  that  the  subgoal  be 
achieved  by  introducing  a  recursive  call  LESSALL(x  TAIL(/)).  To  ensure  that 
this  step  is  valid,  the  rule  establishes  an  input  condition  that 

x  is  a  number  and  TAIL(Z)  is  a  list  of  numbers 

and  a  termination  condition  that  the  argument  pair  (x  TAIL(Z))  is  less  than  the 
input  pair  (x  I)  in  some  well-founded  ordering.  This  termination  condition 
holds  because  TAIL(7)  is  a  proper  sublist  of  /.  As  the  final  program,  the  system 
obtains 

LESSALL(x  /)    <=  if  EMPTY(/)  then  TRUE 

else  x  <  HEAD(Z)  and  LESSALL(x  TAIL(/)) . 


D5  DEDALUS  359 

Procedure  formation.     Suppose  that,  while  developing  a  tree  for  a 
specification  of  the  form 

f(x)   <=  compute  P(x) 
where  Q(x) , 

the  system  encounters  a  subgoal 

Goal  B:     compute  R(t) , 

which  is  an  instance  not  of  the  output  specification  compute  P(x)  but  of  some 
previously  generated  subgoal 

Goal  A:     compute  R(x)  . 

Then  the  procedure-formation  principle  introduces  a  new  procedure,  g(x), 
whose  output  specification  is 

g(x)   <=   compute  R{x) . 

In  this  way,  both  goals  A  and  B  can  be  achieved  by  calls  g(x)  and  g(t)  to  a 
single  procedure.  In  the  case  where  goal  B  has  been  derived  from  goal  A, 
the  call  to  g(t)  will  be  a  recursive  call;  otherwise,  both  calls  will  be  simple 
procedure  calls. 

An  example  of  procedure  formation  occurs  in  the  specification  of  the 
program  CART(s  t)  to  compute  the  Cartesian  product  of  two  sets,  s  and  t: 

CART(s  t)   <=  compute  {(x  y):  x  £  s  and  y  £  t} 
where  s  and  t  are  finite  sets. 

While  deriving  the  tree  for  the  program,  the  system  obtains  a  subgoal 

Goal  A:     compute  {(x  y):   X  =  HEAD(s)   and  y  £  t}  , 

given  that  s  is  nonempty.  Developing  goal  A  further,  the  system  derives 

Goal  B:     compute  {(x  y)\  x  =  HEAD(5)  and  y  G  TAIL(£)}  , 

given  that  t  is  nonempty.  Goal  B  is  an  instance  of  goal  A;  therefore, 
the  procedure-formation  rule  proposes  introducing  a  new  procedure  CART- 
HEAD(s  t)  whose  output  specification  is 

CARTHEAD(s  t)   <=   compute  {(x  y):  x  =  HEAD(s)  and  y  G  t}  , 

so  that  goal  A  can  be  achieved  with  a  procedure  call  CARTHEAD(s  t),  and 
goal  B,  with  a  (recursive)  call  CARTHEAD(s  TAlh(t)). 


360  Automatic  Programming  X 

When  the  CARTHEAD  procedure  is  constructed  by  the  techniques  already 
described,  the  final  system  of  programs  becomes 

CART(s  t)   <=  if  EMPTY(s)  then  {  } 

else  UNION(CARTHEAD(s  t)  CART(TAIL(s)  t)) , 

CARTHEAD(s  t)    <=  if  EMPTY(t)  then  {  } 

else  UNION({HEAD(s)  HEAD(£)} 

CARTHEAD(s  TAIL(t)) . 

Generalization.    Suppose,  in  deriving  a  program,  that  we  obtain  two 
subgoals 

Goal  A:     compute  R(a(x)) 
Goal  B:     compute  R(b(x)) , 

neither  of  which  is  an  instance  of  the  other,  but  both  of  which  are  instances 
of  the  more  general  expression 

compute  R{y)  • 

In  such  a  case,  the  extended  procedure-formation  rule  proposes  the  introduc- 
tion of  the  new  procedure,  whose  output  specification  is 

g(y)   <=   compute  i%) . 

Thus,  goal  A  and  goal  B  can  be  achieved  by  procedure  calls  to  g(a(x))  and 
g(b(x)),  respectively. 

Generalization  is  used  in  the  synthesis  of  the  program  REVERSE(/),  which 
reverses  a  list  /.  We  first  derive  two  subgoals: 

Goal  A:     compute  APPEND(REVERSE(TAIL(/)) 

cons(head(/)nil)) 

Goal  B:     compute  APPEND(REVERSE(TAIL(TAIL(/))) 

cons(head(tail(/)) 

cons(head(/)nil)))  . 

Each  is  an  instance  of  the  more  general  expression 

compute  APPEND(REVERSE(TAIL(/)) 
CONS(HEAD(/)  m)) ; 

therefore,  the  extended  procedure-formation  rule  proposes  introducing  a  new 
procedure  REVERSEGEN(/  m),  whose  output  specification  is  the  more  general 
expression: 


D5  DEDALUS  361 

REVERSEGEN(/  m)    *=  compute  APPEND(REVERSE(TAIL(/)) 

CONS(HEAD(/)m)) . 

Although  this  procedure,  which  reverses  a  nonempty  list  /  and  appends  the 
result  to  m,  is  a  more  general  problem  than  the  original  REVERSE  program,  it 
turns  out  that  REVERSEGEN  is  actually  easier  to  construct.  The  final  system 
of  programs  obtained  is 

REVERSE(/)    <=  if  EMPTY(/)  then  NIL 

else  REVERSEGEN(/  NIL) 

REVERSEGEN(/  m)    <=  if  EMPTY(TAIL(/))  then  CONS(HEAD(/)?m) 

else  REVERSEGEN(TAIL(/)  CONS(HEAD(/)m)) . 

Simultaneous  goals.  To  deal  with  operations  that  produce  side  effects 
such  as  modifying  the  structure  of  data  objects  (e.g.,  assignment  statements), 
DEDALUS  introduces  constructs  such  as  ACHIEVE  P,  to  denote  a  program 
intended  to  make  the  condition  P  true. 

In  constructing  a  program  to  achieve  two  conditions,  Pi  and  P2,  it  is 
not  sufficient  to  decompose  the  problem  by  constructing  two  independent 
programs  to  achieve  Pi  and  P2.  The  concatenation  of  the  two  programs  might 
not  achieve  both  conditions  because  the  program  that  achieves  P2  may  in  the 
process  make  Pi  false,  and  vice  versa. 

For  example,  suppose  a  program  is  desired  to  sort  the  values  of  three 
variables  x,  y,  and  z — in  other  words,  to  permute  the  values  of  the  variables 
to  achieve  the  two  conditions  x  <  y  and  y  <  z  simultaneously.  Assume  the 
given  primitive  instruction  SORT2(it  v),  which  sorts  the  values  of  its  input 
variables  u  and  v.  The  concatenation 

SORT2  (x  y) 
SORT2  (y  z) 

of  these  two  segments  will  not  necessarily  achieve  both  conditions  simul- 
taneously; the  second  segment  SORT2  (y  z)  may,  by  sorting  y  and  2,  make 
the  first  condition  x  <  y  false. 

The  simultaneous-goal  principle,  which  was  introduced  to  circumvent  such 
difficulties,  states  that  to  satisfy  a  goal  of  form 

ACHIEVE  Pi  and  P2  , 

a  program  F  is  first  constructed  to  achieve  Pi,  and  then  F  is  modified 
to  achieve  P2  while  protecting  Pi  at  the  end  of  F.  A  special  protection 
mechanism  (cf.  Sussman,  1975)  ensures  that  no  modification  is  permitted  that 
destroys  the  truth  of  the  protected  condition  Pi  at  the  end  of  the  program. 


362  Automatic  Programming  X 

To  apply  this  principle  to  the  goal 

ACHIEVE  x  <  y    and  y  <  z 

in  the  sorting  problem,  for  example,  a  system  would  first  ACHIEVE  x  <  y, 
by  using  the  segment  SORT2  (x  y).  This  program  would  then  be  modified  to 
achieve  the  second  condition  y  <  z.  But  adding  SORT2  (y  z)  at  the  end  of  the 
program  will  not  work  because  it  destroys  the  truth  of  the  protected  condition 
x  <y. 

However,  in  general,  a  goal  may  be  achieved  by  inserting  modifications 
at  any  point  in  the  program,  not  merely  at  the  end.  Introducing  the  two 
instructions 

if  y  <  x  then  SORT2  (x  z) 

if  x  <  y  then  SORT2  (y  z) 

at  the  beginning  of  the  program  segment  would  simultaneously  achieve  both 
conditions  x  <  y  and  y  <  z.  The  resulting  program  would  be 

if  y  <  x  then  SORT2  (x  z) 
if  x  <  y  then  SORT2  (y  z) 
SORT2  (x  y) . 


Status 

Currently,  the  DEDALUS  implementation  incorporates  the  principles  of 
conditional  formation,  recursion  formation  (including  the  termination  proofs), 
and  procedure  formation,  but  it  does  not  include  generalization  or  the  for- 
mation of  structure-changing  programs.  The  techniques  for  deriving  straight- 
line,  structure-changing  programs  were  implemented  in  a  separate  system  (see 
Waldinger,  1977). 

Conditional  formation  and  recursion  formation  are  well  understood.  The 
method  for  proving  termination  of  ordinary  recursive  calls  does  not  always 
extend  to  the  multiple-procedure  case.  The  generalization  mechanism  and  the 
extended  procedure-formation  principle  are  just  beginning  to  be  formulated. 

The  derivation  of  straight-line  programs  with  simple  side  effects  is  fairly 
well  understood,  but  much  work  remains  to  be  done  on  the  derivation  of 
structure-changing  programs  with  conditional  expressions  and  loops,  as  well 
as  on  the  derivation  of  programs  that  alter  list  structures  and  other  complex 
data  objects. 

The  DEDALUS  system  is  implemented  in  QLISP,  an  extension  of  INTER- 
LISP  that  includes  pattern-matching  and  backtracking  facilities.  The  full 
power  of  the  QLISP  language  is  available  in  expressing  each  rule,  since  the  rules 
are  represented  as  QLISP  programs  in  a  fairly  direct  manner  (see  Chap.  Vl). 


D5  DEDALUS  363 

The  following  are  some  representative  programs  constructed  by  the  cur- 
rent DEDALUS  system: 

Numerical  programs: 

— the  subtractive  GCD  algorithm, 

— the  Euclidean  GCD  algorithm, 

— the  binary  GCD  algorithm, 

— the  remainder  of  dividing  two  integers. 

List  programs: 

— finding  the  maximum  element  of  a  list, 

— testing  whether  a  list  is  sorted, 

— testing  whether  a  number  is  less  than  every  element  of  a  list  of 

numbers  (LESSALL), 
— testing  whether  every  element  of  one  list  of  numbers  is  less  than 

every  element  of  another. 

Set  programs: 

— computing  the  union  or  intersection  of  two  sets, 

— testing  whether  an  element  belongs  to  a  set, 

— testing  whether  one  set  is  a  subset  of  another, 

— computing  the  Cartesian  product  of  two  sets  (CART). 


References 

See  Manna  and  Waldinger  (1975,  1978)  and  Waldinger  (1977). 


D6.     Protosystem  I 


PROTOSYSTEM  I,  an  automatic-programming  system  designed  by  William 
Martin,  Gregory  Ruth,  Robert  Baron,  Matthew  Morgenstern,  and  others  of 
the  M.I.T.  Laboratory  for  Computer  Science,  is  part  of  a  larger  research 
project  aimed  at  modeling,  understanding,  and  automating  the  writing  of  a 
data-processing  system.  (Hereafter,  the  data-processing  system  is  referred  to 
as  a  data-processing  program,  in  accord  with  this  chapter's  terminology,  which 
refers  to  the  output  of  an  automatic-programming  system  as  a  program.) 

A  model  of  the  larger  research  project  was  developed  that  has  five  phases. 
The  successive  phases  can  be  viewed  as  a  series  of  transformations  of  the 
descriptions  of  the  target  program,  beginning  with  a  global  conceptual  descrip- 
tion of  the  problem  at  hand  and  progressing,  through  increasing  specificity, 
toward  a  detailed  machine-level  solution.  The  aim  of  the  project  is  to  develop 
stages  of  an  AP  system  where  each  corresponds  to  one  of  the  five  phases  of 
the  model  and  each  embodies  the  particular  knowledge  and  expertise  for  that 
phase. 

Phase  1:  Problem  definition.  The  specification  of  the  data-processing  pro- 
gram is  expressed  in  domain-dependent  terms  in  English. 

Phase  2:  Specification  analysis  and  system  formulation.  The  specification  in 
phase  1  is  viewed  as  a  data-processing  problem.  This  problem 
is  solved,  yielding  a  data-processing  formulation  of  the  desired 
program. 

Phase  3:  Implementation.  The  procedural  steps,  data  representation,  and 
organization  of  the  target  are  determined  by  intelligent  selection 
from,  and  adaptation  of,  a  set  of  standard  implementation  pos- 
sibilities. 

Phase  4:  Code  generation.  The  implementation  of  phase  3  is  transformed 
into  code  in  some  high-level  language  (e.g.,  PL/l). 

Phase  5:  Compilation  and  loading.  The  high-level  code  is  transformed  into 
a  form  that  can  be  "understood"  and  executed  by  the  target 
computer. 

The  first  two  phases  involve  such  AI  areas  as  natural-language  comprehen- 
sion, program-model  formation,  and  problem  solving.  Since  these  areas  of  AI 
research  are  still  in  the  early  stages  of  evolution,  the  development  of  the  first 
two  phases  has  been  deferred.  At  present,  Protosystem  I  is  limited  to  the 
automation  of  phases  3  and  4,  since  these  phases  were  considered  to  be  much 
more  amenable  to  solution.  Thus,  the  current  system  accepts  a  specification  in 
terms  of  abstract  relations  (in  a  very  high  level  language  called  SSL),  and  then 


364 


D6  Protosystem  I  365 

it  designs  an  optimized  data-processing  program  and  generates  code  for  an 
efficient  implementation.  In  automatic  programming,  it  is  usually  impossible 
for  a  system  to  carry  out  a  search  for  the  absolutely  optimal  implementation; 
instead,  a  system  works  at  optimizing  a  program  only  to  a  degree. 

The  particular  problem  area  of  Protosystem  I  is  that  of  data-processing 
programs  that  are  input/output  intensive  (file  manipulation  and  updating) 
and  batch  oriented.  Included  in  this  area  are  programs  for  inventory  control, 
payroll,  and  other  record-keeping  systems. 

The  specification  method  uses  a  description  of  the  desired  data-processing 
program  in  the  SSL  language.  An  SSL  specification  consists  of  a  data  division 
and  a  computation  division.  The  data  division  gives  the  names  of  the  data  sets 
(conceptual  aggregations  or  groupings  of  data),  their  keys,  and  their  period 
of  updating.  The  computation  division  specifies  for  each  computed  file  the 
calculations  to  be  performed  when  it  is  computed. 

Figure  D6-1  illustrates  an  SSL  specification  of  a  data-processing  program 
for  a  warehouse  inventory.  In  the  proposed  problem,  the  warehouse  stocks 
a  number  of  different  items  that  are  sent  out  daily  to  various  stores.  The 
data-processing  program's  task  is  to  keep  track  of  inventory  levels,  which 
items  and  how  many  of  each  item  should  be  reordered  from  the  producer 
(an  item  is  reordered  when  less  than  100  remain  in  stock),  and  how  many 
items  are  received  from  the  producer.  In  the  data  division  are  data  sets 
(e.g.,  SHIPMENTS-RECEIVED,  BEGINNING-INVENTORY,  TOTAL-ITEMS),  and  in 
the  computation  division  are  the  computation  steps  that  involve  these  data 
sets  (e.g.,  for  each  item,  the  beginning  inventory  is  computed  by  adding  the 
shipments  received  to  the  final  inventory  from  the  previous  day). 

When  it  has  received  the  SSL  specification  of  the  desired  program,  Proto- 
system I  transforms  it  into  an  efficient  target-language  implementation  con- 
sisting of  a  collection  of  PL/1  programs  and  its  JCL  ("Job  Control  Language") 
for  the  IBM-360.  To  accomplish  this  transformation,  the  following  specific 
design  decisions  are  made  with  the  goal  of  achieving  an  efficient  implementa- 
tion: 

1.  Design  each  keyed  file,  deciding  what  are  to  be  its  data  items,  organiza- 
tion (consecutive,  index  sequential,  regional),  storage  device,  associated 
sort  ordering,  and  number  of  records  per  block; 

2.  Design  each  job  step,  determining  which  computations  the  step  is  to 
include,  its  accessing  method  (sequential,  random,  core  table),  its  driving 
data  set(s),  and  the  order  (by  key  values)  in  which  the  records  of  its  input 
data  sets  are  to  be  processed; 

3.  Determine  whether  sorts  are  necessary  and  where  they  should  be  per- 
formed; and 

4.  Determine  the  sequence  of  job  steps. 


366  Automatic  Programming 


DATA  DIVISION 

FILE  SHIPMENTS-RECEIVED  FILE  QUANTITY-ORDERED-BY-STORE 
KEY  IS  ITEM  KEY  IS  ITEM,  STORE 

GENERATED  EVERY  DAY  GENERATED  EVERY  DAY 

FILE  BEGINNING-INVENTORY  FILE  TOTAL-SHIPPED 
KEY  IS  ITEM  KEY  IS  ITEM 

GENERATED  EVERY  DAY  GENERATED  EVERY  DAY 

FILE  TOTAL-ITEM-ORDERS  FILE  FINAL-INVENTORY 
KEY  IS  ITEM  KEY  IS  ITEM 

GENERATED  EVERY  DAY  GENERATED  EVERY  DAY 

FILE  QUANTITY-SHIPPED-TO-STORE      FILE  REORDER-AMOUNT 
KEY  IS  ITEM,  STORE  KEY  IS  ITEM 

GENERATED  EVERY  DAY  GENERATED  EVERY  DAY 


COMPUTATION  DIVISION 

BEGINNING-INVENTORY  IS 

FINAL-INVENTORY  (from  the  previous  day)  +  SHIPMENTS-RECEIVED 

TOTAL-ITEM-ORDERS  IS 

SUM  OF  QUANTITY-ORDERED-BY-STORE  FOR  EACH  ITEM 

QUANTITY-SHIPPED-TO-STORE  IS 

QUANTITY-ORDERED-BY-STORE      IF  BEGINNING-INVENTORY  IS 

GREATER  THAN  TOTAL-ITEM-ORDERS 

ELSE 

QUANTITY-ORDERED-BY-STORE 

*  (BEGINNING-INVENTORY  /  TOTAL-ITEM-ORDERS) 

IF  BEGINNING-INVENTORY  IS  NOT 
GREATER  THAN  TOTAL-ITEM- ORDERS 

TOTAL-SHIPPED  IS 

SUM  OF  QUANTITY-SHIPPED-TO-STORE  FOR  EACH  ITEM 

FINAL-INVENTORY  IS  BEGINNING-INVENTORY  -  TOTAL-SHIPPED 

REORDER-AMOUNT  IS  10C0  IF  FINAL-INVENTORY  IS  LESS  THAN  100. 


Figure  D6-1.     SSL  relational  description  for  a  data-processing  program. 


D6  Protosystem  I  367 

These  design  decisions,  especially  the  central  ones  of  determining  the  final 
target  data  sets,  computation  steps,  and  sequencing  of  computation  steps,  are 
made  by  exploring  the  different  ways  of  combining  data  sets  and  computation 
steps.  The  system  carries  out  these  explorations  with  the  goal  of  minimizing 
the  number  of  file  accesses  made  during  the  run  time  of  the  target  implemen- 
tation. Sometimes,  as  explained  below,  the  system  also  will  seek  to  minimize 
a  more  detailed  cost  estimate  of  the  target  implementation. 

Described  in  greater  detail  in  the  next  section,  the  method  employed  by 
Protosystem  I  for  achieving  an  efficient  implementation  does  not  rely  solely 
on  heuristics  but  uses  instead  what  is  essentially  a  dynamic-programming 
algorithm  with  heuristics  added  to  the  algorithm  so  that  it  can  finish  in  a 
reasonable  amount  of  time.  An  advantage  of  dynamic  programming  is  that 
it  can  provide  a  good  handle  on  global  optimization  when  the  results  of 
individual  decisions  have  far-reaching  and  compounding  effects  throughout 
the  design  of  the  data-processing  program. 

Operation  of  the  System 

Although  the  actual  optimization  process  is  performed  by  the  optimizer 
module,  several  other  modules  provide  preparatory  and  support  services. 
First,  the  structural- analyzer  module  generates  predicates  for  the  operations 
in  the  SSL  computation  division.  These  predicates  indicate  the  conditions 
under  which  data  items  in  a  data  set  will  be  either  accessed  or  generated 
during  an  operation.  For  example,  the  condition 

(DEFINED  A(ki))  =  (OR  (DEFINED  £(fci))(DEFINED  C(fci))) 

would  indicate  that  there  is  a  record  in  data  set  A  for  a  value  of  the  key,  k\ , 
only  when  at  least  one  of  the  data  sets  B  or  C  has  a  record  for  that  value  of 
the  key.  The  structural  analyzer  also  produces  candidate  driving-data-sets  for 
each  operation  in  the  computation  division.  A  driving  data  set  of  an  operation 
is  a  data  set  whose  records  are  "walked  through"  once  in  the  order  of  their 
occurrence  and  the  operation  is  executed  once  at  each  step  (record). 

The  predicates  produced  by  the  structural  analyzer  are  then  used  by  the 
question- answering  module  to  provide  information  to  the  optimizer  about  the 
average  number  of  input/output  accesses  implied  by  tentative  configurations 
(i.e.,  tentative  choices  for  the  data  sets  and  computation  steps)  of  the  target 
implementation.  The  question-answering  module  maintains  a  knowledge  base 
consisting  of  the  predicates,  characteristics  of  the  data,  and  information 
obtained  from  interaction  with  the  user,  such  as  average  data-set  size  or  the 
probability  of  a  predicate  fragment's  being  true.  This  knowledge,  along  with 
knowledge  about  the  probability  calculus,  is  used  to  answer  questions  about 
the  size  of  a  data  set  and  about  the  average  number  of  items  in  the  data 
set  that  are  likely  to  satisfy  a  certain  predicate  (e.g.,  an  access  predicate). 


368  Automatic  Programming  X 

When  the  knowledge  is  insufficient  to  answer  an  optimizer  question,  the 
question  answerer  initiates  a  dialogue  with  the  user  to  elicit  enough  additional 
information  to  proceed. 

The  optimization  process  itself  is  performed  by  the  optimizer  module. 
This  module  intermittently  obtains  information  from  the  question  answerer 
about  input/output  accesses  of  tentative  configurations  of  parts  of  the  data- 
processing  program,  to  explore  the  effects  of  such  design  parameters  as  the 
number  of  records  per  block,  the  file  organization,  the  data  items  that  are  col- 
lected into  a  single  data  set,  and  the  computations  that  are  performed  during 
a  single  reading  of  a  file  or  files.  Since  the  problem  area  of  Protosystem  I  is 
that  of  input/output-intensive  programs,  the  optimizer  explores  the  various 
design  parameters  with  the  goal  of  minimizing  the  number  of  file  accesses  in 
their  target-language  implementation.  Sometimes,  however,  after  a  number 
of  more  important  design  decisions  have  been  made,  the  optimizer  will  further 
explore  design  alternatives  by  computing  a  more  detailed  cost  estimate  that 
attempts  to  approximate  the  charging  structure  of  the  particular  installation 
on  which  the  target  system  is  to  run  (e.g.,  disk  space,  core-residency  charges, 
explicit  input/output). 

The  central  part  of  the  optimization  process  is  concerned  with  the  explo- 
ration of  various  ways  of  setting  up  data  sets  and  computation  steps.  Basically, 
the  optimization  module  starts  with  the  data  sets  and  computation  steps  in 
the  data  division  and  computation  division  of  the  SSL  specification.  Then,  to 
minimize  the  number  of  file  accesses,  the  module  looks  at  data-processing  pro- 
grams that  use  various  aggregations  of  these  initial  data  sets  and  computation 
steps  (an  aggregation  of  two  or  more  data  sets  is  a  data  set  that  has  all  the 
data  items  of  the  original  data  sets,  while  an  aggregation  of  several  computa- 
tion steps  is  a  computation  step  that  performs  the  functions  of  the  original 
steps).  The  optimizer  explores  the  aggregating  data  sets  and  the  aggregating 
computation  steps  and  develops  and  utilizes  constraints  on  the  sort  order  of 
both  data  sets  and  computation  steps  (an  example  of  a  sort-order  constraint 
on  a  data  set  would  be  having  the  data-set  records  sorted  first  on  a  particular 
key). 

To  avoid  the  problem  of  combinatorial  explosion,  the  module  uses  a 
form  of  dynamic  programming  with  heuristics.  Loosely  speaking,  dynamic 
programming  is  a  set  of  parameterized  recursive  equations,  which,  in  this 
case,  express  the  cost  of  optimized  longer  segments  of  the  program  in  terms  of 
optimized  shorter  segments.  A  pure  dynamic-programming  algorithm,  though 
it  would  find  the  absolute  optimum  target  implementation,  would  require  an 
excessive  amount  of  time  to  do  so.  Therefore,  for  the  algorithm  to  finish 
in  a  reasonable  time,  a  number  of  heuristics  are  employed  in  the  algorithm, 
including  decoupling  decisions  where  possible  (and  sometimes  even  where  it  is 
not  completely  possible)  and  carrying  out  local  optimizations  before  making 
adjustments  for  global  concerns.  A  full  explanation  of  the  algorithm  is  found 
in  Morgenstern  (1976). 


D6  Protosystem  I  369 

Status 

The  SSL  specification  language  has  been  completely  defined,  and  there  is 
an  operational  implementation  of  Protosystem  I  in  MACLISP  on  a  PDP-10 
computer  at  M.I.T.  The  system  is  capable  of  producing  acceptable  target- 
language  implementations.  From  a  larger  perspective,  the  Protosystem  I 
project  has  developed  a  five-phase  model  of  the  process  of  writing  a  data- 
processing  program  (system),  from  its  conception  to  its  implementation  as 
executable  code.  Twenty  years  ago,  the  fifth  phase,  compilation  and  loading, 
was  automated.  At  present,  a  preliminary  theory  for  and  automation  of 
the  third  and  fourth  phases,  the  generation  of  the  system  and  translation 
into  high-level  code,  are  embodied  in  Protosystem  I.  Within  the  next  decade, 
the  theory  and  automation  of  the  remaining  two  phases,  including  problem 
definition,  specification  analysis,  and  system  formulation,  should  easily  fall 
within  the  realm  of  presently  developing  AI  technologies. 

References 

See  Baron  (1977),  Morgenstern  (1976),  Ruth  (1976a,  1978),  and  Hammer 
and  Ruth  (1979). 


D7.     NLPQ 


THE  NLPQ  project  (Natural  Language  Programming  for  Queuing  Simula- 
tions) was  begun  by  George  Heidorn  at  Yale  University  in  1967  for  a  doctoral 
dissertation  and  completed  at  the  Naval  Postgraduate  School  during  the  years 
1968-1972.  The  research  area  is  that  of  simulation  programs  for  simple 
queuing  problems.  The  queuing  problem's  specification  takes  place  during 
an  interactive  dialogue  in  English  in  which  the  user  and  the  NLPQ  system 
each  can  furnish  information  to,  and  request  information  from,  the  other. 
From  this  dialogue,  the  NLPQ  system  creates  and  maintains  a  partial  internal 
description  of  the  queuing  problem.  This  partial  description  provides  the  basis 
for  answering  any  questions  that  the  user  may  ask,  for  generating  questions 
that  are  to  be  asked  of  the  user,  and  eventually,  when  completed  by  the 
dialogue  activity,  for  generating  the  implementation  of  the  simulation  program 
in  the  target  language  GPSS.  The  system's  processing — including  creating  the 
problem  description  and  generating  the  GPSS  program,  as  well  as  translating 
and  generating  sentences — is  specified  by  production  rules  (see  Article  III.C4, 
in  Vol.  I). 

Program  Specification 

In  the  English  dialogue  that  constitutes  NLPQ's  method  of  specification, 
the  user  can  make  statements,  give  commands,  ask  questions,  and  answer 
questions.  During  this  process,  the  system  can  ask  and  answer  questions  and 
respond  to  commands.  In  the  brief  dialogue  of  Figure  D7-1,  most  of  the 
features  of  the  specification  method  are  illustrated  in  a  simple  way  (other, 
more  complex  dialogues  are  presented  in  Heidorn,  1972,  1974,  1975b,  and 
1976).  In  the  dialogue,  line  numbers  have  been  added  for  reference,  and  the 
lowercase  typing  was  done  by  the  user,  while  the  uppercase  typing  was  done 
by  the  computer. 

This  example  concerns  a  queuing  problem  about  cars  that  arrive  at  a 
station,  get  serviced,  and  leave.  The  user  initially  volunteered  some  informa- 
tion about  how  often  the  cars  arrive  and  about  the  sequencing  of  actions,  in 
lines  1  and  2,  and  then  asked  the  system  what  other  information  was  needed 
to  complete  the  queuing  model,  in  line  3.  In  lines  4  through  9,  the  system 
asked  questions  about  times  and  actions,  which  the  user  answered,  until  the 
problem  statement  was  complete,  in  line  10.  Then,  in  line  11,  the  user  asked 
a  specific  question  about  the  queuing  model  concerning  the  mean  time  needed 
to  service  a  car,  a  question  that  the  system  answered  in  line  12.  In  line  13,  the 
user  told  the  system  to  produce  a  description  of  the  entire  problem  in  English 
for  verification  purposes,  which  it  did,  in  line  14.  Finally,  in  response  to  the 


370 


D7  NLPQ  371 


1  every  6  minutes  a  car  arrives  at  a  station. 

2  after  arriving,  it  is  serviced  at  a  pump. 

3  is  the  problem  statement  complete? 

4  HOW  LONG  ARE  THE  CARS  SERVICED  AT  THE  PUMP? 

5  from  3  to  7  minutes. 

6  AFTER  BEING  SERVICED  AT  THE  PUMP,  WHAT  DO  THE  CARS  DO? 

7  they  leave  the  station. 

8  HOW  LONG  SHALL  THE  SIMULATION  BE  RUN? 

9  10  hours;  use  1  minute  as  the  basic  time  unit. 

10  THE  PROBLEM  STATEMENT  IS  COMPLETE. 

11  what  is  the  mean  of  the  time  to  service  cars? 

12  THE  MEAN  OF  THE  UNIFORM  DISTRIBUTION  IS  5  MINUTES. 

13  describe  the  problem  in  english. 

14  THE  CARS  ARRIVE  AT  THE  STATION  EVERY  6  MINUTES. 

AFTER  ARRIVING  AT  THE  STATION,  THE  CARS  ARE  SERVICED  AT  THE 
PUMP.  THE  TIME  FOR  THE  CARS  TO  BE  SERVICED  AT  THE  PUMP  IS 
UNIFORMLY  DISTRIBUTED,  WITH  A  MEAN  OF  5  MINUTES  AND  A 
HALF-RANGE  OF  2  MINUTES.  AFTER  BEING  SERVICED  AT  THE  PUMP, 
THE  CARS  LEAVE  THE  STATION.  THE  SIMULATION  IS  TO  BE  RUN 
FOR  10  HOURS,  USING  A  BASIC  TIME  UNIT  OF  1  MINUTE. 


15 

write 

the  gpss  program. 

16 

SIMULATE 

STAT1 

EQU 

l.F,Q 

PUMP2 

EQU   ? 

2,F,Q 

CAR1 

EQU 

l.T 

1 

* 

TABLE 

Ml,  1,1, 2 

THE  CARS 

ARRIVE 

AT  THE  STATION. 

GENERATE 

6 

ASSIGN 

1 , CAR1 

*  THE  CARS  ARE  SERVICED  AT  THE  PUMP. 
ACT1     QUEUE  PUMP2 

SEIZE  PUMP2 

DEPART  PUMP2 

ADVANCE  5 , 2 

RELEASE  PUMP2 
* 

*  THE  CARS  LEAVE  THE  STATION. 
ACT3     TABULATE  PI 

TERMINATE 
* 

*  TIMING  LOOP 
GENERATE  600 
TERMINATE  1 
START  1 
END 


Figure  D7-1.     A  brief  NLPQ  dialogue. 


372  Automatic  Programming  X 

user  command  in  line  15,  the  system  produced  the  GPSS  program,  in  line  16, 
complete  with  English  comments  (preceded  by  *)  and  meaningful  symbolic 
names. 

Operation  of  the  System 

The  processing  to  be  done  by  NLPQ  is  specified  by  sets  of  production 
rules  written  in  a  language  designed  especially  for  the  system.  Decoding  rules 
specify  how  strings  of  English  text  are  to  be  converted  into  records  in  a 
semantic  net,  and  encoding  rules  specify  how  records  are  to  be  converted  into 
text.  These  are  basically  phrase-structure  grammar  rules  (see  Article  1V.C1,  in 
Vol.  i),  but  they  are  augmented  by  arbitrary  conditions  and  structure-building 
actions  (Heidorn,  1975a). 

The  representation  of  the  internal  description  of  the  simulation  problem, 
as  well  as  the  representation  of  the  syntactic  and  semantic  structures,  is  in 
the  form  of  a  semantic  network  (Article  III.C3,  in  Vol.  i).  A  network  consists 
of  records  that  represent  such  things  as  concepts,  words,  physical  entities, 
and  probability  distributions.  Each  record  is  a  list  of  attribute-value  pairs, 
where  the  value  of  an  attribute  is  usually  a  pointer  to  another  record  but  may 
sometimes  be  simply  a  number  or  character  string. 

Prior  to  a  queuing  dialogue,  the  system  is  given  a  network  of  about  300 
"named"  records  containing  information  about  words  and  concepts  relevant 
to  simple  queuing  problems.  Also,  it  is  furnished  with  a  set  of  about  300 
English-decoding  rules  and  500  English  and  GPSS  encoding  rules.  As  the 
dialogue  progresses,  the  system  uses  the  information  it  obtains  from  the 
English  dialogue  to  build  and  complete  a  partial  description  of  the  desired 
simulation,  a  description  that  is  in  the  form  of  a  network  called  the  Internal 
Problem  Description  (IPD). 

Basically,  an  IPD  network  describes  the  flow  of  mobile  entities,  such  as 
vehicles,  through  a  queuing  system  consisting  of  stationary  entities,  such  as 
pumps,  by  specifying  the  actions  that  take  place  in  the  system  and  their 
interrelationships.  Each  action  is  represented  by  a  record  whose  attributes 
furnish  such  information  as  the  type  of  action,  the  entity  doing  the  action 
(i.e.,  the  agent),  the  entity  that  is  the  object  of  the  action,  the  location  where 
it  happens,  its  duration,  its  frequency  of  occurrence,  and  what  happens  next. 
For  example,  the  action  The  men  unload  the  truck  at  a  dock  for  two  hours 
could  be  represented  by  the  record: 

Rl: 


Type 

unload 

Agent 

men 

Object 

truck 

Location 

dock 

Duration 

2  hours 

D7  NLPQ  373 

The  NLPQ  system  must  obtain  from  the  English  dialogue  all  the  informa- 
tion needed  to  build  the  IPD.  Thus,  the  user  must  describe  the  flow  of  mobile 
entities  through  the  queuing  model  by  making  statements  about  the  actions 
that  take  place  and  about  the  relations  between  these  actions.  Each  mobile 
entity  must  "arrive"  at  or  "enter"  the  model.  Then  it  may  go  through  one  or 
more  other  actions,  such  as  "service,"  "load,"  "unload,"  and  "wait."  Then, 
typically,  it  "leaves"  the  model.  The  order  in  which  these  actions  take  place 
must  eventually  be  made  explicit  by  the  use  of  subordinate  clauses  beginning 
with  such  conjunctions  as  after,  when,  and  before,  or  by  using  the  adverb 
then.  If  the  order  of  the  actions  depends  on  the  state  of  the  queuing  model, 
an  "if"  clause  may  be  used  to  specify  the  condition  for  performing  an  action; 
a  sentence  with  an  "otherwise"  in  it  is  used  to  give  an  alternative  action  to 
be  performed  when  this  condition  is  not  met. 

The  information  needed  to  simulate  the  problem,  including  the  various 
times  involved,  must  also  be  furnished  by  the  specification  dialogue.  It  is 
necessary  to  specify  the  time  between  arrivals,  the  time  required  to  perform 
each  activity,  the  length  of  the  simulation  run,  and  the  basic  time  unit  to 
be  used  in  the  GPSS  program.  Activity  times  and  times  between  events 
may  be  given  as  constants  or  as  probability  distributions,  such  as  uniform, 
exponential,  normal,  or  empirical.  The  quantity  of  each  stationary  entity 
should  also  be  specified,  unless  1  is  to  be  assumed. 

The  user  may  either  furnish  this  information  in  the  form  of  a  complete 
problem  statement  or  he  may  state  some  part  of  it  and  then  let  the  system 
ask  questions  to  obtain  the  rest  of  the  information,  as  was  done  above  in 
lines  1  through  10  of  Figure  D7-1.  The  latter  method  results  in  a  scan  of  the 
partially  built  IPD  for  missing  or  conflicting  information  and  the  generation 
of  appropriate  questions.  Each  time  the  system  asks  a  question,  it  is  trying 
to  obtain  the  value  of  some  specific  attribute  that  will  be  needed  to  generate 
a  GPSS  program.  To  furnish  a  value  for  the  attribute,  the  question  may  be 
answered  by  a  complete  sentence  or  simply  by  a  phrase. 

The  user  may  ask  the  system  specific  questions  about  the  queuing  model, 
and  the  system  will  respond  by  generating  the  answers  from  the  information 
in  the  appropriate  parts  of  the  IPD.  To  check  the  entire  IPD  as  it  exists 
at  any  time,  the  user  may  request  that  an  English  problem-description  be 
produced.  Such  a  description  consists  of  all  the  information  in  the  IPD  as 
it  is  converted  into  English  by  the  encoding  rules  (see  line  14  of  Fig.  D7-1). 
Specifically,  for  each  action  in  the  IPD,  the  system  generates  one  or  more 
statements  describing  the  type  of  action;  its  agent,  object,  and  location;  what 
action,  if  any,  follows  (if  none,  a  new  paragraph  is  started);  and,  if  applicable, 
an  inter-event  time  or  duration.  Conditional  successor  actions  may  result  in 
two  sentences,  with  the  first  one  having  an  "if"  clause  in  it  and  the  second  one 
beginning  with  "otherwise."    After  all  of  the  actions  have  been  described,  a 


374  Automatic  Programming  X 

separate  one-sentence  paragraph  is  produced  with  the  values  of  the  run  time 
and  the  basic  time  unit. 

After  the  dialogue  is  finished  and  all  the  required  information  is  obtained, 
NLPQ  uses  the  IPD  and  the  GPSS  encoding  rules  to  produce  the  desired 
program  in  the  GPSS  target  language.  Such  a  program  was  listed  in  line  16 
of  Figure  D7-1.  At  the  beginning  of  the  program,  the  definitions  for  the 
stationary  entities,  mobile  entities,  and  distributions  are  given.  Then,  for  each 
action,  a  comment  consisting  of  a  simple  English  action-sentence  is  produced, 
followed  by  the  GPSS  statements  appropriate  to  this  action.  For  example,  an 
"arrive"  usually  produces  a  GENERATE  and  an  ASSIGN,  a  "leave"  produces 
a  TABULATE  and  a  TERMINATE,  and  most  activities  produce  a  sequence  like 
QUEUE,  SEIZE,  DEPART,  ADVANCE,  and  RELEASE.  These  are  usually  followed 
by  some  sort  of  TRANSFER,  depending  upon  the  type  of  value  that  the  action's 
successor  attribute  has.  Finally,  the  GPSS  program  closes  with  a  "timing 
loop"  to  govern  the  length  of  the  simulation  run. 

Status 

An  NLPQ  prototype  system  was  demonstrated  several  times  on  a  variety 
of  problems.  Although  the  capabilities  of  the  prototype  system  are  limited, 
the  research  did  establish  an  overall  framework  for  such  a  system  and  useful 
techniques  were  developed.  Sufficient  details  were  worked  out  to  allow  the 
system  to  carry  out  interesting  interactions,  as  evidenced  by  the  longer,  more 
complicated  dialogues  shown  in  the  first  four  references  below.  More  details 
of  the  processing  done  by  this  system  can  be  found  in  any  of  the  references, 
especially  Heidorn  (1972). 

References 

See  Heidorn  (1972,  1974,  1975a,  1975b,  1976). 


D8.     LIBRA 


LIBRA,  the  EFFICIENCY-ANALYSIS  expert  of  the  PSI  system  (Article  X.Dl), 
was  developed  by  Elaine  Kant  in  conjunction  with  the  PSI  project  at  Stanford 
University.  The  PSI  system,  through  interaction  with  the  user,  constructs 
a  very  high  level  program  specification  called  the  program  model.  LIBRA, 
working  together  with  the  PECOS  CODING  expert  (Article  X.D4),  converts 
the  program  model  into  a  target-language  implementation.  The  PECOS  sys- 
tem supplies  the  transformation  or  refinement  rules  that  can  convert  the  pro- 
gram model  into  alternative  target-language  implementations.  Using  global 
efficiency  analysis  (with  access  to  the  entire  program,  as  opposed  to  only  a 
local  segment),  LIBRA  directs  and  explores  the  application  of  the  transforma- 
tion rules  to  produce  an  efficient  implementation. 

The  transformation  process  consists  of  repeated  applications  of  trans- 
formation rules  to  parts  of  the  program,  in  which  every  application  results 
in  a  specification  closer  to  a  target-language  implementation.  Each  such 
application  of  a  rule  is  said  to  produce  a  partial  implementation,  or  refinement, 
of  the  program.  Thus,  refinement  rules  applied  to  refinements  produce  further 
refinements.  Because  more  than  one  refinement  rule  may  be  applicable  to 
the  same  part  of  a  refinement,  the  transformation  process  produces  a  tree  of 
possible  refinements  (the  actual  situation  is  slightly  more  complicated,  since 
the  order  in  which  the  rules  are  applied  can  affect  the  tree  that  is  produced). 
To  avoid  the  problem  of  combinatorial  explosion,  LIBRA  develops  only  part 
of  the  tree. 

Operation  of  the  System 

It  is  LIBRA'S  function  to  analyze  and  guide  the  development  of  the  refine- 
ment tree  to  achieve  an  efficient  implementation.  LIBRA  determines  which 
parts  of  the  program  to  expand  next  and  which  parts  not  to  expand  at  all. 
In  particular,  when  more  than  one  refinement  rule  is  applicable,  LIBRA  may 
decide  to  apply  them  all,  so  that  the  resulting  refinements  can  be  considered 
in  greater  detail,  or  it  may  decide  to  apply  only  one  of  the  rules.  In  the  latter 
case,  the  refinement  is  implemented  directly  in  the  current  node  of  the  tree, 
and  the  other  possibilities  are  permanently  forgone. 

One  of  the  most  important  ways  in  which  LIBRA  attacks  the  problem 
of  combinatorial  explosion  is  by  estimating  the  efficiency  of  possible  target- 
language  implementations.  For  each  refinement  in  the  tree,  LIBRA  maintains 
two  cost  estimates  in  the  form  of  symbolic  algebraic  expressions  that  give  the 
time  and  space  requirements  for  executing  a  certain  kind  of  target-language 
implementation.     The  first  estimate  is  the  default  cost  that  might  result 


375 


376  Automatic  Programming  X 

if  all  the  constructs  and  operators  in  the  refinement  were  assigned  default 
implementations.  The  second  is  the  optimistic  cost  estimate  that  might 
result  assuming  (a)  that  certain  efficient  implementation  techniques  that  have 
worked  in  similar  situations  will  prove  successful  in  the  present  situation  and 
(b)  that  LIBRA  expends  enough  of  its  own  resources  of  time  and  space  to  carry 
out  these  implementation  techniques. 

Treating  these  two  costs  as  upper  and  lower  bounds  on  the  costs  of  possible 
target-language  implementations  of  the  refinement,  LIBRA  obtains  important 
guidance  in  directing  the  growth  of  the  refinement  tree.  These  upper  and 
lower  bounds  can  be  used  to  prune  a  branch  of  the  refinement  tree  (without 
further  consideration  of  the  branch)  or  to  calculate  the  effect  of  a  partial 
implementation  decision  on  the  global  program  cost.  As  discussed  below  in 
the  section  on  rules,  the  upper  and  lower  bounds  help  direct  attention  to 
high-impact  areas,  those  areas  in  which  effort  is  likely  to  yield  the  greatest 
increases  in  overall  efficiency. 

Another  feature  of  the  LIBRA  system,  a  feature  implicit  in  the  above 
discussion,  is  the  knowledge  LIBRA  has  about  the  use  and  limits  of  its  own 
resources  of  time  and  space.  This  feature  is  important  because  no  system  can 
devote  unlimited  effort  to  finding  an  efficient  implementation — effort  must 
be  allocated.  The  way  in  which  LIBRA  performs  this  allocation  is  to  assign 
available  resources  to  high-impact  areas,  where  the  resources  will  do  the  most 
good. 

When  new  high-level  constructs  (such  as  new  types  of  sorts,  or  trees) 
are  added  to  a  program,  new  efficiency  knowledge  is  needed  to  analyze  these 
concepts  (their  subparts,  running  times,  data-structure  accesses,  etc.).  LIBRA 
has  a  model  of  programming  concepts  that  is  consulted  when  new  concepts  are 
added.  Some  of  the  necessary  information  can  be  deduced  automatically,  and 
the  user  is  asked  specific  questions  to  obtain  the  rest.  To  help  construct  these 
estimation  functions,  LIBRA  provides  a  semiautomatic  procedure  for  deriving 
cost-estimation  functions  from  the  set  of  cost  functions  for  the  target-language 
constructs. 

The  knowledge  for  managing  resources,  computing  upper  and  lower  cost 
estimates,  directing  attention  to  different  parts  of  the  tree,  making  implemen- 
tation decisions,  and,  in  general,  analyzing  and  directing  the  growth  of  the 
tree  is  in  the  form  of  rules.  Each  rule  consists  of  a  condition  and  an  action  to 
be  performed  if  the  condition  is  met.  The  knowledge  that  a  rule  expresses  can 
easily  be  modified  since  the  rules  are  replaceable  and  can  be  added,  deleted,  or 
altered  without  requiring  that  the  system  itself  be  modified  (see  Article  III.C4, 
in  Vol.  I,  on  production  systems). 

Rules — LIBRA'S  Knowledge  Base 

The  rules  in  LIBRA'S  knowledge  base  generally  can  be  divided  into  three 
groups: 


D8  LIBRA  377 

1.  attention  and  resource-management  rules, 

2.  plausible-implementation  rules,  and 

3.  cost-analysis  rules. 

Attention  and  resource-management  rules  describe  when  to  shift  attention 
to  other  nodes  in  the  tree  and  also  how  to  set  priorities  for  refining  the 
different  constructs  and  operations  within  a  refinement  node.  Some  of  the 
more  important  of  these  rules  determine  how  LIBRA'S  own  resources  of  time 
and  space  are  to  be  allocated,  on  the  basis  of  where  they  will  have  the  greatest 
impact.  One  of  the  ways  of  determining  impact  is  to  consider  the  difference 
between  the  upper  bound  cost  estimate  (assuming  default  implementations) 
and  the  optimistic  lower  bound  cost  estimate  (assuming  both  the  successful 
application  of  efficiency  techniques  that  have  worked  in  similar  situations  and 
the  sufficient  expenditure  of  resources  to  carry  the  techniques  to  completion). 

Other  rules  in  this  group  state  how  to  shift  attention  among  nodes.  These 
rules  (a)  cause  complex  programs  to  be  expanded  early  to  see  what  decisions 
are  involved,  (b)  postpone  trivial  decisions  until  important  ones  are  made, 
(c)  look  at  all  refinements  in  the  tree  and  select  for  development  the  one 
whose  optimistic  cost  estimate  is  lowest  (when  resources  for  developing  a 
particular  refinement  are  exhausted),  and  (d)  apply  a  form  of  branch  and 
bound  stating  that  (when  resources  allocated  for  considering  a  particular 
decision  are  exhausted)  attention  should  be  directed  to  the  whole  tree  and  that 
all  nodes  whose  optimistic  cost  estimate  is  worse  than  the  default  estimate  of 
some  other  node  should  be  eliminated.  As  described  later,  when  cost-analysis 
rules  compare  estimates,  they  take  into  account  the  degree  of  uncertainty  in 
the  estimate. 

Plausible-implementation  rules  express  heuristics  about  when  to  limit 
expansion  of  nodes,  by  making  a  decision  about  some  part  of  an  implementa- 
tion. For  example,  when  the  question  of  how  to  represent  a  set  first  arises, 
LIBRA  performs  a  global  examination  of  the  program  to  determine  all  uses  of 
the  set.  If  there  are  many  places  where  the  program  checks  for  membership 
in  the  set,  a  hash-table  representation  may  be  suggested.  In  general,  plausible 
implementation  rules  express  knowledge  derived  by  human  or  machine  anal- 
ysis of  commonly  occurring  situations,  such  as  which  sorting  techniques  are 
best  for  different-sized  inputs.  These  rules  also  contain  heuristics  to  make 
quick  decisions.  Thus,  if  LIBRA  is  running  out  of  resources,  heuristics  that 
are  not  as  dependable  as  the  one  just  described  are  used  to  make  decisions  on 
the  spot,  without  creating  any  new  nodes.  These  heuristics  generally  express 
defaults,  such  as  Use  lists  rather  than  arrays  if  the  target  language  is  LISP; 
they  are  used  to  make  the  less  important  decisions  or  to  make  all  decisions  if 
the  total  resources  for  writing  a  program  are  nearly  exhausted. 

Cost-analysis  rules  express  how  to  compute,  update,  and  compare  upper 
and  lower  bound  estimates  of  the  cost  of  the  final  implementation.  The  cost 
estimates  are  in  the  form  of  symbolic  algebraic  expressions  that  may  involve 


378  Automatic  Programming  X 

variables  representing  set  sizes.  The  cost  estimates  are  not  computed  once  and 
for  all:  Whenever  a  partial  implementation  in  the  refinement  tree  is  further 
refined,  the  cost  estimates  associated  with  that  partial  implementation  are 
incrementally  updated  to  produce  estimates  that  are  more  accurate  in  view 
of  the  new  information. 

Cost  estimates  are  constructed  from  a  knowledge  base  that  includes  infor- 
mation on  upper  and  lower  bounds  on  costs  for  use  of  time  and  space  by  indi- 
vidual constructs  and  operations  and  on  how  to  combine  such  cost  estimates 
for  composite  programs.  The  knowledge  needed  to  incrementally  update 
the  cost  estimates  is  contained  in  rules  corresponding  to  the  particular  con- 
struct or  operation.  The  method  of  comparing  the  cost  estimates  of  different 
refinements  involves  the  addition  of  a  bonus  to  the  refinement  that  has  a 
greater  degree  of  completion  and  that  consequently  has  a  greater  certainty  in 
its  cost  estimates  (default  and  optimistic).  This  feature  favors  a  nearly  com- 
plete refinement  with  a  slightly  worse  lower  bound  over  a  less  complete  (more 
abstract)  refinement  with  a  slightly  better  lower  bound.  Such  a  preference  is 
desirable,  since  the  cost  estimate  of  the  more  abstract  refinement  is  less  cer- 
tain and  therefore  may  not  be  achievable.  By  giving  a  bonus  for  the  degree  of 
completion,  the  cost- analysis  rules  take  into  account  the  likelihood  of  being 
able  to  achieve  the  low  cost. 

An  Example — A  Simple  Sort  Program 

Suppose  that  a  SORT  is  specified  as  a  transfer  of  elements  from  a  SOURCE 
sequential  collection  to  a  TARGET  sequential  collection  that  is  ordered  by 
some  relation  such  as  LESS-THAN.  After  the  application  of  some  preliminary 
refinement  rules  that  do  not  require  any  decisions  as  to  alternative  choices, 
three  choice  points  remain:  choosing  a  transfer  order,  and  choosing  repre- 
sentations for  SOURCE  as  well  as  for  TARGET. 

Since  the  transfer  order  is  selected  as  the  most  important  decision,  LIBRA 
directs  attention  first  to  that  choice  point.  A  heuristic  rule  is  applied  that 
suggests  the  use  of  either  an  insertion  sort  from  list  to  list  or  array  to  array, 
or  a  selection  sort  from  list  to  array.  The  different  refinement  possibilities  are 
added  to  the  tree  accordingly.  Each  of  the  branches  is  given  a  limited  amount 
of  resources  and  told  to  focus  attention  only  on  the  parts  of  the  program 
directly  relevant  to  the  transfer-order  decision. 

After  these  branches  are  refined  within  the  limits  of  the  assigned  resources, 
the  nodes  of  the  tree  are  compared.  The  branch  and  bound  method  does  not 
eliminate  any  of  the  alternatives  here,  but  the  insertion  branch  is  selected  as 
it  has  the  best  lower  bound  (taking  into  account  factors  related  to  uncertainty 
of  estimates). 

Refinement  then  proceeds  in  that  node.  The  choice  of  a  list  or  array 
representation  for  the  TARGET  is  made  by  a  heuristic  that  says  that  lists  are 
easier  to  manipulate  than  arrays  in  LISP.    This  heuristic  was  applied  because 


D8  LIBRA  379 

much  of  the  time  and  space  resources  allocated  for  finding  an  implementation 
had  been  consumed  in  the  above  tasks  and  a  quick  decision  was  required. 
The  choice  of  a  list  representation  for  TARGET  forces  a  list  representation 
for  SOURCE  because  of  a  suggestion  made  under  the  transfer-order  heuristic. 
Thereafter,  the  refinement  process  is  basically  straightforward,  though  several 
choices  of  whether  to  store  or  recompute  local  variables  are  made. 

Status 

LIBRA  has  guided  the  application  of  the  PECOS  refinement  rules  to  pro- 
duce efficient  implementation  of  several  variants  of  simple  database-retrieval, 
sorting,  and  concept-formation  programs  (see  Article  X.Dl  for  an  example  of 
a  concept-formation  program).  Current  plans  include  extending  the  problem 
area  to  include  simple  algorithms  for  finding  prime  numbers  and  for  reaching 
nodes  in  a  graph.  For  an  efficiency  expert  to  be  of  use  in  a  complete  automatic- 
programming  system,  a  good  deal  more  research  is  needed.  Higher  level 
optimizations,  extended  symbolic  analysis  and  comparison  capabilities,  and 
more  domain  expertise  are  some  obvious  extensions.  Automatic  bookkeeping 
of  heuristics  and  perhaps  even  automatic  generation  of  heuristics  from  an 
analysis  of  symbolic  cost  estimates  of  target-language  concepts  are  some  long- 
range  goals. 

To  write  more  complex  programs  such  as  compilers  or  operating  systems, 
additional  efficiency  rules  would  have  to  be  provided,  rules  about  concepts 
such  as  bit  packing,  machine  interrupts,  and  multiprocessing.  However,  even 
with  such  additions,  the  efficiency  techniques  employed  by  the  LIBRA  system 
should  be  significant  in  controlling  the  problem  of  combinatorial  explosion 
that  arises  during  the  search  for  efficient  implementations. 

References 

See  Kant  (1979);  also,  Barstow  and  Kant  (1977)  and  Kant  (1977,  1978). 


Bibliography 


List  of  Abbreviations 


ACM  Association  for  Computing  Machinery 

AFIPS  American  Federation  of  Information  Processing  Societies 

AMS  American  Mathematical  Society 

CACM  Communications  of  the  Association  for  Computing  Machinery 

IEEE  Institute  for  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineers 

IFIPS  International  Federation  of  Information  Processing  Societies 

IJCAI  International  Joint  Conferences  on  AI 

SIGART  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  on  AI 

SIGCSE  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  on  Computer  Science  Education 

SIGCUE  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  on  Computer  Uses  in  Education 

SIGGRAPH  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  on  Graphics 

SIGPLAN  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  on  Programming  Languages 

TINLAP  Workshops  on  Theoretical  Issues  in  Natural  Language  Processing 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abelson,  H.,  and  diSessa,  A.  1981.  Turtle  geometry:  The  computer  as  a  medium  for 
exploring  mathematics.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press. 

Aikins,  J.  1980.  Prototypes  and  production  rules:  A  knowledge  representation  for 
computer  consultations.  Rep.  No.  STAN-CSD-80-814,  Computer  Science  Dept., 
Stanford  University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 

AIM  Workshop  Proceedings.  Proceedings  of  the  Annual  AIM  Workshops.  1975-1981. 
Computer  Science  Dept.,  Rutgers  University. 

Allen,  J.   1978.  Anatomy  of  LISP.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Amarel,  S.  1972.  Representation  and  modeling  in  problems  of  program  formation. 
In  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  6.  New  York:  American 
Elsevier,  411-466. 

Ashton- Warner,  S.   1963.    Teacher.  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster. 

Atkinson,  R.  C.  1972.  Ingredients  for  a  theory  of  instruction.  American  Psychologist 
27:921-931. 

Atkinson,  R.  C,  and  Wilson,  H.  A.  (Eds.).  1969.  Computer- assisted  instruction.  New 
York:  Academic  Press. 

Austin,  H.  1974.  A  computational  model  of  the  skill  of  juggling.  Al  Memo  330, 
AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Backus,  J.  W.  1958.  Automatic  programming-properties  and  performance  of 
FORTRAN  systems  I  and  II.  Proceedings  of  the  Symposium  on  the  Mechanisation  of 
Thought  Processes.  Teddington,  Middlesex,  England:  National  Physical  Laboratory. 

Backus,  J.  1978.  Can  programming  be  liberated  from  the  von  Neumann  style?  A 
functional  style  and  its  algebra  of  programs.   CA CM  21:613-641. 

Backus,  J.  W.,  and  Herrick,  H.  1954.  IBM  701  Speedcoding  and  other  automatic 
programming  systems.  Proceedings  of  the  Symposium  on  Automatic  Programming  for 
Digital  Computers,  Office  of  Naval  Research,  Washington,  D.  C. 

Balzer,  R.  M.   1973.  A  global  view  of  automatic  programming.  IJCAI  3,  494-499. 

Balzer,  R.  M.,  and  Goldman,  N.  1979.  Principles  of  good  software  specification  and 
their  implications  for  specification  languages.  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  Specification 
of  Reliable  Software  Conference,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Balzer,  R.  M.,  Goldman,  N.,  and  Wile,  D.  1976.  On  the  transformational  implemen- 
tation approach  to  programming.  Second  International  Conference  on  Software  En- 
gineering, 337-344. 

Balzer,  R.  M.,  Goldman,  N.,  and  Wile,  D.  1977.  Informality  in  program  specifi- 
cation. IJCAI  5,  389-397. 

Balzer,  R.  M.,  Goldman,  N.,  and  Wile,  D.  1978.  Informality  in  program  specifica- 
tions. IEEE  Transactions  on  Software  Engineering  SE-4  2:94-103. 

Bamberger,  J.  1974.  The  luxury  of  necessity.  AI  Memo  312,  AI  Laboratory,  Massa- 
chusetts Institute  of  Technology. 

383 


384  Bibliography 

Baron,  R.  V.  1977.  Structural  analysis  in  a  very  high  level  language.  Master's  thesis, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Barr,  A.   1979.  Meta-knowledge  and  cognition.  IJCAI  6,  31-33. 

Barr,  A.,  and  Atkinson,  R.  C.  1977.  Adaptive  instructional  strategies.  In  H.  Spada 
and  W.  F.  Kempf  (Eds.),  Structural  models  of  thinking  and  learning.  Bern:  Hans 
Huber. 

Barr,  A.,  Beard,  M.,  and  Atkinson,  R.  C.  1975.  A  rationale  and  description  of  a  CAI 
program  to  teach  the  BASIC  programming  language.  Instructional  Science  4:1-31. 

Barr,  A.,  Beard,  M.,  and  Atkinson,  R.  C.  1976.  The  computer  as  a  tutorial  lab- 
oratory: The  Stanford  BIP  project.  International  Journal  of  Man-Machine  Studies 
8:567-596. 

Barstow,  D.  1977.  A  knowledge  based  system  for  automatic  program  construction. 
IJCAI  5,  382-388. 

Barstow,  D.  1978.  Codification  of  programming  knowledge:  Graph  algorithms. 
Rep.  No.  TR-149,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Yale  University. 

Barstow,  D.   1979.  Knowledge-based  program  construction.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier. 

Barstow,  D.  R.,  and  Kant,  E.  1977.  Observations  on  the  interaction  between  cod- 
ing and  efficiency  knowledge  in  the  PSI  system.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Second 
International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering.  Long  Beach,  Calif.:  Computer 
Society,  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers,  Inc.,  19-31. 

Bauer,  M.  1975.  A  basis  for  the  acquisition  of  procedures  from  protocols.  IJCAI  4, 
226-231. 

Bennett,  J.  S.,  Creary,  L.  A.,  Engelmore,  R.  M.,  and  Melosh,  R.  E.  1978.  SACON: 
A  knowledge-based  consultant  in  structural  analysis.  Heuristic  Programming 
Project  Rep.  No.  HPP-78-23,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Biermann,  A.  W.  1972a.  Computer  program  synthesis  from  computation  traces. 
Symposium  on  Fundamental  Theory  of  Programming,  Kyoto  University,  Kyoto,  Japan. 

Biermann,  A.  W.  1972b.  On  the  inference  of  Turing  machines  from  sample  com- 
putations. Artificial  Intelligence  3:181-198. 

Biermann,  A.  W.  1976.  Approaches  to  automatic  programming.  In  M.  Rubinoff 
and  M.  C.  Yovits  (Eds.),  Advances  in  computers  (Vol.  15).  New  York:  Academic 
Press,  1-63. 

Biermann,  A.  W.,  and  Feldman,  J.  A.  1970.  On  the  synthesis  of  finite-state  accep- 
tors. AI  Memo  114,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 

Biermann,  A.  W.,  and  Krishnaswamy,  R.  1974.  Constructing  programs  from  ex- 
ample computations.  Rep.  No.  OSU-CISRC-TR-74-5,  Computer  and  Information 
Science  Research  Center,  Ohio  State  University. 

BiggerstafT,  T.  J.  1976.  C2:  A  super-compiler  approach  to  automatic  program- 
ming. Tech.  Rep.  76-01-01,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  University  of  Washington. 
(Doctoral  dissertation.) 

Blaine,  L.  H.,  and  Smith,  R.  L.  1977.  Intelligent  CAI:  The  role  of  curriculum  in  sug- 
gesting computational  models  of  reasoning.  Proceedings:  1977  Annual  Conference, 
ACM,  Seattle. 

Blum,  R.  L.,  and  Wiederhold,  G.  1978.  Inferring  knowledge  from  clinical  data 
banks:  Utilizing  techniques  from  artificial  intelligence.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Second 


Bibliography  385 

Annual  Symposium  on  Computer  Application  in  Medical  Care,  IEEE,  Washington,  D.C., 
303-307. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.  1972.  Requirements  for  advanced  programming  systems  for  list 
processing.   CA CM  7:618-627. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.,  and  Wegbreit,  B.  1973.  A  model  and  stack  implementation  of 
multiple  environments.   CACM  10:591-602. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.,  and  Winograd,  T.  1977.  An  overview  of  KRL,  a  knowledge  repre- 
sentation language.   Cognitive  Science  1:3-46. 

Borning,  A.  1979.  THINGLAB:  A  constraint  simulation  laboratory.  Rep.  No.  CS- 
79-746,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 

Brown,  G.  P.  1977.  A  Framework  for  processing  dialogue.  Rep.  No.  TR-182,  Lab- 
oratory for  Computer  Science,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Brown,  H.,  and  Masinter,  L.  1974.  An  algorithm  for  the  construction  of  the  graphs 
of  organic  molecules.  Discrete  Mathematics  8:227. 

Brown,  H.,  Masinter,  L.,  and  Hjelmeland,  L.  1974.  Constructive  graph  labeling 
using  double  cosets.  Discrete  Mathematics  7:1. 

Brown,  J.  S.   1977.  Uses  of  artificial  intelligence  and  advanced  computer  technology 

in  education.  In  R.  J.  Seidel  and  M.  Rubin  (Eds.),  Computers  and  communications: 

Implications  for  education.  New  York:  Academic  Press,  253-270. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  and  Burton,  R.  R.   1978a.  Diagnostic  models  for  procedural  bugs  in 

basic  mathematical  skills.   Cognitive  Science  2:155-192. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  and  Burton,  R.  R.   1978b.  Multiple  representations  of  knowledge  for 

tutorial  reasoning.    In  D.  G.  Bobrow  and  A.  Collins  (Eds.),  Representation  and 

understanding:  Studies  in  cognitive  science.  New  York:  Academic  Press,  311-349. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  Burton,  R.  R.,  and  Bell,  A.  G.   1974.  SOPHIE:  A  sophisticated  instruc- 
tional environment  for  teaching  electronic  troubleshooting  (an  example  of  AI  in 

CAI).  BBN  Rep.  No.  2790,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  Burton,  R.  R.,  and  de  Kleer,  J.  In  press.  Knowledge  engineering  and 

pedagogical  techniques  in  SOPHIE  I,  II,  and  III.    In  D.  Sleeman  and  J.  S.  Brown 

(Eds.),  Intelligent  tutoring  systems.  London:  Academic  Press. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  Burton,  R.  R.,  Hausmann,  C,  Goldstein,  I.,  Huggins,  B.,  and  Miller,  M. 

1977.  Aspects  of  a  theory  for  automated  student  modelling.  BBN  Rep.  No.  3549, 

Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 
Brown,   J.  S.,   Burton,   R.  R.,   and  Larkin,   K.  M.   1977.  Representing  and  using 

procedural  bugs  for  educational  purposes.    Proceedings:  1977  Annual  Conference, 

ACM,  Seattle,  247-255. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  Collins,  A.,  and  Harris,  G.   1978.  Artificial  intelligence  and  learning 

strategies.    In  H.  O'Neil  (Ed.),  Learning  strategies.    New  York:  Academic  Press, 

107-140. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  and  Goldstein,  I.  P.   1977.  Computers  in  a  learning  society.   Testimony 

for  the  House  Science  and  Technology  Subcommittee  on  Domestic  and  International 

Planning,  Analysis,  and  Cooperation. 
Brown,  J.  S.,  Rubinstein,  R.,  and  Burton,  R.   1976.  Reactive  learning  environment 

for  computer  assisted  electronics  instruction.   BBN  Rep.  No.  3314,  Bolt  Beranek 

and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 


386  Bibliography 

Brown,  J.  S.,  and  Traub,  J.  F.  1971.  On  Euclid's  algorithm  and  the  computation 
of  polynomial  greatest  common  divisors.  J.  ACM  18:505-514. 

Brown,  J.  S.,  and  VanLehn,  K.  1980.  Repair  theory:  A  generative  theory  of  bugs  in 
procedural  skills.   Cognitive  Science  4:379-426. 

Buchanan,  B.  G.  1976.  Scientific  theory  formation  by  computer.  Proceedings  of 
NATO  Advanced  Study  Institute  on  Computer  Oriented  Learning  Processes,  Noordhoff, 
Leydon,  515-530. 

Buchanan,  B.  G.,  and  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1978.  DENDRAL  and  Meta-DENDRAL: 
Their  applications  dimension.  Journal  of  Artificial  Intelligence  11:5-24. 

Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Smith,  D.  H.,  White,  W.  C.,  Gritter,  R.  J.,  Feigenbaum,  E.  A., 
Lederberg,  J.,  and  Djerassi,  C.  1976.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence  for 
chemical  inference  XXII.  Automatic  rule  formation  in  mass  spectrometry  by 
means  of  the  Meta-DENDRAL  program.  Journal  of  the  American  Chemical  Society 
98:6168-6178. 

Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Sutherland,  G.  L.,  and  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1969.  Heuristic  DEN- 
DRAL: A  program  for  generating  explanatory  hypotheses  in  organic  chemistry. 
In  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  4-  Edinburgh:  Edinburgh 
University  Press,  209-254. 

Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Sutherland,  G.  L.,  and  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1970.  Rediscovering 
some  problems  of  artificial  intelligence  in  the  context  of  organic  chemistry.  In 
B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Mitchie  (Eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  5.  Edinburgh:  Edinburgh 
University  Press,  253-280. 

Buchs,  A.,  Delfino,  A.  B.,  Dufrleld,  A.  M.,  Djerassi,  C.,  Buchanan,  B.,  Feigenbaum, 
E.  A.,  and  Lederberg,  J.  1970.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence  for  chemical 
inference  VI.  Approach  to  a  general  method  of  interpreting  low  resolution  mass 
spectra  with  a  computer.  Helvetica  Chemica  Acta  53:1394. 

Burstall,  R.  M.,  Collins,  J.  S.,  and  Popplestone,  R.  J.  1968.  The  POP-2  papers. 
Edinburgh:  Edinburgh  University  Press. 

Burstall,  R.  M.,  Collins,  A.,  and  Popplestone,  R.  J.  1971.  Programming  in  POP-2. 
Edinburgh:  Edinburgh  University  Press. 

Burstall,  R.  M.,  and  Darlington,  J.  1977.  A  transformation  system  for  developing 
recursive  programs.  J.  ACM  24:44-67. 

Burton,  R.  R.  1976.  Semantic  grammar:  A  technique  for  efficient  language  understanding 
in  limited  domains.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  University  of 
California,  Irvine. 

Burton,  R.  R.,  and  Brown,  J.  S.  1976.  A  tutoring  and  student  modelling  paradigm 
for  gaming  environments.  SIGCSE  Bulletin  8:236-246. 

Burton,  R.  R.,  and  Brown,  J.  S.  1979a.  An  investigation  of  computer  coaching  for 
informal  learning  activities.  International  Journal  of  Man-Machine  Studies  11:5-24. 

Burton,  R.  R.,  and  Brown,  J.  S.  1979b.  Toward  a  natural-language  capability  for 
computer-assisted  instruction.  In  H.  O'Neil  (Ed.),  Procedures  for  instructional  sys- 
tems development.  New  York:  Academic  Press,  273-313. 

Carbonell,  J.  R.  1970a.  AI  in  CAI:  An  artificial  intelligence  approach  to  computer- 
aided  instruction.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Man-Machine  Systems  MMS-ll(4):190-202. 

Carbonell,  J.  R.  1970b.  Mixed-initiative  man-computer  instructional  dialogues. 
BBN  Rep.  No.  1971,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 


Bibliography  387 

Carbonell.  J.  R.,  and  Collins,  A.  1973.  Natural  semantics  in  artificial  intelligence. 
IJCAI3,  344-351. 

Carhart,  R.  E,  and  Smith,  D.  H.  1976.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence  for 
chemical  inference  XX.  Intelligent  use  of  constraints  in  computer-assisted  struc- 
ture elucidation.   Computers  and  Chemistry  1:79. 

Carhart,  R.  E.,  Smith,  D.  H.,  Brown,  H.,  and  Djerassi,  C.  1975.  Application- 
of  artificial  intelligence  for  chemical  inference  XVII.  An  approach  to  computer- 
assisted  elucidation  of  molecular  structure.  Journal  of  the  American  Chemical  Society 
97:5755-5762. 

Carr,  B.,  and  Goldstein,  I.  1977.  Overlays:  A  theory  of  modeling  for  computer  aided 
instruction.  AI  Memo  406,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Chang,  C.  L.  1978.  DEDUCE  2:  Further  investigations  of  deduction  in  relational 
databases.  In  H.  Gallaire  and  J.  Minker  (Eds.),  Logic  and  databases.  New  York: 
Plenum,  201-236. 

Charniak,  E.,  Riesbeck,  C,  and  McDermott,  D.  1979.  Artificial  intelligence  program- 
ming. Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Lawrence  Erlbaum. 

Church,  A.  1941.  Calculi  of  lambda  conversion.  Princeton,  N.J. :  Princeton  University 
Press. 

Clancey,  W.  J.  1978.  An  antibiotic  therapy  selector  which  provides  for  explana- 
tions. Heuristic  Programming  Project  Memo  HPP-78-26,  Computer  Science  Dept .. 
Stanford  University. 

Clancey,  W.  J.  1979a.  Dialogue  management  for  rule-based  tutorials.  IJCAI  6,  155— 
161. 

Clancey,  W.  J.  1979b.  Transfer  of  rule-based  expertise  through  a  tutorial  dialogue. 
Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-769,  Computer  Science  Dept,,  Stanford  University.  (Doctoral 
dissertation.) 

Clancey,  W.  J.  1979c.  Tutoring  rules  for  guiding  a  case  method  dialogue.  Interna- 
tional Journal  of  Man-Machine  Studies  11:25-49. 

Clancey,  W.  J.  In  press-a.  The  epistemology  of  a  rule-based  expert  system:  A 
framework  for  explanation.  Submitted  to  Artificial  Intelligence. 

Clancey,  W.  J.  In  press-b.  Methodology  for  building  an  intelligent  tutoring  system. 
To  appear  in  W.  Kintsch-(Ed.),  Methods  and  tactics  in  cognitive  science. 

Clancey,  W.  J.,  and  Letsinger,  R.  1981.  NEOMYCIN:  Reconfiguring  a  rule-based 
expert  system  for  application  to  teaching.  IJCAI  7,  829-836. 

Clark,  K.,  and  Sickel,  S.  1977.  Predicate  logic:  A  calculus  for  deriving  programs. 
IJCAI  5,  419-420. 

Clocksin,  W.  F.,  and  Mellish,  C.  S.  1981.  Programming  in  PROLOG.  New  York: 
Springer- Verlag. 

Codd,  E.  F.,  Arnold,  R.  S.,  Cadiou,  J.  M.,  Chang,  C.  L.,  and  Roussopoulos.  N. 
1978.  RENDEZVOUS  version  1:  An  experimental  English-language  query  formula- 
tion system  for  casual  users  of  relational  databases.  Rep.  No.  RJ-2 144(29407). 
Computer  Sciences  Dept.,  Thomas  J.  Watson  Research  Center,  IBM.  Yorktown 
Heights,  N.Y. 

Collins,  A.  1976.  Processes  in  acquiring  knowledge.  In  R.  C.  Anderson,  R.  J.  Spiro. 
and  W.  E.  Montague  (Eds.),  Schooling  and  the  acguisition  of  knowledge.  Hillsdale. 
N.J.:  Lawrence  Erlbaum,  339-363. 


388  Bibliography 

Collins,  A.   1978a.  Fragments  of  a  theory  of  human  plausible  reasoning.   TINLAP-2, 

194-201. 
Collins,  A.   1978b.  Reasoning  from  incomplete  knowledge.    In  D.  G.  Bobrow  and 

A.  Collins  (Eds.),  Representation  and  understanding:  Studies  in  cognitive  science.  New 

York:  Academic  Press,  383-415. 

Collins,  A.,  Warnock,  E.  H.,  and  Passafiume,  J.  J.  1974.  Analysis  and  synthesis 
of  tutorial  dialogues.  BBN  Rep.  No.  2789,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc., 
Cambridge,  Mass. 

Corey,  E.  J.,  and  Wipke,  W.  T.  1969.  Computer  assisted  design  of  complex  organic 
synthesis.  Science  166:178-192. 

Croft,  J.  1972.  Is  computerized  diagnosis  possible?  Computers  and  Biomedical  Re- 
search 5:351-367. 

Crowder,  N.  A.  1962.  Intrinsic  and  extrinsic  programming.  In  J.  E.  Coulson  (Ed.), 
Proceedings  of  the  Conference  on  Application  of  Digital  Computers  to  Automated  Instruc- 
tion. New  York:  Wiley,  58-65. 

Damerau,  F.  J.  1979.  The  transformational  question  answering  (TQA)  system:  Op- 
erational statistics— 1978.  Rep.  No.  RC-7739  (No.  33522),  Computer  Sciences 
Dept.,  Thomas  J.  Watson  Research  Center,  IBM,  Yorktown  Heights,  N.Y. 

Darlington,  J.,  and  Burstall,  R.  M.  1973.  A  system  which  automatically  improves 
programs.  IJCAI  3,  479-485. 

Davies,  D.,  et  al.  1973.  POPLER  1.5  reference  manual.  Edinburgh:  University  of 
Edinburgh. 

Davis,  R.  1976.  Applications  of  meta-level  knowledge  to  the  construction,  main- 
tenance, and  use  of  large  knowledge  bases.  Memo  AIM-283,  AI  Laboratory, 
and  Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-76-552,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 
(Doctoral  dissertation.)  Reprinted  in  R.  Davis  and  D.  Lenat  (Eds.),  Knowledge- 
based  systems  in  artificial  intelligence.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1982,  229-490. 

Davis,  R.  1977.  Interactive  transfer  of  expertise:  Acquisition  of  new  inference  rules. 
IJCAI  5,  321-328. 

Davis,  R.  1978.  Knowledge  acquisition  in  rule-based  systems:  Knowledge  about  rep- 
resentations as  a  basis  for  system  construction  and  maintenance.  In  D.  Waterman 
and  F.  Hayes-Roth  (Eds.),  Pattern- directed  inference  systems.  New  York:  Academic 
Press,  99-134. 

Davis,  R.   1980.  Meta-rules:  Reasoning  about  control.  AI  Journal  15:179-222. 
Davis,  R.,  and  Buchanan,  B.   1977.  Meta-level  knowledge:  Overview  and  applica- 
tions. IJCAI  5,  920-928. 

de  Kleer,  J.,  Doyle,  J.,  Steele,  G.  L.,  Jr.,  and  Sussman,  G.  J.  1979.  Explicit  control 
of  reasoning.  In  P.  J.  Winston  and  R.  H.  Brown  (Eds.),  Artificial  intelligence:  An 
MIT  perspective.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press,  93-116. 

Doyle,  J.   1979.  A  truth  maintenance  system.  Artificial  Intelligence  12:231-272. 

Doyle,  J.  1980.  A  model  for  deliberation,  action,  and  introspection.  Rep.  No. 
TR-581,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  (Doctoral  disser- 
tation.) 

Doyle,  J.,  and  London,  P.  E.  1980.  Selected  descriptor  index  bibliography  to  the 
literature  on  belief  revision.  SIGART  Newsletter  71:7-23. 


Bibliography  389 

Duda,  R.  0.,  and  Gaschnig,  J.  G.  1981.  Knowledge-based  expert  systems  come  of 
age.  BYTE  6:238-281. 

Duda,  R.,  Gaschnig,  J.,  and  Hart,  P.  E.  1979.  Model  design  in  the  PROSPECTOR 
consultant  system  for  mineral  exploration.  In  D.  Michie  (Ed.),  Expert  systems  in 
the  micro- electronic  age.  Edinburgh:  Edinburgh  University  Press,  153-167. 

Duda,  R.  O.,  Gaschnig,  J.,  Hart,  P.  E.,  Konolige,  K.,  Reboh,  R.,  Barrett,  P., 
and  Slocum,  J.  1978.  Development  of  the  PROSPECTOR  consultation  system  for 
mineral  exploration.  Final  Report,  SRI  Projects  5821  and  6415,  SRI  International, 
Inc.,  Menlo  Park,  Calif. 

Duda,  R.  O.,  Hart,  P.  E.,  Nilsson,  N.  J.,  Reboh,  R.,  Slocum,  J.,  and  Sutherland, 
G.  L.  1977.  Development  of  a  computer-based  consultant  for  mineral  exploration. 
Annual  Report,  SRI  Projects  5821  and  6415,  SRI  International,  Inc.,  Menlo  Park, 
Calif. 

Duffield,  A.  M.,  Robertson,  A.  V.,  Djerassi,  C,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Sutherland,  G.  L., 
Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  and  Lederberg,  J.  1969.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence 
for  chemical  inference  II.  Interpretation  of  low  resolution  mass  spectra  of  ketones. 
Journal  of  the  American  Chemical  Society  91(11):2977-2981. 

Dugdale,  S.,  and  Kibbey,  D.  1977.  Elementary  mathematics  with  PLATO.  Com- 
puter-based Education  Research  Laboratory,  University  of  Illinois,  Urbana. 

Engelmore,  R.  S.,  and  Nii,  H.  P.  1977.  A  knowledge-based  system  for  the  inter- 
pretation of  protein  x-ray  crystallographic  data.  Heuristic  Programming  Project 
Rep.  No.  HPP-77-2,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Engelmore,  R.  E.,  and  Terry,  A.  1979.  Structure  and  function  of  the  CRYSALIS 
system.  IJCAI  6,  250-256. 

Fagan,  L.  1979.  Knowledge  engineering  for  dynamic  clinical  settings:  Giving  advice  in 
the  intensive  care  unit.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford 
University. 

Fahlman,  S.  E.  1977.  A  system  for  representing  and  using  real  world  knowledge.  Doc- 
toral dissertation,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Fain,  J.,  Gorlin,  D.,  Hayes-Roth,  F.,  Rosenschein,  S.,  Sowizral,  H.,  and  Waterman,  D. 
1981.  The  ROSIE  language  reference  manual.  Tech.  Note  N-1647-ARPA,  Rand 
Corp.,  Santa  Monica,  Calif. 

Fateman,  R.  J.  1976.  An  approach  to  automatic  asymptotic  expansions.  Symposium 
on  Symbolic  and  Algebraic  Computation,  ACM. 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1977.  The  art  of  artificial  intelligence:  Themes  and  case  studies 
in  knowledge  engineering.  IJCAI  5,  1014-1029. 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  Buchanan,  B.,  and  Lederberg,  J.  1971.  On  generality  and  prob- 
lem solving:  A  case  study  using  the  DENDRAL  program.  In  B.  Meltzer  and 
D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  6.  New  York:  American  Elsevier,  165-190. 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  Engelmore,  R.  S.,  and  Johnson,  C.  K.  1977.  A  correlation 
between  crystallographic  computing  and  artificial  intelligence  research.  Acta  Crys- 
tallographica  A33 : 1 3 . 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  and  Feldman,  J.  (Eds.).  1963.  Computers  and  thought.  New  York: 
McGraw-Hill. 

Feinstein,  A.   1967.   Clinical  judgment.  Baltimore:  William  and  Wilkins. 

Feldman,  J.  A.,  and  Rovner,  P.  D.  1969.  An  ALGOL-based  associative  language. 
CACM  8:439-449. 


390  Bibliography 

Feldman,  J.  A.,  Gips,  J.,  Horning,  J.  J.,  and  Reder,  S.  1969.  Grammatical  com- 
plexity and  inference.  AI  Memo  89,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 

Feldman,  J.  A.,  Low,  J.  R.,  Swinehart,  D.  C.,  and  Taylor,  R.  H.  1972.  Recent 
developments  in  SAIL.  Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-308,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  and 
Rep.  No.  AIM-176,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 

Fikes,  R.  E.  1970.  REF-ARF:  A  system  for  solving  problems  stated  as  procedures. 
Artificial  Intelligence  1:27-120. 

Fikes,  R.  E.  1975.  Deductive  retrieval  mechanisms  for  state  description  models. 
IJCAI  4,  99-106. 

Fischer,  G.,  Brown,  J.  S.,  and  Burton,  R.  R.  1978.  Aspects  of  a  theory  of  simplifi- 
cation, debugging,  and  coaching.  Proceedings  of  the  Second  Annual  Conference  of  the 
Canadian  Society  for  Computational  Studies  of  Intelligence. 

Fletcher,  J.  D.  1975.  Modeling  the  learner  in  computer-assisted  instruction.  Journal 
of  Computer -Based  Instruction  1:118-126. 

Floyd,  R.  W.  1972.  Toward  interactive  design  of  correct  programs.  In  C.  V.  Freiman 
(Ed.),  Foundations  and  systems,  information  processing  71:  Proceedings  of  IFIPS  Con- 
gress 11  (Vol.  1).  Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  7-10. 

Forgy,  C.,  and  McDermott,  J.  1977.  OPS,  a  domain-independent  production  system 
language.  IJCAI  5,  933-939. 

Friedman,  D.  P.   1974.    The  little  LISPer.  Chicago:  Science  Research  Associates. 

Furakawa,  K.  1977.  A  deductive  question  answering  system  on  relational  databases. 
IJCAI  5,  59-66. 

Gabriel,  R.  P.  1981.  An  organization  for  programs  in  fluid  dynamics.  Rep.  No. 
STAN-CS-81-856,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University.  (Doctoral  dis- 
sertation.) 

Gelernter,  H.  L.,  Sanders,  A.  F.,  Larsen,  D.  L.,  Agarival,  K.  K.,  Boivie,  R.  H., 
Spritzer,  G.  A.,  and  Searleman,  J.  E.  1977.  Empirical  explorations  of  SYNCHEM. 
Science  197:1041-1049. 

Genesereth,  M.  R.  1976.  DB:  A  high  level  data  base  system  with  inference.  Memo  4, 
MACSYMA  Group,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Genesereth,  M.  R.  1977.  The  difficulties  of  using  MACSYMA  and  the  function  of 
user  aids.  Proceedings  of  the  First  MACSYMA  Users'  Conference.  Rep.  No.  CP-2012, 
NASA. 

Genesereth,  M.  R.  1978.  Automated  consultation  for  complex  computer  systems.  Doc- 
toral dissertation,  Division  of  Applied  Sciences,  Harvard  University. 

Genesereth,  M.  R.  1979.  The  role  of  plans  in  automated  consultation  systems. 
IJCAI  6,  311-319. 

Ginsparg,  J.  M.  1978.  Natural  language  processing  in  an  automatic  program- 
ming domain.  Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-78-671,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford 
University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 

Goldberg,  A.  1973.  Computer-assisted  instruction:  The  application  of  theorem- 
proving  to  adaptive  response  analysis.  Tech.  Rep.  203,  Institute  for  Mathematical 
Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University. 

Goldstein,  I.  1977.  The  computer  as  coach:  An  athletic  paradigm  for  intellectual 
education.  AI  Memo  389,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 


Bibliography  391 

Goldstein,  I.  1979.  The  genetic  epistemology  of  rule  systems.  International  Journal 
of  Man- Machine  Studies  11:51-77. 

Gorry,  G.  A.,  Silverman,  H.,  and  Pauker,  S.  G.  1978.  Capturing  clinical  expertise: 
A  computer  program  that  considers  clinical  response  to  digitalis.  American  J.  of 
Medicine  64:452-460. 

Gosper,  R.  W.  1977.  Indefinite  hypergeometric  sums  in  MACSYMA.  Proceedings  of 
the  First  MACSYMA  Users'  Conference.  Rep.  No.  CP-2012,  NASA. 

Green,  C.  1969.  The  application  of  theorem  proving  to  question-answering  systems. 
Memo  AIM-96,  Electrical  Engineering  Dept.,  and  Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-69-138, 
Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 

Green,  C.  1975a.  Unpublished  lecture  surveying  automatic  proramming.  Computer 
Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Green,  C.  1975b.  Whither  automatic  programming?  (Invited  tutorial  lecture.) 
IJCAI  4. 

Green,  C.  1976.  The  design  of  the  PSI  program  synthesis  system.  Proceedings  of  the 
Second  International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering,  4-18. 

Green,  C.   1977.  A  summary  of  the  PSI  program  synthesis  system.  IJCAI  5,  380-381. 

Green,  C,  et  al.  1979.  Results  in  knowledge  based  program  synthesis.  IJCAI  6, 
342-344. 

Green,  C,  and  Barstow,  D.  1977.  A  hypothetical  dialogue  exhibiting  a  knowledge 
base  for  a  program  understanding  system.  In  E.  W.  Elcock  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.), 
Machine  Intelligence  8.  New  York:  Wiley,  335-359. 

Green,  C,  and  Barstow,  D.  1978.  On  program  synthesis  knowledge.  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence 3:241-279. 

Green,  C,  Phillips,  J.,  Westfold,  S.,  Pressburger,  T.,  Kedzierski,  B.,  Ange- 
branndt,  S.,  Mont-Reynaud,  B.,  and  Tappel,  S.  1981a.  Progress  on  knowledge- 
based  programming  and  algorithm  design.  Memo  KES.U.81.1,  Kestrel  Institute, 
Palo  Alto,  Calif. 

Green,  C,  Phillips,  J.,  Westfold,  S.,  Pressburger,  T.,  Kedzierski,  B.,  Ange- 
branndt,  S.,  Mont-Reynaud,  B.,  and  Tappel,  S.  1981b.  Research  on  knowledge- 
based  programming  and  algorithm  design — 1981.  Memo  KES.U.81.2,  Kestrel 
Institute,  Palo  Alto,  Calif. 

Green,  C,  Waldinger,  R.,  Barstow,  D.,  Elschlager,  R.,  Lenat,  D.,  McCune,  B.. 
Shaw,  D.,  and  Steinberg,  L.  1974.  Progress  report  on  program  understanding 
systems.  Memo  AIM-240,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 

Green,  C,  and  Westfold,  S.  1982.  Knowledge-based  programming  self  applied. 
Machine  Intelligence  10.  New  York:  Wiley. 

Grignetti,  M.  C,  Hausmann,  C,  and  Gould,  L.  1975.  An  intelligent  on-line  assistant 
and  tutor — NLS-SCHOLAR.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Computer  Conference,  San 
Diego,  Calif,  775-781. 

Grossman,  R.  1976.  Some  data  base  applications  of  constraint  expressions.  Rep. 
No.  TR-158,  Computer  Science  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technol- 
ogy- 

Gund,  P.,  Andose,  J.  D.,  and  Rhodes,  J.  B.  1977.  Computer  assisted  analysis  in 
drug  research.  In  W.  T.  Wipke  and  W.  J.  Howe  (Eds.),  Computer- assisted  organic 
synthesis.  Washington,  D.C.:  American  Chemical  Society,  179-187. 


392  Bibliography 

Gupta,  M.  M.,  Saridis,  G.  N.,  and  Gaines,  B.  R.  1977.  FUZZY  automata  and  decision 
processes.  New  York:  North- Holland. 

Haas,  N.,  and  Hendrix,  G.  G.  1980.  An  approach  to  acquiring  and  applying  knowl- 
edge. Proceedings  of  the  First  Annual  National  Conference  on  AI,  Stanford  University, 
235-239. 

Hammer,  M.,  and  McLeod,  D.  1978.  The  semantic  data  model:  A  modelling  mech- 
anism for  data  base  applications.  ACM,  26-36. 

Hammer,  M.,  and  Ruth,  G.  1979.  Automating  the  software  development  process. 
In  P.  Wegner  (Ed.),  Research  directions  in  software  technology.  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
MIT  Press,  767-792. 

Hardy,  S.   1975.  Synthesis  of  LISP  functions  from  examples.  IJCAI  4,  240-245. 

Harris,  L.  R.  1977.  ROBOT:  A  high  performance  natural  language  processor  for 
data  base  query.  SIGART  Newsletter  61:39-40. 

Hart,  P.  E.   1975.  Progress  on  a  computer  based  consultant.  IJCAI  4,  831-841. 

Hayes,  P.  J.   1975.  A  representation  for  robot  plans.  IJCAI  4,  181-188. 

Hayes-Roth,  F.,  Gorlin,  D.,  Rosenschein,  S.,  Sowizral,  H.,  and  Waterman,  D.  1981. 
Rationale  and  motivation  for  ROSIE.  Tech.  Note  N-1648-ARPA,  Rand  Corp., 
Santa  Monica,  Calif. 

Hayes-Roth,  F.,  Waterman,  D.  A.,  and  Lenat,  D.  B.  (Eds.).  In  preparation.  Building 
expert  systems. 

Hearn,  A.  C.  1973.  REDUCE-2  users'  manual.  Rep.  No.  UCP-19,  Computational 
Physics  Group,  University  of  Utah. 

Heathcock,  C.  H.,  and  Clark,  R.  D.   1976.   Journal  of  Organic  Chemistry  41:636-643. 

Heidorn,  G.  E.  1972.  Natural  language  inputs  to  a  simulation  programming  system. 
Rep.  No.  55hd72101A,  Naval  Postgraduate  School,  Monterey,  Calif. 

Heidorn,  G.  E.  1974.  English  as  a  very  high  level  language  for  simulation  program- 
ming. Proceedings  of  Symposium  on  Very  High  Level  Language,  SIGPLAN  Notices 
9:91-100. 

Heidorn,  G.  E.  1975a.  Augmented  phrase  structure  grammars.  In  B.  L.  Nash- 
Webber  and  R.  C.  Schank  (Eds.),  Theoretical  issues  in  natural  language  processing. 
Association  for  Computational  Linguistics,  1-5. 

Heidorn,  G.  E.  1975b.  Simulation  programming  through  natural  language  dialogue.  Am- 
sterdam: North-Holland. 

Lleidorn,  G.  E.  1976.  Automatic  programming  through  natural  language  dialogue: 
A  survey.  IBM  J.  Research  and  Development  4:302-313. 

Heidorn,  G.  E.  1977.  The  end  of  the  user  programmer?  The  Software  Revolution, 
Infotech  State  of  the  Art  Conference,  Copenhagen,  Denmark. 

Heiser,  J.  F.,  Brooks,  R.  E.,  and  Ballard,  J.  P.  1978.  Progress  report:  A  com- 
puterized psychopharmacology  advisor.  Proceedings  of  the  Eleventh  Collegium  Inter- 
nationale Neuro-Psychopharmacologicum,  Vienna,  Austria. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.,  and  Lewis,  W.  H.  1981.  Transportable  natural  language  interfaces 
to  databases.  Proceedings  of  the  Nineteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Association  for 
Computational  Linguistics,  Stanford,  University. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.,  and  Sacerdoti,  E.  D.  1981.  Natural-language  processing:  The  field 
in  perspective.  BYTE  6:304-352. 


Bibliography  393 

Hewitt,  C.  1971.  Description  and  theoretical  analysis  (using  schemas)  of  PLANNER:  A 
language  for  proving  theorems  and  manipulating  models  in  a  robot.  Doctoral  disserta- 
tion, AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Hewitt,  C.  1977.  Viewing  control  structures  as  patterns  of  passing  messages.  Arti- 
ficial Intelligence  8:323-364. 

Holt,  J.   1964.  How  children  fail.  New  York:  Delta. 

Howe,  J.  A.  M.  1973.  Individualizing  computer-assisted  instruction.  In  A.  Elithorn 
and  D.  Jones  (Eds.),  Artificial  and  human  thinking.  Amsterdam:  Elsevier,  94-101. 

Howe,  J.  A.  M,  and  O'Shea,  T.  1976.  Computational  metaphors  for  children.  Rep. 
No.  24,  Dept.  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  Edinburgh  University. 

Hunt,  E.  B.   1975.  Artificial  Intelligence.  New  York:  Academic  Press. 

Illich,  I.   1971.  Deschooling  society.  New  York:  Harper  and  Row. 

Jacquez,  J.  A.  (Ed.).  1964.  The  diagnostic  process.  Proceedings  of  a  conference  spon- 
sored by  the  Biomedical  Data  Processing  Training  Program,  University  of  Michigan 
Medical  School,  Ann  Arbor. 

Jelliffe,  R.  W.  1967.  A  mathematical  analysis  of  digitalis  kinetics  in  patients  with 
normal  and  reduced  renal  function.  Mathematical  Biosciences  1:305. 

Jurs,  P.  C.  1974.  Chemical  data  interpretation  using  pattern  recognition  tech- 
niques. In  W.  T.  Wipke,  S.  R.  Heller,  R.  J.  Feldman,  and  E.  Hyde,  (Eds.),  Computer 
representation  and  manipulation  of  chemical  information.  New  York:  Wiley,  265-285. 

Kahn,  K.  1976.  An  actor-based  computer  animation  language.  Proceedings  of  the 
SIGGRAPH/ACM  Workshop  on  User-Oriented  Design  of  Interactive  Graphics  Systems, 
37-43. 

Kant,  E.  1977.  The  selection  of  efficient  implementations  for  a  high  level  language. 
Proceedings  of  Symposium  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Programming  Languages. 
SIGART  Newsletter  64:140-146. 

Kant,  E.  1978.  Efficiency  estimation:  Controlling  search  in  program  synthesis.  In 
S.  P.  Ghosh  and  L.  Y.  Leonard  (Eds.),  AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings:  National 
Computer  Conference,  47:703. 

Kant,  E.  1979.  Efficiency  considerations  in  program  synthesis:  A  knowledge-based  ap- 
proach. Doctoral  dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Kaplan,  S.  J.  1979.  Cooperative  responses  from  a  portable  natural  language  data  base 
query  system.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Dept.  of  Computer  and  Information  Sciences, 
University  of  Pennsylvania. 

Kay,  A.,  and  Goldberg,  A.   1977.  Personal  dynamic  media.   Computer  10:31-41. 

Kedzierski,  B.  1982.  Communication  and  management  support  in  system  develop- 
ment environments.  Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors  in  Computer  Systems  Confer- 
ence, Gaithersburg,  Md. 

Kellogg,  C,  Klahr,  P.,  and  Travis  L.  1978.  Deductive  planning  and  pathfinding  for 
relational  databases.  In  H.  Gallaire  and  J.  Minker  (Eds.),  Logic  and  databases.  New 
York:  Plenum,  179-200. 

Kimball,  R.  B.  1973.  Self-optimizing  computer-assisted  tutoring:  Theory  and  prac- 
tice. Rep.  No.  206,  Institute  for  Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences. 
Stanford  University. 


394  Bibliography 

King,  J.  J.  1981a.  Modelling  concepts  for  reasoning  about  access  to  knowledge. 
Proceedings  of  the  Workshop  on  Data  Abstraction,  Databases,  and  Conceptual  Modelling, 
Pingree  Park,  Colorado,  1980. 

King,  J.  J.  1981b.  Query  optimization  by  semantic  reasoning.  Rep.  No.  CS-81-857, 
Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 

Koffman,  E.  B.,  and  Blount,  S.  E.  1973.  Artificial  intelligence  and  automatic  pro- 
gramming in  CA1.  IJCAI  3,  86-94. 

Koffman,  E.  B.,  and  Blount,  S.  E.  1975.  Artificial  intelligence  and  automatic  pro- 
gramming in  CAI.  Artificial  Intelligence  6:215-234. 

Kornfeld,  W.  A.  1979.  ETHER— A  parallel  problem  solving  system.  IJCAI  6,  490- 
492. 

Kornfeld,  W.  A.,  and  Hewitt,  C.  1981.  The  scientific  community  metaphor.  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics  SMC-1 1:24-33. 

Kowalski,  R.  1977.  Predicate  logic  as  a  programming  language.  Amsterdam:  North- 
Holland. 

Kunz,  J.,  et  al.  1978.  A  physiological  rule-based  system  for  interpreting  pulmo- 
nary function  test  results.  Heuristic  Programming  Project  Rep.  No.  HPP-78-19, 
Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Laubsch,  J.  H.  1975.  Some  thoughts  about  representing  knowledge  in  instructional 
systems.  IJCAI  4,  122-125. 

Le  Faivre,  R.  A.  1977.  FUZZY  reference  manual.  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Rutgers 
University. 

Lederberg,  J.  1964a.  Computation  of  molecular  formulas  for  mass  spectrometry.  San 
Francisco:  Holden-Day. 

Lederberg,  J.  1964b.  DENDRAL-64:  A  system  for  computer  construction,  enumera- 
tion and  notation  of  organic  molecules  as  tree  structures  and  cyclic  graphs.  Part  I. 
Notational  algorithm  for  tree  structures.  Rep.  No.  CR-57029,  NASA. 

Ledley,  R.,  and  Lusted,  L.  1959.  Reasoning  foundations  of  medical  diagnosis.  Sci- 
ence 130:9-21. 

Lenat,  D.  B.  1975.  Synthesis  of  large  programs  from  specific  dialogues.  In  G.  Huet 
and  G.  Kahn  (Eds.),  Proving  and  improving  programs.  Rocquencourt,  France:  Insti- 
tut  de  Recherche  d'Informatique  et  d'Automatique,  225-241. 

Lewis,  V.  E.  1977.  User  aids  for  MACSYMA.  Proceedings  of  the  First  MACSYMA  Users' 
Conference.  Rep.  No.  CP-2012,  NASA. 

Lindberg,  D.  A.  B.,  Sharp,  G.  C,  Kingsland,  L.  C,  Weiss,  S.  M.,  Hayes,  S.  P., 
Ueno,  H.,  and  Hazelwood,  S.  E.  1980.  Computer  based  rheumatology  consultant. 
In  the  syllabus  for  the  Tutorial  on  computers  in  medicine:  Applications  of  artificial 
intelligence  techniques,  Stanford  University  School  of  Medicine. 

Lindsay,  R.,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  and  Lederberg,  J.  1980.  DEN- 
DRAL.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Liskov,  B.  H.,  Snyder,  A.,  Atkinson,  R.,  and  Schaffert,  C.  1977.  Abstraction  mech- 
anisms in  CLU.  CACM  8:564-576. 

London,  P.  E.  1978.  Dependency  networks  as  a  representation  for  modelling  in 
general  problem  solvers.  Rep.  No.  TR-698,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  University 
of  Maryland. 


Bibliography  395 

Long,  W.   1980.  Criteria  for  computer  generated  therapy  advice  in  a  clinical  domain. 

Conference  on  Computers  in  Cardiology,  Williamsburg,  Va. 
Low,  J.  R.   1974.  Automatic  coding:   Choice  of  data  structures.    Memo  AIM-242, 

AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 
Low,  J.  R.   1978.  Automatic  data  structure  selection:  An  example  and  overview. 

CACM  5:21-25. 

Manna,  Z.,  and  Waldinger,  R.  1975.  Knowledge  and  reasoning  in  program  synthesis. 
Artificial  Intelligence  6:175-208. 

Manna,  Z.,  and  Waldinger,  R.   1977.  Synthesis:   Dreams  =>  programs.    Rep.  No. 

STAN-CS-77-630,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 
Manna,   Z.,   and  Waldinger,  R.   1978.  DEDALUS— The  DEDuctive  ALgorithm  Ur- 

Synthesizer.  National  Computer  Conference,  Anaheim,  Calif.,  683-690. 
Martin,  W.  A.   1974.  OWL  notes:   A  system  for  building  expert  problem  solving 

systems  involving  verbal  reasoning.     Project  MAC,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 

Technology. 
Masinter,  L.,  Sridharan,  N.  S.,  Carhart,  R.,  and  Smith,  D.  H.   1974.  Application  of 

artificial  intelligence  for  chemical  inference  XII:  Exhaustive  generation  of  cyclic 

and  acyclic  isomers.  Journal  of  the  American  Chemical  Society  96:7702. 

Mathlab  Group.  1977.  MACSYMA  reference  manual.  Computer  Science  Laboratory, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

McCarthy,  J.  1960.  Recursive  functions  of  symbolic  expressions  and  their  computa- 
tion by  machine.   CACM  4:184-195. 

McCarthy,  J.   1978.  History  of  LISP.  SIGPLAN  Notices  13:217-223. 

McCarthy,  J.,  Abrahams,  P.  W.,  Edwards,  D.  J.,  Hart,  T.  P.,  and  Levin,  M.  I.  1962. 
LISP  1.5  programmer's  manual.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press. 

McCune,  B.  P.  1977.  The  PSI  program  model  builder:  Synthesis  of  very  high-level 
programs.  Proceedings  of  the  Symposium  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Programming 
Languages,  SIGART  Newsletter  64:130-139. 

McCune,  B.  1979.  Building  program  models  incrementally  from  informal  descriptions. 
Doctoral  dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

McDermott,  D.  V.  1975.  Very  large  PLANNER-type  data  bases.  Memo  AIM-339, 
AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

McDermott,  D.  V.   1981.  Rl:  The  formative  years.  AI  Magazine  2:21-29. 

Miller,  M.  L.  1979.  A  structured  planning  and  debugging  environment  for  elemen- 
tary programming.  International  Journal  of  Man-Machine  Studies  1:79  95. 

Miller,  M.  L.,  and  Goldstein,  I.   1977a.  Problem  solving  grammars  as  formal  tools 

for  intelligent  CAI.  Proceedings:  1977  Annual  Conference,  ACM,  Seattle. 
Miller,  M.  L.,  and  Goldstein,  I.   1977b.  Structured  planning  and  debugging.  IJCAI  5. 

Minker,  J.  1978.  An  experimental  relational  data  base  system  based  on  logic.  In 
H.  Gallaire  and  J.  Minker,  (Eds.),  Logic  and  databases.  New  York:  Plenum. 

Mitchell,  T.  M.  1977.  Version  spaces:  An  approach  to  rule  revision  during  rule 
induction.  IJCAI  5,  305-310. 

Mitchell,  T.  M.  1978.  Version  spaces:  An  approach  to  concept  learning.  Rep.  No. 
CS-78-711,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 


396  Bibliography 

Mitchell,  T.  M.,  and  Schwenzer,  G.  M.  1978.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence 
for  chemical  inference  XXV:  A  computer  program  for  automated  empirical  13C 
NMR  rule  formation.   Organic  Magnetic  Resonance  8:378. 

Morgenstern,  M.  1976.  Automated  design  and  optimization  of  information  processing 
systems.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Moses,  J.   1971.  Symbolic  integration:  The  stormy  decade.  ACM  14:548-560. 

Moses,  J.  1975.  A  MACSYMA  primer.  Mathlab  Memo  No.  2,  Computer  Science 
Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Moses,  J.,  and  Yun,  D.  Y.  1973.  The  EZGCD  algorithm.  Proceedings  of  the  ACM 
National  Convention. 

Musser,  D.  R.   1975.  Multivariate  polynomial  factoring.  J.  ACM  2:291-307. 

Mylopolous,  J.,  Bernstein,  P.  A.,  and  Wong,  H.  K.  T.  1980.  A  language  facility  for 
designing  database-intensive  applications.  A  CM  5:185-207. 

Newell,  A.,  Shaw,  J.  C,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1957.  Programming  the  logic  theory 
machine.  Proceedings  of  the  Western  Joint  Computer  Conference,  230-240. 

Nii,  H.  P.,  and  Aiello,  N.  1978.  AGE  (Attempt  to  Generalize):  Profile  of  the  AGE-0 
system.  Heuristic  Programming  Project  Working  Paper  HPP-78-5,  Computer 
Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Nii,  H.  P.,  and  Aiello,  N.  1979.  AGE  (Attempt  to  Generalize):  A  knowledge-based 
program  for  building  knowledge-based  programs.  IJCAI  6,  645-655. 

Nilsson,  N.  (Ed.).  1975.  Artificial  intelligence — research  and  applications.  SRI  In- 
ternational, Inc.,  Menlo  Park,  Calif. 

Nordyke,  R.,  Kulikowski,  C.  A.,  and  Kulikowski,  C.  W.  1971.  A  comparison  of 
methods  for  the  automated  diagnosis  of  thyroid  dysfunction.  Computers  and  Bio- 
medical Research  4:374-389. 

Norman,  A.  C.  1975.  On  computing  with  formal  power  series.  ACM  Transactions  on 
Mathematical  Software  1:346-356. 

Norman,  D.  A.,  Gentner,  D.  R.,  and  Stevens,  A.  L.  1976.  Comments  on  learning 
schemata  and  memory  representation.  In  D.  Klahr  (Ed.),  Cognition  and  instruction. 
Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Lawrence  Erlbaum,  177-196. 

Papert,  S.  1972a.  Teaching  children  to  be  mathematicians  vs.  teaching  about  math- 
ematics. International  Journal  of  Mathematics,  Education,  Science,  and  Technology 
3:249-262. 

Papert,  S.  1972b.  Teaching  children  thinking.  Programmed  Learning  and  Educational 
Technology  9(5):245-255. 

Papert,  S.  1973.  Uses  of  technology  to  enhance  education.  AI  Memo  298,  AI  Labora- 
tory, Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Papert,  S.  1980.  Mindstorms:  Children,  computers,  and  powerful  ideas.  New  York: 
Basic  Books. 

Pauker,  S.,  Gorry,  G.  A.,  Kassirer,  J.,  and  Schwartz,  W.  1976.  Towards  the  simula- 
tion of  clinical  cognition — Taking  a  present  illness  by  computer.  American  Journal 
of  Medicine  60:981-996. 

Petry,  F.  E.,  and  Biermann,  A.  W.  1976.  Reconstruction  of  algorithms  from  memory 
snapshots  of  their  execution.  Proceedings:  1976  Annual  Conference,  ACM,  New  York, 
530-534. 


Bibliography  397 

Phillips,    J.   V.   1977.  Program   inference   from   traces   using   multiple   knowledge 
sources.  IJCAI  5,  812. 

Piaget,  J.  (D.  Coltman,  Trans.).   1970.   Science  of  education  and  the  psychology  of  the 

child.  New  York:  Viking. 
Piaget,  J.,  and  Inhelder,  B.  (H.  Weaver,  Trans.).   1969.    The  psychology  of  the  child. 

New  York:  Basic  Books. 
Polya,  G.   1954.  Mathematics  and  plausible  reasoning  (2  vols.).  New  York:  Wiley. 
Polya,  G.   1957.  How  to  solve  it  (2nd  ed.).  New  York:  Doubleday  Anchor. 
Pople,    H.   1977.  The  formation  of  composite  hypotheses   in   diagnostic   problem 

solving — An  exercise  in  synthetic  reasoning.  IJCAI  5,  1030-1037. 
Popplestone,  R.  J.   1967.  The  design  philosophy  of  POP-2.     In  D.  Michie  (Ed.), 

Machine  Intelligence  3.  Edinburgh:  Edinburgh  University  Press,  393-402. 
Pratt,  V.   1979.  LISP.  In  J.  Belzer,  A.  G.  Holzman,  and  A.  Kent  (Eds.),  Encyclopedia 

of  computer  science  and  technology  (Vol.  10).  New  York:  Marcel  Dekker,  78-116. 
Preston,  K.   1976.  Computer  processing  of  biomedical  images.   Computer  9:54-68. 
Reiser,  J.  F.   1975.  BAIL:  A  debugger  for  SAIL.   Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-75-270,  Com- 
puter Science  Dept.,  and  AIM-270,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 
Reiser,   J.  F.  (Ed.).   1976.  SAIL.     Rep.   No.  STAN-CS-76-574,   Computer  Science 

Dept.,  and  Memo  AIM-289,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 
Reiter,  R.   1978.  On  reasoning  by  default.   TINLAP-2,  210-218. 
Rich,  C.    1979.  A  library  of  programming  plans  with  applications  to  automated  analysis, 

synthesis  and  verification  of  programs.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Massachusetts  Institute 

of  Technology. 
Rich,  C,  and  Shrobe,  H.  E.   1976.  Initial  report  on  a  LISP  programmer's  apprentice. 

Rep.  No.  TR-354,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 
Rich,  C,  and  Shrobe,  H.  E.   1978.  Initial  report  on  a  LISP  programmer's  apprentice. 

IEEE  Transactions  on  Software  Engineering  SE-4(6):456-467. 
Rieger,  C,  Rosenberg,  J.,  and  Samet,  H.   1979.  Artificial  intelligence  programming 

languages  for  computer-aided  manufacturing.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Systems,  Man, 

and  Cybernetics  SMC-9(4):205-226. 
Risch,  R.   1969.  The  problem  of  integration  in  finite  terms.   Transactions  of  the  AMS 

139:167-189. 
Rothstein,  M.   1977.  A  new  algorithm  for  the  integration  of  exponential  and  logarith- 
mic functions.  Proceedings  of  the  First  MACSYMA  Users'  Conference.  Rep.  No.  CP- 

2012,  NASA. 
Roussopoulos,  N.  D.   1977.  A  semantic  network  model  of  databases.  Rep.  No.  104, 

Computer  Science  Dept.,  University  of  Toronto. 
Rowe,   N.   1978.  An  inductive  tutor  for  context-free  grammar  construction.     Master's 

thesis,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 
Rulifson,  J.  F.,  Waldinger,  J.  A.,  and  Derkson,  J.  A.   1971.  A  language  for  writing 

problem-solving  programs.  Proceedings  of  IFIPS  Congress  '71,  Ljubljana,  Yugoslavia. 
Ruth,   G.   1976.  Automatic  design  of  data  processing  systems.     Proceedings  of  the 

Third  ACM  Symposium  on  Principles  of  Programming  Languages,  Atlanta. 
Ruth,  G.   1978.  Protosystem  I:  An  automatic  programming  system  prototype.  Pro- 
ceedings of  the  National  Computer  Conference,  Anaheim,  Calif,  AFIPS  47:675  681. 


398  Bibliography 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.  1974.  Planning  in  a  hierarchy  of  abstraction  spaces.  Artificial 
Intelligence  5:115-135. 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.  1977.  A  structure  for  plans  and  behavior.  New  York:  American 
Elsevier. 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.,  Fikes,  R.  E.,  Reboh,  R.,  Sagalowicz,  D.,  Waldinger,  R.  J.,  and 
Wilber,  B.  M.  1976.  QLISP:  A  language  for  the  interactive  development  of  com- 
plex systems.  SRI  Tech.  Note  120,  AI  Center,  SRI  International,  Inc.,  Menlo  Park, 
Calif. 

Safrans,  C,  Desforges,  J.,  and  Tsichlis,  P.  1976.  Diagnostic  planning  and  cancer 
management.  Rep.  No.  TR-169,  Laboratory  for  Computer  Science,  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology. 

Sandewall,  E.  1978.  Programming  in  the  interactive  environment:  The  LISP  ex- 
perience. ACM  Computing  Surveys  10:35-71. 

Schank,  R.  C,  and  Riesbeck,  C.  K.  1981.  Inside  computer  understanding.  Hillsdale, 
N.J.:  Lawrence  Erlbaum. 

Schmidt,  C.  F.,  and  Sridharan,  N.  S.  N.  1977.  Plan  recognition  using  a  hypothesize 
and  revise  paradigm:  An  example.  IJCAI  5,  480-486. 

Schroll,  C,  Duffield,  A.  M.,  Djerassi,  C,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Sutherland,  G.  L., 
Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  and  Lederberg,  J.  1969.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence 
for  chemical  inference  III.  Aliphatic  ethers  diagnosed  by  their  low  resolution  mass 
spectra  and  NMR  data.  Journal  of  the  American  Chemical  Society  91:7440. 

Self,  J.  A.  1974.  Student  models  in  computer-aided  instruction.  International  Journal 
of  Man-Machine  Studies  6:261-276. 

Shaw,  D.  E.  1980.  Knowledge-based  retrieval  on  a  relational  database  machine. 
Rep.  No.  TR-823,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Shaw,  D.,  Swartout,  W.,  and  Green,  C.  1975.  Inferring  LISP  programs  from  ex- 
amples. IJCAI  I  260-267. 

Sheikh,  Y.  M.,  Buchs,  A.,  Delfino,  A.  B.,  Schroll,  G.,  Duffield,  A.  M.,  Djerassi,  C, 
Buchanan,  B.,  Sutherland,  G.  L.,  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  and  Lederberg,  J.  1970. 
Applications  of  artificial  intelligence  for  chemical  inference  V.  An  approach  to  the 
computer  generation  of  cyclic  structures.  Differentiation  between  all  the  possible 
isomeric  ketones  of  composition,  C6H10O.  Organic  Mass  Spectrometry  4:493. 

Shortliffe,  E.  H.  1976.  Computer-based  medical  consultations:  MYCIN.  New  York: 
American  Elsevier. 

Shortliffe,  E.  H.,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  and  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1979.  Knowledge  en- 
gineering for  medical  decision  making:  A  review  of  computer-based  clinical  deci- 
sion aids.  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  67:1207-1224. 

Shortliffe,  E.  H.,  Scott,  A.  C,  Bischoff,  M.  B.,  Campbell,  A.  B.,  van  Melle,  W., 
and  Jacobs,  C.  D.  1981.  ONCOCIN:  An  expert  system  for  oncology  protocol 
management.  IJCAI  7. 

Shrobe,  H.  E.  1978.  Reasoning  and  logic  for  complex  program  understanding.  Doctoral 
dissertation,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Sibel,  W.,  Furbach,  U.,  and  Schreiber,  J.  F.  1978.  Strategies  for  the  synthesis  of 
algorithms.  Informatik-Fadbendik  5:97-109. 

Siklossy,  L.   1976.  Let's  talk  LISP.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall. 


Bibliography  399 

Siklossy,  L.,  and  Sykes,  D.  1975.  Automatic  program  synthesis  from  example  prob- 
lems. IJCAI  4,  268-273. 

Silverman,  H.  1975.  A  digitalis  therapy  advisor.  Rep.  No.  TR-143,  MAC  Project, 
Computer  Science  Dept.,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Simon,  H.  A.  1972.  The  heuristic  compiler.  In  H.  A.  Simon  and  L.  Siklossy  (Eds.), 
Representation  and  meaning.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.  J.:  Prentice-Hall,  9-43. 

Sleeman,  D.,  and  Brown,  J.  S.  (Eds.).  In  press.  Intelligent  tutoring  systems.  London: 
Academic  Press. 

Smith,  D.  H.  1975.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence  for  chemical  inference  XV. 
Constructive  graph  labelling  applied  to  chemical  problems.  Chlorinated  hydrocar- 
bons. Analytical  Chemistry  47:1176. 

Smith,  D.  H.,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Engelmore,  R.  S.,  Adlercreutz,  H.,  and  Djerassi,  C. 
1973.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence  for  chemical  inference  DC.  Analysis 
of  mixtures  without  prior  separation  as  illustrated  for  estrogens.  Journal  of  the 
American  Chemical  Society  95:6078. 

Smith,  D.  H.,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Engelmore,  R.  S.,  Duffield,  A.  M.,  Yeo,  A.,  Feigen- 
baum,  E.  A.,  Lederberg,  J.,  and  Djerassi,  C.  1972.  Applications  of  artificial  intel- 
ligence for  chemical  inference  VIII.  An  approach  to  the  computer  interpretation 
of  the  high  resolution  mass  spectra  of  complex  molecules.  Structure  elucidation 
of  estrogenic  steroids.  Journal  of  the  American  Chemical  Society  94:5962. 

Smith,  D.  H.,  and  Carhart,  R.  E.  1976.  Applications  of  artificial  intelligence  for 
chemical  inference  XXIV.  Structural  isomerism  of  mono-  and  sesquiterpenoid 
skeleton  1,2-.   Tetrahedron  32:2513. 

Smith,  D.  H.,  and  Carhart,  R.  E.  1978.  Structure  elucidation  based  on  computer 
analysis  of  high  and  low  resolution  mass  spectral  data.  In  M.  L.  Gross  (Ed.),  High 
performance  mass  spectrometry:  Chemical  applications.  Washington,  D.C.:  American 
Chemical  Society,  325. 

Smith,  R.  G.,  and  Davis,  R.  1981.  Frameworks  for  cooperation  in  distributed  prob- 
lem solving.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics  SMC-ll(l). 

Smith,  R.  L.  1976.  Artificial  intelligence  in  CAI.  Unpublished  working  paper,  Insti- 
tute for  Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University. 

Smith,  R.  L.,  and  Blaine,  L.  H.  1976.  A  generalized  system  for  university  mathe- 
matics instruction.  SIG CUE  Bulletin  1:280-288. 

Smith,  R.  L.,  Graves  W.  H.,  Blaine,  L.  H.,  and  Marinov,  V.  G.   1975.  Computer- 
assisted  axiomatic  mathematics:   Informal  rigor.    In  O.  Lacarme  and  R.  Lewis 
(Eds.),  Computers  in  education,  IFIPS  (Part  2).   Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  803 
809. 

Snape,  K.   1974.  Doctoral  dissertation,  University  of  Oxford. 

Solomon,  C,  and  Papert,  S.  1976.  A  case  study  of  a  young  child  doing  turtle 
graphics  in  LOGO.  Proceedings  of  the  AFIPS  National  Computer  Conference, 
1049-1056. 

Sowa,  J.  F.  1976.  Conceptual  graphs  for  a  data  base  interface.  IBM  J.  Research  and 
Development  20:336-357. 

Sridharan,  N.  S.  1978.  Special  issue  on  applications  in  the  sciences  and  medicine. 
AI  Journal  1(1,2):195. 


400  Bibliography 

Stallman,  R.  M.,  and  Sussman,  G.  J.  1977.  Forward  reasoning  and  dependency- 
directed  backtracking  in  a  system  for  computer-aided  circuit  analysis.  Artificial 
Intelligence  9:135-196. 

Stansfield,  J.  L.,  Carr,  B.  P.,  and  Goldstein,  I.  P.  1976.  WUMPUS  Advisor  I:  A  first 
implementation  of  a  program  that  tutors  logical  and  probabilistic  reasoning  skills. 
Memo  381,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Stefik,  M.  1980.  Planning  with  constraints.  Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-80-784,  Computer 
Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 

Steinberg,  L.  1980.  A  dialogue  moderator  for  program  specification  dialogues  in  the  PSI 
system.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Stevens,  A.  L.,  and  Collins,  A.  1977.  The  goal  structure  of  a  socratic  tutor.  BBN 
Rep.  No.  3518,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Stevens,  A.  L.,  and  Collins,  A.  1978.  Multiple  conceptual  models  of  a  complex 
system.  BBN  Rep.  No.  3923,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Stevens,  A.  L.,  Collins,  A.,  and  Goldin,  S.  1978.  Diagnosing  student's  misconcep- 
tions in  causal  models.  BBN  Rep.  No.  3786,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc., 
Cambridge,  Mass. 

Summers,  P.  D.  1977.  A  methodology  for  LISP  program  construction  from  exam- 
ples. /.  ACM  24:161-175. 

Suppes,  P.   1957.  Introduction  to  logic.  New  York:  Van  Nostrand  Reinhold. 

Suppes,  P.  (Ed.).  1981.  University-level  computer  assisted  instruction  at  Stanford:  1968- 
1980.  Stanford,  Calif.:  Institute  for  Mathematical  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences. 

Sussman,  G.  J.  1975.  A  computer  model  of  skill  acquisition.  New  York:  American 
Elsevier. 

Sussman,  G.  J.,  and  McDermott,  D.  V.  1972a.  Why  conniving  is  better  than  plan- 
ning. AI  Memo  255A,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Sussman,  G.  J.,  and  McDermott,  D.  V.  1972b.  From  PLANNER  to  CONNIVER: 
A  genetic  approach.  AFIPS  1171-1180. 

Sussman,  G.  J.,  Winograd,  T.,  and  Charniak,  E.  1971.  MICRO-PLANNER  reference 
manual.  AI  Memo  203A,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Swartout,  W.  1977a.  A  digitalis  therapy  advisor  with  explanations.  Rep.  No.  TR- 
176,  MAC  Project,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technol- 
ogy- 

Swartout,  W.  1977b.  A  digitalis  therapy  advisor  with  explanations.  IJCAI  5, 
819-825. 

Swartout,  W.  1981.  Explaining  and  justifying  expert  consulting  programs.  IJCAI  7, 
815-822. 

Szolovits,  P.,  and  Pauker,  S.  1976.  Research  on  a  medical  consultation  program  for 
taking  the  present  illness.  Proceedings  of  the  Third  Illinois  Conference  on  Medical 
Information  Systems. 

Szolovits,  P.,  and  Pauker,  S.  1978.  Categorical  and  probabilistic  reasoning  in  medi- 
cal diagnosis.  AI  Journal  11(1,2):115— 154. 

Teitelman,  W.,  et  al.  1978.  INTERLISP  reference  manual.  Xerox  PARC,  Palo  Alto, 
Calif. 

Teitelman,  W.,  and  Masinter,  L.  1981.  The  INTERLISP  programming  environment. 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Computers  C-14(4):25-35. 


Bibliography  401 

Terry,  A.  In  preparation.  The  hierarchical  control  of  productions  systems.  Doctoral 
dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Trager,  B.  M.  1978.  In  preparation.  Integration  of  algebraic  functions.  Doctoral  dis- 
sertation, Computer  Science  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

TrigobofT,  M.  1978.  IRIS:  A  Framework  for  the  construction  of  clinical  consultation  sys- 
tems. Doctoral  dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Rutgers  University. 

Trigoboff,  M,  and  Kulikowski,  C.  1977.  IRIS:  A  system  for  the  propagation  of 
inferences  in  a  semantic  net.  IJCAI  5,  274-280. 

van  Melle,  W.  1980.  A  domain  independent  system  that  aids  in  constructing  consul- 
tation programs.  Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-80-820,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford 
University.  (Doctoral  dissertation.) 

Varkony,  T.  H.,  Carhart,  R.  E.,  and  Smith,  D.  H.  1977.  Computer  assisted  struc- 
ture elucidation,  ranking  of  candidate  structures,  based  on  comparison  between 
predicted  and  observed  mass  spectra.  Paper  presented  at  the  ASMS  meeting, 
Washington,  D.C. 

Varkony,  T.  H.,  Smith,  D.  H.,  and  Djerassi,  C.  1978.  Computer-assisted  structure 
manipulation:  Studies  in  the  biosynthesis  of  natural  products.  Tetrahedron  34:841- 
852. 

Wahlster,  W.  1977.  HAM-RPM:  A  knowledge  based  conversationalist.  SIGART  News- 
letter 61:36-37 . 

Waldinger,  R.  1977.  Achieving  several  goals  simultaneously.  In  E.  W.  Elcock  and 
D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  Intelligence  8.  New  York:  Wiley,  94-136. 

Waldinger,  R.,  and  Levitt,  K.  N.  1974.  Reasoning  about  programs.  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence 5:235-316. 

Waltz,  D.  L.  1978.  An  English  language  question  answering  system  for  a  large 
relational  database.   CA CM  21:526-539. 

Wang,  P.,  and  Rothschild,  L.  1975.  Factoring  multivariate  polynomials  over  the 
integers.  Mathematics  of  Computation  29:935-950. 

Warren,  D.,  Pereira,  L.  M.,  and  Pereira,  F.  1977.  PROLOG — The  language  and  its 
implementation  compared  with  LISP.  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  SIGART-SIGPLAN 
Symposium  on  AI  and  Programing  Languages,  Rochester,  N.  Y. 

Waterman,  D.  A.,  and  Hayes-Roth,  F.  (Eds.).  1978.  Pattern- directed  inference  systems. 
New  York:  Academic  Press. 

Waters,  R.  C.  1976.  A  system  for  understanding  mathematical  FORTRAN  pro- 
grams. Memo  AIM-168,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Waters,  R.  C.  1978.  Automatic  analysis  of  the  logical  structure  of  programs.  Rep. 
No.  AI-TR-492,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology.  (Based  on  doctoral  dis- 
sertation, A  Method  for  automatically  analyzing  the  logical  structure  of  programs,  1978.) 

Wegbreit,  B.  1975a.  Goal-directed  program  transformation.  Rep.  No.  CSL-75-8, 
Xerox  PARC,  Palo  Alto,  Calif. 

Wegbreit,  B.   1975b.  Mechanical  program  analysis.   CACM  18:528-539. 

Weiss,  S.  M.,  and  Kulikowski,  C.  A.  1979.  EXPERT:  A  system  for  developing  con- 
sultation nodes.  IJCAI  6,  942-947. 

Weiss,  S.  M.,  Kulikowski,  C.  A.,  Amarel,  S.,  and  Safir,  A.  1978.  A  model-based 
method  for  computer-aided  medical  decision-making.  Artificial  Intelligence  11:145- 
172. 


402  Bibliography 

Weiss,  S.  M.,  Kulikowski,  C.  A.,  and  Galen,  R.  S.  1981.  Developing  microprocessor 
based  expert  models  for  instrument  interpretation.  IJCAI  7,  853-855. 

Weiss,  S.,  Kulikowski,  C,  and  Safir,  A.  1977.  A  model-based  consultation  system 
for  the  long-term  management  of  glaucoma.  IJCAI  5,  826-832. 

Weissman,  C.   1967.  LISP  1.5  Primer.  Belmont,  Calif.:  Dickenson. 

Wescourt,  K.  T.,  and  Hemphill,  L.  1978.  Representing  and  teaching  knowledge  for 
troubleshooting/debugging.  Tech.  Rep.  292,  Institute  for  Mathematical  Studies 
in  the  Social  Sciences,  Stanford  University. 

Wexler,  J.  D.  1970.  Information  networks  in  generative  computer-assisted  instruc- 
tion. IEEE  Transactions  on  Man-Machine  Systems  MMS-1 1:181-190. 

Weyhrauch,  R.  1979.  Prolegomena  to  a  theory  of  mechanized  formal  reasoning. 
Rep.  No.  STAN-CS-78-687,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Wilber,  B.  M.  1976.  A  QLISP  reference  manual.  Tech.  Note  118,  AI  Center,  SRI 
International,  Inc.,  Menlo  Park,  Calif. 

Winograd,  T.  1975.  Breaking  the  complexity  barrier  again.  SIGPLAN  Notices 
1:13-30. 

Winston,  P.  H.   1977.  Artificial  intelligence.  Reading,  Mass:  Addison- Wesley. 

Winston,  P.  H.,  and  Horn,  B.  K.  P.   1981.  LISP.  Reading,  Mass.:  Addison- Wesley. 

Wipke,  W.  T.,  Braun,  H.,  Smith,  C,  Choplin,  F.,  and  Sieber,  W.  1977.  SECS— 
Simulation  and  Evaluation  of  Chemical  Synthesis:  Strategy  and  planning.  In 
W.  T.  Wipke  and  W.  J.  House  (Eds.),  Computer -assisted  organic  synthesis.  Washing- 
ton, D.C.:  American  Chemical  Society,  97-127. 

Yob,  G.   1975.  Hunt  the  Wumpus.   Creative  Computing  51-54. 

Yu,  V.  L.,  Buchanan,  B.  B.,  Shortliffe,  E.  H.,  Wriath,  S.  M.,  Davis,  R.,  Scott, 
A.  C,  and  Cohen,  S.  N.  1979.  Evaluating  the  performance  of  a  computer-based 
consultant.   Computer  Programs  in  Biomedicine  9:95-102. 

Yu,  V.  L.,  Fagan,  L.  M.,  Wraith,  S.  M.,  Clancey,  W.  J.,  Scott,  A.  C,  Hannigan, 
J.  F.,  Blum,  R.  L.,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  and  Cohen,  S.  N.  1979.  Antimicrobial 
selection  by  a  computer — A  blinded  evaluation  by  infectious  disease  experts. 
J.  American  Medical  Association  242:1279-1282. 

Zadeh,  L.  A.   1965.  Fuzzy  sets.  Information  and  Control  8:338-353. 

Zilles,  S.  1975.  Abstract  specification  for  data  types.  IBM  Research  Laboratory, 
San  Jose,  Calif. 

Zippel,  R.  1976.  Univariate  power  series  expansions  in  algebraic  manipulation.  Pro- 
ceedings of  an  ACM  Symposium  on  Symbolic  and  Algebraic  Computation. 


Indexes 


NAME  INDEX 


Pages  on  which  an  author's  work  is  discussed  are  italicized. 


Abelson,  R.,  225,  291,  294,  383 

Abrahams,  P.  W.,  33,  395 

Adlercreutz,  H.,  110,  399 

Agarival,  K.  K.,  139,  140,  142,  390 

Aiello,  N.,  84,  126,  396 

Aikins,  J.,  182,  383 

Allen,  J.,  29,  383 

Amarel,  S.,  325,  383,  401 

Anderson,  B.,  255 

Andose,  J.  D.,  142,  391 

Angebranndt,  S.,  335,  391 

Arnold,  R.  S.,  167,  383,  387 

Ashton- Warner,  S.,  291,  383 

Atkinson,  R.  C,  226,  228,  230,  344,  383,  384, 

394 
Austin,  H.,  293,  383 

Backus,  J.  W.,  6,  297,  383 

Ballard,  J.  P.,  84,  392 

Balzer,  R.  M,  298,  305,  336-342,  383 

Bamberger,  J.,  294,  383 

Baron,  R.  V.,  364-369,  384 

Barr,  A.,  89,  226,  228,  230,  384 

Barrett,  P.,  155,  162,  389 

Barstow,  D.  R.,  305,  307,  330,  335,  350-354, 

379,  384,  391 
Barton,  D.,  141-148 
Bauer,  M,  319,  325,  384 
Bayes,  T.,  90 
Beard,  M,  230,  384 
Bell,  A.  G.,  229,  253,  385 
Bennett,  J.  S.,  84,  384 
Bernstein,  P.  A.,  172,  396 
Biermann,  A.  W.,   298,  305,   311,   318-319, 

322,  325,  384,  396 
Biggerstaff,  T.  J.,  316,  325,  384 
Bischoff,  M.  B.,  180,  398 
Blaine,  L.  H.,  284,  290,  384,  399 
Blount,  S.  E.,  227,  233,  394 
Blum,  R.  L.,  180,  303-307,  384 
Bobrow,  D.  G.,  45,  64,  385 
Boivie,  R.  H.,  139,  140,  142,  390 


Borning,  A.,  293,  385 

Braun,  H.,  138,  142,  402 

Brooks,  R.  E.,  84,  392 

Brown,  G.  P.,  227,  233,  385 

Brown,  H.,  103,  111,  115,  385,  387 

Brown,  J.  S.,   144,  227,  228,  229,  231,  233, 

234,  235,    £47-253,    254-260,    279-282, 

385,  386,  390,  399 

Buchanan,  B.  G.,  101,  108,  109,  110,  115, 
120,  123,  182,  183,  192,  386,  388,  389, 
394,  398,  399 

Buchs,  A.,  109,  115,  386,  398 

Burstall,  R.  M.,  7,  310,  314,  315,  325,  386, 
388 

Burton,  R.  R.,  227,  228,  229,  231,  233,  234, 

235,  247-253,    254-260,    279-282,    385, 

386,  390 

Cadiou,  J.  M.,  167,  387 

Campbell,  A.  B.,  180,  398 

Carbonell,  J.,   226,   227,   229,  236-241,  386, 

387 
Carhart  R.  E.,  109,  110,  111,  112,  114,  115, 

387,  395,  399,  401 

Carr,  B.  P.,  231,  233-234,  261-266,  387,  400 

Chang,  C.  L.,  167,  173,  387 

Charniak,  E.,  10,  14,  387,  400 

Choplin,  J.  M,  138,  142,  402 

Church,  A.,  21,  387 

Clancey,  W.  J.,  191,  228,  229,  235,  267-278, 

387 
Clark,  K.,  138,  312,  325,  387 
Clocksin,  W.  F.,  13,  387 
Codd,  E.  F.,  167,  387 
Collins,  A.,  7,  227,  229-230,  231,  233,  234, 

235,  236-241,   242-246,   274,  386,   387. 

388,  400 
Collins,  J.  S.,  7,  386 

Corey,  E.  J.,  134-138,  142,  388 
Creary,  L.  A.,  84,  384 
Croft,  J.,  179,  388 
Crowder,  N.  A.,  226,  388 


405 


406 


Name  Index 


Damerau,  F.  J.,  165,  388 

Darlington,  J.,  310,  314,  315,  325,  386,  388 

Davies,  A.,  12,  53,  388 

Davis,  R.,  46,  57,  87-101,  115,  130,  182,  192, 

388 
de  Kleer,  J.,  76,  253,  385,  388 
Delfino,  A.  B.,  109,  115,  386,  398 
Derkson,  J.  A.,  11    12,  397 
Desforges,  J.,  180,  398 
diSessa,  A.,  225,  291,  294,  383 
Djerassi,   C,    109,    110,    111,    114-115,   386, 

387,  389,  398,  399,  401 
Doyle,  J.,  74,  75,  76,  388 
Duda  R.  O.,  86,  155-162,  389 
Duffield,  A.  M,  109,  110,  115,  389,  398,  399 
Dugdale,  S.,  255,  389 

Edwards,  D.  J.,  33,  395 
Elschlager,  R.,  307,  391 
Engelmore,   R.  S.,   84,    110,    124,   126,    133, 

389,  399 
Engleman,  C,  143-149 

Fagan,  L.,  180,  182,  192,  206,  389 

Fahlman,  S.,  146,  389 

Fain,  J.,  84,  389 

Fateman,  R.  J.,  144,  389 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  5,  84,  86,  108,  109,  110, 

115,  120,  122,  123,  124,  126,  133,  183, 

389,  394,  398,  399 
Feinstein,  A.,  178,  389 
Feldman,  J.  A.,  5,  11,  41,  52,  318,  325,  384, 

389,  390 
Fikes,  R.  E.,  5,  64,  69,  73,  390,  398 
Fisher,  G.,  254,  390 
Fletcher,  J.  D.,  226,  390 
Floyd,  R.  W.,  311,  390 
Forgy,  C,  84,  390 
Friedman,  D.  P.,  29,  390 
Furakawa,  K.,  170,  173,  390 
Furbach,  U.,  310,  398 

Gabriel,  R.  P.,  329,  335,  390 
Gaines,  B.  R.,  13,  392 
Galen,  R.  S.,  222,  402 
Gaschnig,  J.  G.,  86,  162,  155,  389 
Gelernter,  H.  L.,  135-136,  139-142,  390 
Genesereth,  M.  R.,  146,  147,  232,  390 
Gentner,  D.  R.,  234,  396 
Ginsparg,  J.  M,  327,  329,  390 
Gips,  J.,  318,  325,  390 
Goldberg,  A.,  228,  293,  390,  393 
Goldin,  S.,  234,  242,  246,  400 
Goldman,  N.,  336-342,  383 


Goldstein,  I.,  228,  229-234,  235,  254,  260, 
261-266,  288,  293,  385,  386,  387,  390, 
391,  395,  400 

Gorlin,  D.,  84,  389,  392 

Gorry,  G.  A.,  202,  205,  206-211,  391,  396 

Gosper,  R.  W.,  144,  391 

Gould,  L.,  236,  241,  391 

Graves,  W.  H.,  284,  290,  399 

Gray,  N.,  114 

Green,  C.  C.,  11,  305,  307,  311,  312,  313. 
316,  319,  325,  326-335,  350,  391 

Grignetti,  M.  C.,  236,  241,  391 

Gritter,  R.  J.,  122,  386 

Grossman,  R.,  146,  391 

Gund,  P.,  142,  391 

Gupta,  M.  M.,  13,  392 

Haas,  N.,  169,  392 

Hammer,  M,  172,  298,  305,  369,  392 

Hardy,  S.,  319,  325,  392 

Harris,  G.,  234,  385 

Harris,  L.  R.,  164,  392 

Hart,  P.  E.,  152,  153-154,  155,  160,  162,  389, 

392 
Hart,  T.  P.,  33,  395 
Hausmann,  C.  L.,  236,  241,  279,  282,  386, 

391 
Hayes,  P.  J.,  73,  392 
Hayes,  S.  P.,  222,  394 

Hayes-Roth,  F.,  9,  57,  84,  86,  389,  392,  401 
Hearn,  A.  C.,  146,  392 
Heathcock,  C.  H.,  138,  391 
Heidorn,  G.  E.,  298,  305,  311,  370-374,  392 
Heiser,  J.  F.,  84,  180,  392 
Hemphill,  L.,  234,  402 
Hendrix,  G.  G.,  166,  169,  173,  390,  392 
Herrik,  H.,  297,  383 
Hewitt,  C.,  9-10,  35,  46,  393 
Hjelmeland,  L.,  115,  385 
Holt,  J.,  291,  393 
Horn,  P.  K.  F.,  14,  29,  402 
Horning,  J.  J.,  318,  325,  390 
Howe,  J.  A.  M,  225,  293,  393 
Huggins,  B.,  282,  386 
Hunt,  E.  B.,  228,  393 

Illich,  I.,  291-292,  393 
Inhelder,  B.,  291,  397 

Jacobs,  C.  D.,  180,  398 
Jacquez,  J.  A.,  177,  393 
Jelliffe,  R.  W.,  206,  393 
Johnson,  C.  K.,  124,  133,  389 
Jurs,  P.  C.,  118,  393 


Name  Index 


10; 


Kahn,  K.,  62,  293,  393 

Kant,  E.,  330,  335,  351,  354,  375-379,  383, 

393 
Kaplan,  S.  J.,  167,  393 
Kassirer,  A.,  202,  205,  396 
Kay,  A.,  293,  393 
Kedzierski,  B.,  335,  393 
Kellogg,  C,  173,  393 
Kibbey,  D.,  255,  389 
Kimball,  R.  B.,  226,  393 
King,  J.  J.,  170,  171,  173,  394 
Kingsland,  L.  C,  222,  394 
Klahr,  P,  173,  393 
Koffman,  E.  B.,  227,  230,  233,  394 
Konolige,  K.,  155,  162,  389 
Kornfeld,  W.  A.,  46,  394 
Kowalski,  R.,  312,  325,  394 
Krishnaswamy,  R.,  318-319,  384 
Kulikowski,  C.  A.,  179,  180,  193-196,  212- 

216,  217-222,  396,  401,  402 
Kulikowski,  C.  W.,  179,  396 
Kunz,  J.,  180,  394 

Larkin,  K.  M.,  279-282,  385 

Larsen,  D.  L.,  139,  140,  142,  390 

Laubsch,  J.  H.,  227,  229,  231,  394 

Le  Faivre,  R.,  13,  394 

Lederberg,  J.,  103,  106-110,  120,  122,   123, 

386,  389,  394,  398,  399 
Ledley,  R.,  177,  394 
Lenat,  D.  B.,  86,  307,   316,   318,  325,  391, 

392,  394 
Letsinger,  R.,  228,  277,  278,  387 
Levin,  M.  I.,  33,  395 
Levitt,  K.,  312,  325,  401 
Lewis,  V.  E.,  147,  394 
Lewis,  W.  H.,  147,  166,  392 
Lindberg,  D.  A.  B.,  222,  394 
Lindsay,  R.,  110,  123,  394 
Liskov,  B.  H.,  343-344,  394 
London,  P.  E,  74,  76,  389,  394 
Long,  W.,  207-211,  395 
Low,  J.  R.,  11,  41,  52,  317,  325,  390,  395 
Lusted,  L.,  177,  394 

Manna,  Z.,  308,  355-363,  395 
Marinov,  V.  V.,  284,  290,  399 
Martin,  W.  A.,  143-149,  316,  325,  364-369, 

395 
Masinter,  L.,  67,  103,  111,  115,  385,  390,  400 
McCarthy,  J.,  5,  6,  7,  15,  29,  33,  395 
McCune,  B.,  300,  307,  329-330,  335,  391,  395 
McDermott,  J.,  84,  390 


McDermott,  D.  V.,  10,  14,  29,  35,  56,  387, 

395,  400 
McLeod,  D.,  172,  392 
Mellish,  C.  S.,  13,  387 
Melosh,  R.  E.,  84,  384 

Miller,  M.  L.,  229,  232-233,  282,  293,  3X6. 

395 
Minker,  J.,  173,  395 

Mitchell,  T.  M.,  110,  120,  121,  123,  395,  396 
Mont-Reynaud,  B.,  335,  391 
Morgenstern,  M.,  364-369,  395,  396 
Moses,  J.,  143-149,  396 
Musser,  D.  R.,  144,  396 
Myers,  J.,  197-201 
Mylopolous,  J.,  172,  396 

Newell,  A.,  4,  396 

Nii,  H.  P.,  84,  126,  133,  389,  396 

Nilsson,  N.  J.,  102,  154,  160,  389,  396 

Nordyke,  R.,  179,  396 

Norman,  A.  C,  144,  396 

Norman,  D.  A.,  234,  396 

Nourse,  J.,  113 

O'Shea,  T.,  293,  393 

Papert,  S.,  225,  291-294,  396,  399 

Passafiume,  J.  J.,  237,  388 

Pauker,  S.  G.,   180,  202-205,  206-211,  391, 

396,  400 
Pereira,  F.,  13,  401 
Pereira,  L.  M.,  13,  401 
Petry,  F.  E.,  322,  325,  396 

Phillips,  J.,  319,  322,  324,  325.  329,  335.  391, 

397 
Piaget,  J.,  291,  397 
Polya,  G.,  294,  397 
Pople,  H.,  180,  197-201,  397 
Popplestone,  R.  J.,  7,  12,  397 
Pratt,  V.  R.,  29,  397 
Pressburger,  T.,  335,  391 
Preston,  K.,  177,  397 

Quillian,  M.  R.,  5 

Raphael,  B.,  11 

Reboh,  R.,  64,  69,  155,  160.  162,  389,  398 

Reder,  S.,  318,  325,  390 

Reiser,  J.  F.,  11,  70,  397 

Reiter,  R.,  172,  173,  239,  397 

Rhodes,  J.  B.,  142,  391 

Rich,  C.,  343-349,  397 

Rieger,  C.,  14,  397 

Riesbeck,  C.  K.,  14,  29,  33,  387,  398 


408 


Name  Index 


Rinehart,  A.  R.,  141 

Risch,  R.,  82,  144,  397 

Robertson,  A.  V.,  109,  389 

Rosenberg,  L.,  14,  397 

Rosenschein,  S.,  84,  389,  392 

Rothschild,  L.,  144,  401 

Rothstein,  M.,  144,  397 

Roussopoulos,  N.  D.,  167,  171-172,  387,  397 

Rovner,  P.  D.,  11,  381 

Rowe,  N.,  293,  397 

Rubenstein,  R.,  247,  248,  252,  253,  385 

Rulifson,  J.  F.,  11-12,  397 

Ruth,  G.,  298,  305,  364-369,  392,  397 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.,  64,  69,  164,  173,  280,  392, 

398 
Safir,  A.,  180,  193-196,  222,  402 
Safrans,  C,  180,  397 
Sagalowicz,  D.,  64,  69,  398 
Samet,  H.,  14,  397 
Sanders,  A.  F.,  139,  140,  142,  390 
Sandewall,  E.,  65-66,  67,  398 
Saridis,  G.  N.,  13,  392 
Schaffert,  C.,  344,  394 
Schank,  R.,  14,  29,  33,  398 
Schmidt,  C.  F.,  13,  398 
Schreiber,  J.  F.,  310,  398 
Schroll  G.,  109,  398 
Schwartz,  W.,  202,  205,  396 
Schwenzer,  G.  M.,  110,  121,  396 
Scott,  A.  C.,  180,  398 
Searleman,  J.  E.,  139,  140,  142,  390 
Self,  J.  A.,  229,  235,  398 
Sharp,  G.  C.,  222,  394 
Shaw,  J.  C.,  4,  396 

Shaw,  D.  E.,  172,  307,  319,  325,  391,  398 
Sheikh,  Y.  M.,  115,  398 
Shortliffe,  E.,  180,  183,  184-192,  398 
Shrobe,  H.  E.,  343-349,  387,  398 
Sibel,  W.,  310,  398 
Sickel,  S.,  312,  325,  387 
Sieber,  W.,  138,  142,  402 
Siklossy,  L.,  29,  319,  325,  398,  399 
Silverman,  H.,  180,  206-211,  391,  398 
Simon,  H.  A.,  4,  317,  325,  396,  399 
Sleeman,  D.,  228,  399 
Slocum,  .].,  155,  160,  162,  389 
Smith,  D.  H.,   109,  110,   111,   112,  114-115, 

387,  398,  399,  401 
Smith,  G.,  138,  142,  402 
Smith,  R.  G.,  46,  399 
Smith,  R.  L.,  228,  284,  290,  384,  399 
Snape,  K.,  125,  399 
Snyder,  A.,  344,  394 


Solomon,  C.,  293,  399 

Sowa,  J.  F.,  171-172,  399 

Sowizral,  H.,  84,  389,  392 

Sridharan,  N.  S.,  13,  86,  111,  115,  140,  183, 

395,  399 
Stallman,  R.  M.,  73-74,  400 
Stansfield,  J.  L.,  261,  266,  400 
Steel,  J.,  76,  388 
Stefik,  M,  84,  400 
Steinberg,  L.,  307,  329,  391,  400 
Stevens,  A.,  229-230,  234,  242-246,  274,  396, 

400 
Summers,  P.  D.,  325,  400 
Suppes,  P.,  227,  283-290,  400 
Sussman,  G.,  10,  56,  73-74,  76,  316,  317-318, 

325,  361,  388,  400 
Sutherland,  G.  L.,  108,  109,  110,  115,  160, 

162,  389,  398 
Swartout,   W.,  91,    180,    182,   206-211,   211, 

319,  325,  398,  400 
Swinehart,  D.  C.,  11,  41,  52,  390 
Sykes,  D.,  319,  325,  399 
Szolovits,  P.,  180,  183,  202-205,  206,  400 

Tappel,  S.,  335,  391 

Taylor,  R.  H.,  11,  41,  52,  390 

Teitelman,  W.,  8,  400 

Terry,  A.,  133,  389,  401 

Trager,  B.  M.,  144,  401 

Traub,  J.  F.,  144,  385 

Travis,  L.,  173,  393 

Trigoboff,  M.,  180,  212-216,  401 

Tsichlis,  P.,  180,  398 

VanLehn,  K.,  282,  386 
van  Melle,  W.,  84,  180,  276,  398,  401 
Varkony,  T.  H.,  109,  110,  114-115,  401 
von  Neumann,  J.,  6 

Wahlster,  W.,  13,  401 

Waldinger,  R.,  11,  12,  64,  69,  307,  308,  312, 

325,  355-363,  391,  395,  398,  401 
Waltz,  D.  L.,  164,  401 
Wang,  P.,  144,  401 
Warnock,  E.  H.,  237,  388 
Warren,  D.,  13,  401 
Waterman,   D.  A.,   9,   57,  84,  86,   389,  392, 

401 
Waters,  R.  C.,  343-349,  401 
Wegbreit,  B.,  45,  315,  325,  384,  401 
Weiss,  S.  M.,  180,  193-196,  217-222,  394,  402 
Weissmann,  C.,  29,  402 
Wescourt,  K.,  234,  402 
Westfold,  S.,  335,  391 


Name  Index  409 

Wexler,  J.  D.,  227,  402  Wipke,  W.  T.,  134-139,  142,  388,  402 

Weyhrauch,  R.,  13,  402  Wong,  H.  K.  T.,  172,  396 

White,  W.  C,  122,  386 

Wiederhold,  G.,  303-307,  384  Yeo'  A"'  110'  3" 

Y:bVG'l8261194202267,  402 
Wile,  D.,  336-342,  383  Yun   D  3% 

Williams,  C,  336-342 

Wilson,  H.  A.,  226,  383  Zadeh;  Lij  13j  402 

Winograd,  T.,  10,  64,  383,  400  Ziles,  L.  A.,  343-344,  402 

Winston,  P.  H.,  14,  29,  86,  330-332,  402  Zippel,  R.,  144,  402 


SUBJECT  INDEX 


Acceptance  of  expert  systems,  89 
Acquisition  of  knowledge.     See  Knowledge 

acquisition;  Learning. 
Action  clause  of  production  rule,  188 
Acyclic  molecular  structures,  106,  111 
ADD  list,  73 

Advisor  in  MACSYMA,  147 
AGE,  84 

use  of,  in  CRYSALIS,  126 
Agenda  in  SCHOLAR,  239 
Agricultural  pest-management  systems,  154 
AI  programming,  30-32 
AI  programming  languages,  3-76 

CONNIVER,  4,  8-10,  38-39,  50-51,  56, 
60-61,  68,  146,  202 

context  mechanisms  in,  10,  35-37,  39,  44, 
46,  73 

control  structures  in,  31-32,  45-57 

database  facilities  in,  44 

data  structures  in,  30-31,  34-44 

features  of,  30-71 

FOL,  13 

FUZZY,  13,  43,  53-55,  63-64 

INTERLISP,  8,  67-68,  70-71,  212,  362 

IPL,  4 

LEAP,  11,  41,  317 

LISP,  4,  5-9,  15-29,  37,  46-47,  59,  66-68, 
187,  298,  300,  312-314,  355 

MACLISP,  8,  202,  206,  369 

MICRO-PLANNER,  10 

pattern  matching  in,  32,  58-64 

PLANNER,  8-10,  38,  47-50,  56,  60,  68, 
74,  79 

POP-2,  7,  12,  42,  53,  63,  70 

POPLER,  12 

programming  environment  of,    3-4,    7-9, 
32,  65-71 

PROLOG,  13 

QA4,  11,  79 

QLISP,  12,  39-41,  51-52,  61-62,  69,  362 

SAIL,  11,  41-42,  52-53,  62-63,  69-70,  317 
AIMDS/BELIEVER,  13 
ALCHEM  in  SECS,  137 
Algebraic  manipulation,  143 
ALGOL,  6,  11 
Aliphatic  amines,  117 


Allocation  of  storage.  See  Variable  scoping. 
Alternative  dialogues  in  GUIDON,  272 
Ambiguity  in  program  specification,  336   337 
Analytic  chemistry,  102-133 
Anaphoric  reference,  250 
AND/OR  tree,  90,  95,  134,  190,  270 
Androstanes,  122 

Antecedent  reasoning.  See  Bottom-up 
reasoning;  Control  structure; 
Reasoning  strategies. 
Antecedent  theorem  in  PLANNER,  38,  48, 

73 
Antimicrobial  therapy,  184 
AP2  in  SAFE,  337 
APL,  6 

Applications  of  AI.   See  Expert  system. 
Applicative  style  of  programming,  6-7,  15, 

17 
Apprentice  for  MACSYMA,  148 
Approaches  to  automatic  programming,  301, 
312-325 
automatic  data-structure  selection,   316- 

317 
induction,  319-325 
knowledge  engineering,  301,  315-316, 

350-354,  375-379 
problem  solving,  301,  317-318,  321,  324- 

325 
program  transformation,    301,   302,    304, 
309,  314-315,  350-354,  355-363,  370 
374,  375-379 
program  understanding,  303,  305,  343, 

364-369 
theorem  proving,  301,  308-309,  312-314 
Arithmetic  skills,  279-282 
Articulate  expert.  See  also  Explanation, 
in  ICAI  systems,  230 
in  SOPHIE,  252 
Askable  vs.  unaskable  hypotheses,  161 
Assembly,  automation  of,  in  SRI  computer- 
based  consultant,  150-154 
Assertion,  38 
Assignment  statement,  19 
Associations.  See  also  LEAP;  Property  lists, 
in  AI  programming  languages,  4 
in  LISP,  7 


411 


412 


Subject  Index 


Associations  (continued) 

in  SAIL,  41 
Associative  triple 
in  MYCIN,  188 
in  SAIL,  41 
Atom  in  LISP,  7,  16 

Atom  migration  in  mass  spectroscopy,  117 
Attribute-object-value  triple.  See 

Associative  triple. 
Augmented  links  in  IRIS,  212 
Automatic  backtracking,  9 
Automatic  coding,  299.    See  also  Automatic 

programming. 
Automatic  derivation  of  NL  front  end,  166 
Automatic  programming  (AP),  297  379.  See 
also  Program  specification, 
approaches  to,  301,  312  325 
automatic  data-structure  selection,   316- 

317 
of  data-processing  systems,  364  369 
definition  of,  297-298 
efficiency  of  synthesized  code  in,  302-303, 

317,  327,  365,  375  379 
issues  in,  301   303 
and  learning,  297  298,  318 
and  LISP,  27 
planning  in,  339  340 
program-specification  methods  for,  297, 

299-300,  306-311,  336-337 
program  synthesis,  313 
program  understanding,  303,  305,  343, 

364-369 
representation  of  knowledge  in,  315-316 
representation  of  programs  in,  319,  327, 

329-330,  343-348,  375 
and  self-reflective  programs,  297-298,  318 
of  simulation  programs  in  NLPQ,  370-374 
symbolic  execution  in,  323,  336,  339-340 
systems-design  issues  in,  327-328 
target  language  in,  28,  300,  355,  370 
verification  of  synthesized  code,  320,  344- 
347,  355 
Automatic  theory  formation,  116.    See  also 

Hypothesis,  formation. 
Axiomatization  of  operations,  319 

Backtracking,  121,  336,  339 
automatic,  9 
chronological,  50,  72 
in  CONNIYER,  50 
dependency-directed,  73 
Backward  chaining,  83,  87,  93,  136. 
See  also  Control  structure; 
Reasoning  strategies. 


as  depth-first  search,  189 

in  MYCIN,  189-191 

in  PROSPECTOR,  156,  160-161 
Backward  reasoning,  136.  See  also  Backward 
chaining;  Control  structure;  Reasoning 
strategies. 
BADLIST,  107 
Bag  in  QLISP,  34,  39  41 
BAIL  in  SAIL,  70 
Bayesian  decision  theory,  179,  267 
Behavioral  specification  of  programs,   336- 

338,  343 
Belief  revision,  72-76 
Best-first  search,  141 
BIP,  230,  234 
Blackboard  architecture,  31,  104,  126,  342. 

See  also  Design  notebook. 
Bottom-up  reasoning 

in  CASNET,  196 

in  INTERNIST,  199  200,  201 

in  IRIS,  214 
British  Museum  Algorithm,  35 
BUGGY,  231,  279-282,  292 

evaluation  of,  280 

sample  protocol  from,  281   282 

Calling  hierarchy,  31 

CAR  in  LISP,  16 

Case  grammar,  238 

Case-method  tutor,  235,  242 

CASNET,  160,  180,  181,  182,  193   196,  215, 

221 
Categorical  reasoning,  205 
Causal  disease  pathway  in  CASNET,  195 
Causal  model  in  CASNET,  193-195 
Causal  network  in  CASNET,  180-181,  193- 

195 
CDR  in  LISP,  16 
Cell  in  LISP,  4,  16-17 
CENTAUR,  182 

Certainty  factor  (CF),  13,  271,  277.  See 
also  Hypothesis,  status  of,  in  CASNET; 
Uncertainty. 

in  CASNET,  193,  195-196 

in  CRYSALIS,  131 

in  EXPERT,  221 

in  IRIS,  215 

in  MYCIN,  180,  188-191 
Chemical  applications  of  AI.  See  Expert 

system. 
Chess,  4,  72 
CHI,  326,  333-335 
Chief  complaint,  202 
Chronological  backtracking,  9,  50,  72 


Subject  Index 


413 


Classification  systems,  217 

Classification  tables  in  CASNET,  194-196 

Clinical  reasoning.     See  Diagnosis;  Medical 

diagnosis. 
CLISP  in  INTERLISP,  8,  68 
Closed-world  assumption  in  SCHOLAR,  240 
COBOL,  3 
Code  generation  in  automatic  programming. 

See  Program  synthesis. 
Codification  of  programming  knowledge. 
See  Representation  of  programming 
knowledge. 
Combinatorial  explosion,  79,  134,  136,  140, 

303,  313,  368.  See  also  Search. 
Communication  skills  of  a  computer-based 

consultant,  150 
Compiler,  3,  297 

compared  to  AP  system,  302 
Completeness  of  program  specification,  300, 

308 
Computer-assisted  instruction  (CAI), 

225-294.  See  also  Intelligent  computer- 
assisted  instruction, 
environmental  approach  in,  291-294 
learning  by  doing,  291 
learning  resources  in,  292-293 
nontutorial,  291-294 
teacherless  learning,  293 
Computer-based  consultant  (CBC),  177.  See 
also  Expert  system. 
Advisor  for  MACSYMA,  147 
for  air-compressor  assembly  system  (SRI), 

150-154 
definition  of,  150 
Computer  coach  in  ICAI  systems,  231,  234, 
254-255,   257-259,   261-266.      See  also 
Tutoring  strategies  in  ICAI. 
Computer  games  in  ICAI  systems,  234,  252, 

254,  261-266 
Computer  programming.  See  Programming. 
Concept  formation,  116.  See  also 

Hypothesis,  formation. 
Conceptual  bugs,  279-280.  See  also 

Diagnosis  of  student  misconceptions. 
Conditional-formation  principle,  357 
Conditional  statements,  31 
Confidence  measure.  See  Certainty  factor. 
Conflict  resolution  in  PECOS,  350 
Conflicting  subgoals,  361 
CONGEN,  106,  111-115.  See  also 
DENDRAL. 
status  of,  110,  113-115 
use  of  constraints  in,  112 
user  interface  in,  112 


CONNIVER,  4,  8-10,  146,  202 
backtracking  in,  50 
control  structures  in,  50-51 
data  structures  in,  38-39 
pattern  matching  in,  60-61 
programming  environment  of,  68 
vs.  PLANNER,  56 
CONS  cell  in  LISP,  4,  16-17 
Consequent  reasoning  in  PROSPECTOR, 
156,  160-161.  See  also  Backward 
chaining. 
Consequent  theorems  in  PLANNER,  9,  12, 

48 
Consistency  of  program  specifications,  302 
Constraint  expressions,  146 
Constraint  generator,  106 
Constraint  propagation,  146 
Constraint  satisfaction,  102 
in  CONGEN,  112 
in  CRYSALIS,  124,  128 
in  DENDRAL,  107-108 
in  Meta-DENDRAL,  118 
in  program  specification,  302,  336,  338- 
340 
Constraints 

on  bond  fragmentations,  106,  111 
semantic,  118 

in  structure  elucidation,  103 
Constrictor  relation  in  INTERNIST,  200 
Constructive  bugs,  234,  254.  See  also 

Tutoring  strategies  in  ICAI. 
Consultation  in  medical  diagnosis,  178 
Consultation  model  in  EXPERT,  218 
Consultation  system,  81,  82,  177.    See  also 

Expert  system. 
Content  addressing,  58 
Context  in  dialogue,  270 
Context  mechanisms,  10,  35-37,  39,  44,  46, 

73 
Control  structure.   See  also  Reasoning 
strategies, 
agenda,  239 
of  AI  programming  languages,  9,  31-32, 

45-57 
automatic  backtracking,  9 
backward  chaining,  83,  87,  93,   136,   156, 

161,  189-191 
backward  reasoning,  136 
bottom-up,  196 

consequent  reasoning,  156,  160-161 
data-  or  event-driven  processing,  129,  257 
dependency-directed  backtracking,  73 
expectation-  or  goal-driven  processing, 
91-92,  97-101 


414 


Subject  Index 


Control  structure  (continued) 

forward  chaining,  214 

forward  reasoning,  136 

goal  tree,  90 

hill  climbing,  317 

matching,  160,  202,  319-320 

means-ends  analysis,  139,  317 

meta-rules,  92 

opportunism,  129 

pattern-directed  invocation,  9 

propagation,  213-215 

triggering,  203-204 
Conversational  LISP  (CLISP),  8,  68 
COOP,  167 

Cooperative  responses  in  DBMS,  167 
Coroutining,  45.  See  also  Multiprocessing. 

in  CONNIYER,  51 

in  SAIL,  53 
Cost 

in  search,  140 

of  tests  in  diagnosis,  193-194,  199 
Courseware,  226,  240.    See  also  Computer- 
assisted  instruction. 
CPM  in  MACSYMA,  146 
Credit  assignment,  72,  88,  121 

in  ICAI  student  models,  232 
Critic  in  ICAI  student  models,  233 
CRYSALIS,  104,  124-133 

sample  protocol  from,  130-133 

status  of,  133 
Cyclic  molecules,  111 

Data  abstraction,  172,  344 

Database  facilities  in  AI  programming 

languages,  44 
Database  management  systems  (DBMS), 
163-173 
cooperative  responses  in,  167 
incremental  query  formulation,  167 
logic  in,  172-173 
NL  front  ends,  164-170 
query  optimization  in,  170-171 
Database,  relational,  in  MACSYMA,  146 
Database  schema,  163,  171-172 
Data-  or  event-driven  processing,  129,  257. 
See  also  Bottom-up  reasoning;  Control 
structure;  Reasoning  strategies. 
Data  independence  in  DBMS,  163 
Data-manipulation  language,  163 
Data  model  in  DBMS,  171-172 
Data-processing  systems,  synthesis  of,  364- 

369 
Data  structure,  30  31,  34  44,  308,  350 
automatic  selection  of,  in  AP,  316-317 


Data  types,  34,  39-41,  43-44 
Debugging.      See  also  Diagnosis  of  student 
misconceptions. 

in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  344-347 

in  TEIRESIAS,  192 
Decision  criteria  in  PIP,  203 
Decision  rules  in  EXPERT,  218-220 
Decision  tables  in  IRIS,  214-215 
DEDALUS,  12,  302,  304,  355-363 

status  of,  362-363 
Default  reasoning,  239 
DELETE  list,  73 
Demons,  46 

as  antecedent  theorems  in  PLANNER,  38 

in  SAIL,  52 
DENDRAL,  79,  82,  103,  104,  106-123 

plan-generate-test  cycle  in,  106-109 

status  of,  109-110 

use  of  constraints  in,  107   108 
Dependencies  and  assumptions,  72-76 
Dependency-directed  backtracking,  73 
Depth-first  search,  50,  189-190 
Design  notebook  in  Programmer's 

Apprentice,  348 
Diagnosis,  177,  274.   See  also  Medical 
diagnosis;  Troubleshooting. 

cost  of  tests  in,  193   194,  199 

decision-theoretic  approaches  to,  179 

differential,  204 

hypothesis  confirmation  in,  204-205 

in  INTERNIST,  197,  199-201 

in  PIP,  202,  204-205 

propagation  in,  in  IRIS,  212-215 

sequential,  179 

statistical  approaches  to,  179 

teaching  strategies  for,  247-253,  267-278 
Diagnosis  of  student  misconceptions,  226, 
254.   See  also  Intelligent  computer- 
assisted  instruction;  Plan  recognition; 
Student  model. 

conceptual  bugs,  279-280 

diagnostic  model  for,  233,  279-280 

differential  modeling  in,  255-256 

partial  solutions  in,  273 

in  SCHOLAR,  239 

in  WHY,  245 
Dialectical  argumentation,  74 
Dialogue  management,  259.  See  also  Mixed- 
initiative  dialogue;    Natural   language; 
Tutoring  strategies  in  ICAI. 

agenda  in  SCHOLAR,  239 

alternative  dialogues,  272 

askable  vs.  unaskable  hypotheses  in 
PROSPECTOR,  161 


Subject  Index 


415 


context,  270 

dialectical  argumentation,  74 

discourse  model,  150,  238,  259,  263,  266 

discourse  procedure,  272-273 

explicating  in  GUIDON,  235,   267,   272- 
273 

focus  of  attention,  351,  376 

in  PSI,  329 

rules,  268 

Socratic  tutoring  method,  242-246 

via  tutorial  goals,  244 

in  WUSOR,  263 
Difference  measures,  320 
Differential  diagnosis,  204 
Differential  modeling,  255-256.  See  also 
Diagnosis  of  student  misconceptions; 
Student  model. 
Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor,  206-211 

sample  protocol  from,  208-211 

status  of,  211 

validation  of,  211 
DIRECTOR,  293 

Discourse  model,  150,  238,  259,  263,  266 
Discourse  procedure  in  GUIDON,  272-273 
Discovery  learning.   See  Learning,  by 

discovery. 
Discussion  agenda  in  SCHOLAR,  239 
Disease  area  in  INTERNIST,  198,  200 
Disease  category  in  CASNET,  193 
Disease  hypothesis  in  INTERNIST,  197 
Disease  model  in  INTERNIST,  199 
Disease  process.     See  Monitoring  dynamic 

processes. 
Disease  tree  in  INTERNIST,  198 
Distributed  processing  in  PUP,  318 
Documentation  of  programs  in 

Programmer's  Apprentice,  344-347 
Domain  independence,  276.    See  also  Tools 

for  building  expert  systems. 
Domain-independent  constraint 

propagation,  146 
Domain-independent  rules,  84 
Domain  model  in  SAFE,  339 
Domain-specific  knowledge,  79,  129 
Dotted  pair,  312 

Drug-preference  categories  in  MYCIN,  191 
DWIM  in  INTERLISP,  68 
Dynamic  allocation,  33.     See  also  Variable 

scoping. 
Dynamic  lists,  53 
Dynamic  processes.  See  Monitoring  dynamic 

processes. 
Dynamic  programming  in  Protosystem  1,  368 


Dynamic  scoping,  18,  33.    See  also  Variable 
scoping. 

Early  AI  programs,  4 
EDITSTRUC  in  CONGEN,  112 
Education.  See  also  Computer-assisted 
instruction;  Intelligent  computer- 
assisted  instruction;  Tutoring 
strategies  in  ICAI. 

applications  of  AI  in,  225-294 

environmental  approach  to,  225,  291-294 

learning  by  discovery,  254 

learning  by  doing,  291 

learning  environment,  292 

learning  resources,  292-293 

LOGO  lab,  225 

nontutorial  CAI,  291-294 

pedagogical  style  in,  275-276 
Efficiency  of  DBMS  queries,  170-171 
Efficiency  of  synthesized  programs,  327 

in  AP  systems,  302-303,  317 

by  eliminating  redundant  computations, 
314 

estimation  of,  375-378 

in  LIBRA,  330,  351,  375-379 

in  Protosystem  I,  368 
Electron  density  map  interpretation,  124 
Electron  trees,  115 
Ellipsis,  165,  250 
EMYCIN,  84,  183,  276 
English.  See  Natural  language. 
Environment 

programming,  3-4,  7,  28,  32,  65-71,  230. 
232,  234 

runtime,  3,  9 
Environmental  approach  to  CAI,  291-294 
EPAM,  5 

ESTABLISH  in  EXCHECK,  287 
Etiology  of  a  disease,  179 
Evaluation  of  expert  systems.  See 
Validation,  of  expert  systems. 
Evaluation  function,  3,  27.  See  also 
Interpreter. 

EVAL  in  LISP,  15,  17,  28 

in  search,  141 
Evaluation  of  ICAI  systems.  See  Validation, 

of  ICAI  systems. 
Event-driven  processing.  See  Data-  or  event- 
driven  processing. 
Event  list  in  CRYSALIS,  128 
Evidence,  120 

EVOKE  relation  in  INTERNIST,  198 
EXAMINE  in  CONGEN,  114 


416 


Subject  Index 


Examples,  program  specification  from,  300, 
306-308,  318  325 

generic,  307 

in  PSI,  329 

traces,  307-308,  321-325 
EXCHECK,  227,  283-290 

explanation  in,  97 

sample  protocol  from,  284   285 
Expanding  procedure  calls,  315 
Expectation-  or  goal-driven  processing,  91- 
92,  97   101.  See  also  Backward 
chaining;  Control  structure; 
Reasoning  strategies;  Top-down 
processing. 
EXPERT,  180,  217  222 

status  of,  222 
Expert  system,  9,  79-294.  See  also 
Knowledge  engineering. 

acceptance  of,  89 

for  agricultural  pest  management,  154 

in  chemical  analysis,  102-133 

in  chemical  synthesis,  102,  134-142 

for  classification,  217 

as  consultation  system,  81-82 

for  database  management,  163-173 

debugging  of,  in  TEIRESIAS,  192 

for  digitalis  administration,  206-211 

in  education,  225   194 

for  electromechanical  assembly,  150-154 

exhaustive  solutions  in,  177,  190 

for  glaucoma,  193-196,  215-216 

history  of,  79-80 

in  internal  medicine,  197-201 

for  mathematics,  143-154 

for  medical  diagnosis,  177  222 

for  mineral  exploration,  154,  155-162 

for  renal  disease,  202-205 

in  rheumatology,  222 

size  of,  85,  159 

sociological  considerations  concerning,  177 

status  of,  83-85 

in  stereochemistry,  113 

in  synthetic  chemistry,  134-142 

tools  for  building,  84,  126,  183,  212-216, 
217-222,  267-278 

for  treatment  regimen,  206-211 

tutorial,  267  278 

validation  of,  182,  192,  211,  267 
Expert-systems-building  tools.  See  Tools  for 

building  expert  systems. 
Expertise,  80 

in  automatic  programming,  315 
Expertise  module  of  ICAI  systems,  229-231 

and  simulation,  229  230,  245-246,  251 


in  WEST,  256 

in  WUSOR,  263-264 
Experts   in   PSI,   326.      See  also  Knowledge 

sources. 
Explanation,  6,  72,  81-83,  89-91,  120 

and  acceptance  of  expert  systems,  89 

by  articulate  expert,  252 

by  computer  coaches,  257-259 

for  debugging,  89,  192 

in  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor,  206,  211 

in  EXCHECK,  97 

in  ICAI  systems,  97,  228,  229 

for  justification  of  conclusions,  89 

in  medical  consultation  systems,  182 

in  production  systems,  187-188 

in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  348 

by  proof  summarization   in   EXCHECK, 
287-289 

in  PROSPECTOR,  155 

in  PSI,  329 

and  self-reflective  programs,  6-7,  89 

in  TEIRESIAS,  95-97 

of  therapy  selection  in  MYCIN,  191 

in  WUSOR,  263,  266 
Extensibility,  69 

Finding  in  medical  diagnosis,  178 
in  EXPERT,  218-220 
in  PIP,  202 
Flexibility.  See  also  Self-reflective  programs, 
of  knowledge  representation,  130 
and  meta-knowledge,  89,  267 
of  a  model,  118 
of  production  rules,  228 
Focus  of  attention 
in  LIBRA,  376 
in  PECOS,  351 
FOL,  13 

Formal  language  in  AP,  301,  312-314 
Formal  program  specifications.   See  also 
Informality;  Program  specification; 
Very  high  level  language, 
in  DEDALUS,  355 
definition  of,  300 
vs.  informality,  326,  336 
FORTRAN,  3,  5,  217,  297,  299 
Forward  chaining  in  IRIS,  214 
Forward  reasoning,    136.     See  also  Bottom- 
up  reasoning;  Control  structure;  Data- 
or  event-driven  processing;   Reasoning 
strategies. 
Fragmentation  in  mass  spectrometry,    104, 

116 
Frame-oriented  CAI,  226,  231 
Frames 


Subject  Index 


417 


in  AP  systems,  316 

in  IRIS,  212-213 

in  PIP,  181,  202-204 
FUNARG,  46 
Function,  34 

Functional  Description  Compiler,  317 
Functional  relationships,  245-246 
FUZZY,  13 

control  structures  in,  53-55 

data  structures  in,  43 

pattern  matching  in,  63-64 
Fuzzy  set,  13 

Garbage  collection,  4,  18 

General  Problem  Solver  (GPS),  4,  47,  79 

Generality  of  rules  for  molecular  processes, 

120 
Generalization  principle  in  DEDALUS,  360- 

361 
Generate  and  test.   See  Plan-generate-test. 
Generative  CAI,  227,  229 
Generator,  4,  45 
Generic  examples  for  program  specification, 

307 
Generic  traces  for  program  specification,  307 
Geography  tutor,  236-241 
Geological  data  models,  155 
Glaucoma  consultation  system,  193-196, 

215-216 
Goal  tree,  90,  95 
GOODLIST,  107,  113 
Goodness  of  fit  in  PIP,  202 
GPSS,  303,  370-374 
Gradual  refinement,  350 
Grammar 

automatic  derivation  of,  in  TED,  166 

case,  238 

in  DBMS,  164-165 

problem-solving,  229 
Grammatical  inference,  116,  318 
Graphics,  293 

GUIDON,  6,  228,  230,  235,  243,  267-278, 
292 

domain  independence  in,  276 

sample  protocol  from,  268-270 

status  of,  276-278 

HACKER,  10,  315,  317-318,  361 
Half-order  theory  of  mass  spectrometry, 

118-119 
HAM-RPM,  13 
HEADMED,  180 
HEARSAY,  31-32,  126,  342 
Heuristic  Compiler,  317 
Heuristic  DENDRAL.  See  DENDRAL. 


Heuristic  problem  solving 

in  MACSYMA,  146 

as  search,  79 

in  structure  elucidation,  106 

in  synthetic  chemistry,  140,  142 
Heuristics,  81,  140,  313 
Hierarchical  knowledge  in  SCHOLAR,  237 
Hierarchy  of  procedural  knowledge,  151 
Hill  climbing,  145,  317 
HODGKINS,  180 
How  the  West  Was  Won,  254,  255 
Human  engineering,  84.  See  also  User 

interface. 
Hypothesis 

askable  vs.  unaskable,  161 

confirmation,  202,  204-205 

in  EXPERT,  218-220 

formation,  84,  116,  124-125 

in  INTERNIST,  197 

in  medical  reasoning,  179-180 

propagation  in  PROSPECTOR,  160 

status  of,  in  CASNET,  195 

Imbedding  algorithm,  111 
Implicit  knowledge,  277 
IMPLIES  in  EXCHECK,  286-287 
IMPORT  property  in  INTERNIST,  199 
Importance  tags  in  SCHOLAR,  237 
Incomplete  knowledge,  240.  See  also 

Uncertainty. 
Incremental  compiler,  70,  300 
Incremental  query  formulation,  167 
Individualization  of  instruction,  226 
Induction  axioms,  313 
Induction/inference  in  mass-spectral 

processes,  116 
Induction  of  programs.    See  also  Automatic 
programming;  Examples,  program 
specification  from;  Traces, 
as  approach  to  AP,  318-325 
axiomatization  of  operations  in,  319 
from  examples,  318-325 
and  grammatical  inference,  318 
program  schemas  in,  319 
from  protocols,  322-325 
from  traces,  321-325 
Inexact  knowledge,  79,  81.  See  also 
Uncertainty, 
in  medical  reasoning,  179 
Infectious-disease  consultant  system, 

184-192 
Inference  engine,  189 


418 


Subject  Index 


Inference  mechanism.   See  also  Control 
structure;  Reasoning  strategies, 
constraint  propagation,  146 
and  explanation,  90 
network  as,  in  PROSPECTOR,  158 
rules,  159,  188-189 
in  SOPHIE,  251-252 
strategies  for,  239 
Informality 

human,  studies  of,  337 
in  mathematical  reasoning,  283-290 
of  program  specifications,  326,  336-338 
Information  retrieval.   See  Database 

management  systems. 
Instructional  programming  environment 
BIP,  230,  234 
SPADE,  232 
Instructional  strategy.  See  Tutoring 

strategies  in  ICAI. 
Intelligent  computer-assisted  instruction 
(ICAI),  225-294.  See  also  Computer- 
assisted  instruction, 
in  arithmetic  skills,  279-282 
case-method  tutor,  235,  242 
computer  coach,  231,  234,  254-255,  257- 

259,  261-266 
computer  games,  234,  252,  254,  261-266 
diagnosis  of  student  misconceptions  in, 
226,  233,  239,  245,  254,  273,  279-280 
in  electronics  troubleshooting,  247-253 
geography  tutor,  236-241 
in  informal  mathematical  reasoning,  283- 

290 
in  logic,  283-290 
in  medical  diagnosis,  267-278 
pedagogical  style  in,  275 
in  proof  theory,  283-290 
in  set  theory,  283-290 
Socratic  method  in,  234 
survey  of,  225-228 

for  teaching  diagnostic  strategies,  247-253 
tutoring  module,  233-235 
tutoring  strategies  in,  228,  233,  237 
Interactive  dialogue.  See  Mixed-initiative 

dialogue. 
Interactive  knowledge  acquisition.  See 
Knowledge  acquisition;  Transfer  of 
expertise. 
Interactive  LISP.  See  INTERLISP. 
Interactive  program  specification,  300,  302, 
303,  310-311.  See  also  Mixed-initiative 
dialogue;  Natural  language;  Program 
specification, 
in  NLPQ,  370-374 


in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  345,  348 

in  PSI,  327,  330-332 

in  SAFE,  337-338 
Interactive  transfer  of  expertise.   See 

Knowledge  acquisition;  Transfer  of 
expertise. 
Interestingness 

in  selection  of  heuristics,  119 

in  synthetic  chemistry,  134,  135 
INTERLISP,  8,  212,  362 

CLISP,  68 

DWIM,  68 

programmer's  assistant  for,  68 

programming  environment  of,  67  68,  70- 
71 
Internal  medicine,  197-201 
Internal  Problem  Description  (IPD)  in 

NLPQ,  372-373 
INTERNIST,  83,    180,    181,    182,    197-201, 
205 

INTERNIST-II,  200-201,  215 

status  of,  201 
Interpreter,  3.   See  also  Evaluation  function. 

EVAL  in  LISP,  15,  17,  28 
Intersection  search  in  SCHOLAR,  239-240 
INTSUM  in  Meta-DENDRAL,  119 
IPL,  4 

IRIS,  84,  160,  180,  181,  212-216 
Isomers,  108 
ISPEC  in  IRIS,  212-214 
Issues-and-examples  tutoring  strategy,  256 

issue  evaluators  in,  257 

issue  recognizers  in,  257 
Items  in  SAIL,  41 

JCL,  365 

Judgmental  knowledge,  277.  See  also 

Uncertainty. 
Justification.   See  also  Explanation. 

for  beliefs,  74 

in  medical  consultation  systems,  182 

KLAUS,  169-170 

sample  protocol  from,  169-170 
Knowledge,  opacity  of,  82 
Knowledge  acquisition,   79,   80-83,   87,   91- 
92,  116.   See  also  Learning;  Transfer  of 
expertise. 

by  automatic  theory  formation,  116 

interactive,  in  SECS,  137 

in  medical  consultation  systems,  182 

in  Meta-DENDRAL,  116-123 

REACT,  in  CONGEN,  114-115 

in  TEIRESIAS,  97-101,  191-192 


Subject  Index 


419 


by  transfer  of  expertise,  116 
Knowledge  base,  34,  80 
Knowledge-based  system,  326.   See  also 

Expert  system. 
Knowledge  engineering,  326.  See  also  Expert 
system;  Knowledge  acquisition, 
as  approach  to  AP,  301,   315-316,   350- 

354,  375-379 
definition  of,  84 
in  PECOS,  350-354 
Knowledge  representation.  See 

Representation  of  knowledge. 
Knowledge  sources,  125,  126 
Experts  in  PSI,  326 
in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  348 
in  SAFE,  342 

LADDER,  164-166 

sample  protocol  from,  165-166 
Laser  pointer  for  a  computer-based 

consultant,  150 
LEAP  in  SAIL,  11,  41,  317 
Learning,  6-7,  72,  88,  116,  293,  317.  See  also 
Education;  Knowledge  acquisition. 

by  debugging,  318 

by  discovery,  254 

by  doing,  291 

environment,  292 

in  HACKER,  318 

resources,  292-293 

and  self-reflective  programs,  6-7,  89,  318 

statistical,  in  DENDRAL,  118 

strategy  of  Meta-DENDRAL,  119 

training  instances  for,  in  DENDRAL,  117 
LHASA,  104,  134-142 
LIBRA,  302,  304,  305,  330,  351,  375-379 
LIFER,  165-166 

interface  for  PROSPECTOR,  160 
Limited  inference  algorithm  (CPM),  in 

MACSYMA,  146 
Link  types,  212 
LISP,  5-9,  15-29,  187 

and  automatic  programming,  27 

cell,  4 

control  structures,  46-47 

data  structures,  37 

disadvantages  of,  28-29 

dotted  pair,  312 

formal  axioms  for,  312-314 

INTERLISP,  8 

language  primitives,  19-21 

machines,  9 

MACLISP,  8 

pattern  matching,  59 


programming  environment,  66-67 

programs  as  data,  26-28,  298 

self-reflective  programs  in,  6-7,  27,  298 

syntax  of,  18 

as  target  language,  28,  300,  355 
List  processing,  15 
List  structure,  4,  15-17 
Logic,  283-290,  312 

in  DBMS,  172 

programming,  13 
Logic  Theorist,  4,  79 
Logical  decision  criteria  in  PIP,  203 
LOGO,  225,  232,  291-294 

MACLISP,  8,  202,  206,  369 
MACSYMA,  8,  29,  79,  82,  85,  143-154 

Advisor,  232 

Apprentice,  148 

current  status  of,  147-149 
Man-machine  interaction.  See  User 

interface. 
Managing  modifications  to  programs  in 
Programmer's  Apprentice,  344-347 
MANIFEST  relation  in  INTERNIST,  198 
Manifestations 

in  INTERNIST,  197-198 

in  medical  diagnosis,  178 
Mass  spectrometry,  104,  106,  111,  116 

half-order  theory  of,  118-119 

zero-order  theory  of,  118 
Mass  spectroscopy,  104 
Masterscope  in  INTERLISP,  8 
Matching.  See  also  Pattern  matching. 

goodness  of  fit  in,  202 

in  PIP,  202 

programs  to  schemas,  319-320 
Mathematics,  143 
Mathlab  68,  143 
Means-ends  analysis,  139,  317 
Medical  diagnosis,    178-179,   274.     See  also 
Diagnosis. 

advantages  of  computers  in,  177 

errors  in,  177 

as  hypothesis  formation,  179-180 

as  search,  179 

thresholding  in,  181 
Medical  diagnosis  systems,  80,  81,  177-222. 
See  also  Expert  system. 

exhaustive  solutions  in,  177,  190 

history  of,  179-180 

status  of,  180-183 

x-ray  and  ultrasound  image  analysis,  177 


420 


Subject  Index 


Memo  function  in  POP-2,  53 
Meta-DENDRAL,  84,  104,  106,  116-123 

status  of,  121-122 
Meta-evaluation  in  SAFE,  340 
Meta-knowledge,  85,  89,  91,  240  241,  267 
Meta-rules,  88,  92,  130 
Methods  in  CONNIVER,  50 
MICRO-PLANNER,  10 
Migration,  104 

Mineral-exploration  systems,  154,  155-162 
Missionaries  and  Cannibals  puzzle,  79 
Mixed-initiative  dialogue,  160,  234,  236-238, 
247,   259,   272,   368.     See  also  Natural 
language. 

in  GUIDON,  267 

in  NLPQ,  370-374 

for  program  specification,  311 

in  PSI,  326,  329-332 

Socratic,  242 
Model  building 

in  PROSPECTOR,  155,  161 

in  SECS,  139 
Modularity 

in  CRYSALIS,  125 

in  knowledge  representation,  83,  155,  263 

of  productions,  376 

in  programs,  65 
Molecular  fragmentation,  111,  116 
Molecular  structures,  102 

analysis  of,  102-133 
Monitoring  dynamic  processes 

in  CASNET,  193   194,  196 

in  Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor  and  VM,  206 
Multiple  representations  of  knowledge,  229 
Multiprocessing,  45.  See  also  Coroutining. 

in  SAIL,  52 
MYCIN,  82-83,  84,  87,  90,  92,  180,  181,  182, 
184-192,  205,  215,  235,  267-278,  288 

NEOMYCIN,  205,  228,  277 

reasoning  in,  189   191 

sample  protocol  from,  184-187 

validation  of,  267 

Natural  deduction,  283,  285-286 
Natural  language  (NL) 

anaphoric  reference  in,  250 

ellipsis  in,  165,  250 

in  EXCHECK,  283 

front  end,  automatic  derivation  of,  166 

in  ICAI  systems,  227 

interface,  150 

LIFER,  165   166 

mixed-initiative  dialogue,  311 

in  MYCIN,  192 


in  NLPQ,  370-374 

program  specification,  300,  302,  303,  310- 
311,  337-338 

in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  345,  348 

in  PSI,  327,  330-332 

in  SCHOLAR,  238-239 

semantic  grammar,  250-251 

in  SOPHIE,  250-251 

in  TED,  166-167 
Negative  evidence,  120 
NEOMYCIN,  205,  228,  277 
Networks.   See  also  Representation  of 

Knowledge. 
NIL  in  LISP,  16 
NLPQ,  301,  302,  303,  311,  370-374 

sample  protocol  from,  370-372 

status  of,  374 
NLS-SCHOLAR,  236 
NOAH,  12 

Noise  in  student  model,  260 
Nonalgorithmic  procedures,  144 
Nonmonotonic  reasoning,  74-75 
Nontutorial  CAI,  291-294 
Nuclear-magnetic  resonance  (NMR) 

spectroscopy,  122 
Numerical  problems,  143 

ONCOCIN,  180 
Opacity 

of  knowledge,  82,  89-90 

of  reasoning,  230 
Open  sets,  240 
Open  world,  240 

Opportunistic  problem  solving,  129 
Opportunistic  tutoring  in  GUIDON,  275 
OPS,  84 
Optimization  of  code.   See  Efficiency  of 

synthesized  programs. 
Organic  synthesis,  105,  134-142 
Overlay  model,  231,  256,  261,  270,  282 
OWL,  182 

Parallel  processing,  146 
Parsing,  293 

in  DBMS,  164-165 

in  SAFE,  339 
Partial  program  specification,  301,  307,  313, 
348-349 

by  humans,  337 

in  NLPQ,  370-374 

in  PSI,  326 

in  SAFE,  337-338,  341 
Partial  solutions,  273 
Partitioned  semantic  net,  159 


Subject  Index 


421 


Pathogenesis  of  a  disease,  178 

Pathway  in  CASNET,  196 

Patient  management.   See  Monitoring 

dynamic  processes. 
Patient-specific  model,  208  211 
Pattern,  35 

Pattern-directed  invocation,  9,  11,  32,  46,  58 
Pattern-directed  retrieval,  58 
Pattern  matching,  32,  58-64,  286 

in  ICAI,  231 

network  matching,  160 

in  PROSPECTOR,  155,  160 

in  SECS,  137 

semantic,  144-145 
Pattern  variables,  58 

PECOS,  302,  304,  305,  330,  350-354,  375, 
379 

status  of,  353-354 
Pedagogy.  See  Education. 
Perceptual  skills  of  a  computer-based 

consultant,  150 
Performance  grammar.   See  Semantic 

grammar. 
Personal  computer,  9 
PL/1,  365 
Plan-generate- test,  131 

in  DENDRAL,  106-109 

in  Meta-DENDRAL,  120 
Plan  in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  303,  305, 

343 
Plan   library  in  Programmer's  Apprentice, 

344,  348 
Plan  recognition,  147,  149,  232 

for  cooperative  responses,  167 

in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  303 
PLANES,  164 

Planes  of  knowledge  in  CASNET,  193 
PLANNER,  8-10,  74,  79 

antecedent  theorems  in,  38,  48,  73 

chronological  backtracking  in,  50 

consequent  theorems  in,  48 

control  structures  in,  47-50 

data  structures  in,  38 

MICRO-PLANNER,  10 

pattern  matching  in,  60 

programming  environment  of,  68 

vs.  CONNIVER,  56 
Planning 

of  program  synthesis  in  SAFE,  339-340 

in  the  SRI  computer-based  consultant, 
151-152 
PLATO  Project,  255 

Plausible  reasoning,  158,  179,  199,  201,  236, 
239,  241 


POP-2,  7,  12 

control  structures,  53 

data  structures,  42 

dynamic  lists,  53 

pattern  matching,  63 

programming  environment,  70 
POPLER,  12 
Positive  evidence,  120 
Possibility  list  in  CONNIVER,  38 
Predicate  calculus,  301.  See  also  Logic. 
Predicate  function,  188 
Premise  clause  of  a  production  rule,  188 
Present  Illness  Program  (PIP),  83,  180,  181, 

202-205 
Probabilistic  reasoning,  155,  158  160,  205 
Problem   area  in   automatic   programming, 

300-301 
Problem-reduction  space,  317 
Problem  solving,  9,  79.  See  also  Expert 
system;  Reasoning  strategies. 

approach  to  AP,  301,  317-318,  321,  324- 
325 

plan-generate-test  strategy  in,  131 
Problem-solving  expertise,  247,  256,  263. 

See  also  Expertise. 
Problem-solving  grammar,  229,  232 
Problem  space,  140 
Procedural  attachment,  59 
Procedural  knowledge  representation,  9,  73, 

151-152,  229,  261 
Procedural  net,  151,  280 
Procedure-formation  principle,  359 
Process,  45.  See  also  Coroutining; 

Multiprocessing. 
Production  rule,  83,  87,  128,  129-130,  136, 
212,  228,  235,  261-263 

in  EXPERT,  218-220 

flexibility,  228,  267 

in  ICAI  systems,  229 

in  mass  spectrometry,  106,  116,  117-118 
Production  systems.  See  also  Program 
transformation  as  approach  to  AP. 

conflict  resolution  in,  350 

focus  of  attention  in,  351 

IRIS,  212-213 

LIBRA,  375-379 

modularity  of,  in  LIBRA,  376 

MYCIN,  187-188 

in  NLPQ,  370 

PECOS,  350 

refinement  rules  in,  350-351 

in  SAFE,  339 
Program  model 

in  LIBRA,  375 


422 


Subject  Index 


Program  model  (continued) 
in  PSI,  327,  329-330,  333 
Program  net  in  PSI,  327,  329,  330,  332 
Program  representation.  See  Representation 

of  programs  in  AP  systems. 
Program  schemas,  319 

Program  specification,   297,   299-300,   SOB- 
SI  1.  See  also  Automatic  programming, 
ambiguity  of,  336-337 
AP2  in  SAFE,  337 
behavioral,  336-338,  343 
completeness  of,  300 
consistency  of,  302 
constraints  in,  302,  336,  338-340 
efficiency  of,  336 

by  example,  300,  306-308,  318-325,  329 
executability  of,  336 
formal,  300,  308-310,  355 
by  generic  examples,  307 
human,  studies  of,  337 
informality  of,  326,  336 
interactive,  300 
methods  of,  306-311 
mixed-initiative  dialogue  in,  311,  326, 

329-333,  370-374 
natural-language,  300,  302,  310-311,  327, 

330-332,  337  338,  341,  345,  348,  370- 

374 
partial,  301,  307,  313,  326,  337  338,  341, 

348-349,  370-374 
protocols  for,  308 
in  PSI,  326-332 
SSL  in  Protosystem  I,  364-369 
by  traces,  300,  307-308,  321-325,  329 
unambiguous,  in  DEDALUS,  355 
V  in  CHI,  334 
very  high  level  language,   309,   315,   326, 

355-363,  364-369 
vocabulary  of,  336 
Program  synthesis,  313.  See  also  Automatic 

programming, 
in  PECOS,  350-354 
in  PSI,  330 
Program  transformation  as  approach  to  AP, 

301,  302,  304,  309 
conditional-formation  principle,  357 
in  DEDALUS,  355-363 
by  eliminating  redundant  computations, 

314 
by  expanding  procedure  calls,  315 
generalization  principle,  360-361 
by  gradual  refinement,  350 
in  LIBRA,  375-379 
in  NLPQ,  370-374 


in  PECOS,  330,  350-354 
procedure-formation  principle,  359-360 
recursion-formation  principle,  358 
by  recursion  removal,  314 
refinement  rules  in,  316 
refinement  tree  in,  375 
simultaneous  goals  in,  361-362 
Program  understanding,  303,  305,  343,  364- 

369 
Programmer's  Apprentice,    303,    305,    343- 

349 
sample  protocol  from,  344  347 
status  of,  349 
Programmer's  assistant  in  INTERLISP,  8, 

68 
Programming.   See  also  Automatic 

programming;  Programming 

environment;  Programming 

languages;  Representation  of 

programming  knowledge, 
applicative  style  of,  6-7 
codification  of  programming  knowledge  in 

PECOS,  350-354 
current  problems  in,  and  AP,  299 
debugging  in   Programmer's  Apprentice, 

344-347 
definition  of,  297 
documentation  in  Programmer's 

Apprentice,  344-347 
in  logic,  13 
modification  management  in 

Programmer's  Apprentice,  344-347 
pattern-directed  invocation  in,  9 
recursion  in,  6 
verification  in  Programmer's  Apprentice, 

344-347 
Programming  environment,  3-4,  32,  65-71, 

299 
BIP,  230 

CHI,  326,  333-335 
for  instruction,  230,  232,  234 
interactive,  28 
LISP,  7 

Programmer's  Apprentice,  343-349 
SPADE,  232 
Programming  knowledge.   See 

Representation  of  programming 

knowledge. 
Programming  languages.  See  also  AI 

programming  languages. 
ALGOL,  6 
APL,  6 
COBOL,  3 
FORTRAN,  3,  5 


Subject  Index 


423 


very  high  level,   309,  315,  326,   355-363, 
364-369 
Programs  as  data,   7,    15,   26-28.     See  also 
Self-reflective  programs. 

for  explanation,  6 

for  learning,  6-7 
PROLOG,  13 
Proof  checking,  283 
Proof  summarization  in  EXCHECK,  283, 

287-289 
Proof  theory,  283-290 
Propagation,  212 

in  IRIS,  213-215 

of  probabilistic  hypotheses,  160 
Property  lists,  7,  31 
PROSPECTOR,  82,  85,  155-162 

natural-language  interface,  160 

sample  protocol  from,  155-158 

status  of,  161-162 
Protection  mechanism  for  simultaneous 

subgoals,  361 
Protein  x-ray  crystallography,  124 
Protocol  analysis,  237 
Protocols  for  program  specification.  See 

Traces. 
Protosystem  I,  302,  304,  364-369 

status  of,  369 
Pruning,  114 

PSI,  301,  302,  303-304,  311,  319,  326-335, 
350,  375 

PECOS  and  LIBRA,  375,  379 

sample  protocol  from,  330-331 
Psychologist  module  in  ICAI  system,   263, 

265 
PUFF,  180,  182-183 
PUP,  318 

QA4,  11,  79 
QLISP,  12,  362 

control  structures  in,  51-52 

data  structures  in,  39-41 

pattern  matching  in,  61-62 

programming  environment  of,  69 

segment  variables  in,  61 

unification  in,  61-62 
Query  optimization  in  QUIST,  170-171 
QUIST,  170-171 

REACT  in  CONGEN,  114-115 
Reactive  learning  environment,  227,  247,  283 
Reasoning  strategies.  See  also  Control 
structure;  Uncertainty. 

about  programs  in  AP,  298 

bottom-up,  196,  199-201,  214 


in  CASNET,  195-196 

categorical,  205 

consequent,  156,  160-161 

data-  or  event-driven  processing,  129,  257 

default,  239 

dependency-directed  backtracking,  73 

in  EXPERT,  220-222 

heuristic,  81,  140,  313 

hill-climbing,  145,  317 

from  incomplete  knowledge,  236,  240 

inexact,  79,  81 

in  INTERNIST,  199-201 

intersection  search,  239-240 

means-ends  analysis,  139,  317 

in  MYCIN,  189-191 

plausible,  158,  179,  199,  201,  236,  239,  241 

probabilistic,  155,  158-160,  205 

schema  matching,  319-320 

in  SCHOLAR,  239-241 

top-down  vs.  bottom-up,  201 

uncertainty  in,  13,  131,  180,  188-191,  193, 
195-196,  197,  215,  221,  271,  277 
Record,  34 
Recursion,  6,  15,  18 
Recursion-formation  principle,  358 
Recursion  removal,  314 
REDUCE,  146 
REF-ARF,  5,  79 

Refinement  of  a  program  specification,  350. 
See  also  Program  transformation  as 
approach  to  AP. 

in  PECOS,  350-351 

rules  for,  375 
Relational  database  in  MACSYMA,  146 
Renal  disease,  202-205 
RENDEZVOUS,  167-169 
Representation  of  algebraic  expressions,  147 
Representation  of  knowledge,  7,  9,  79 

about  diagnosis,  212,  216 

about  functional  relationships,  245-246 

about  mass  spectrometry,  116-117 

articulate  expert,  230 

associative  triple,  188 

in  automatic  programming,  315-316 

blackboard  architecture,  126 

causal  model,  193-195 

closed- world  assumption,  240 

in  DBMS,  171-173 

decision  rules,  218-220 

decision  tables,  214-215 

disease  model,  199 

about  disease  progression,  196 

expertise,  80 


424 


Subject  Index 


Representation  of  knowledge  (continued) 
in  EXPERT,  218-220 
facts,  algorithms,  and  heuristics,  128 
findings,  219 

flexibility  of,  89,  130,  228,  267 
formal  vs.  informal,  128 
frame,  181,  202-204,  212-213,  316 
hierarchical,  237 
of  hypotheses,  220 
in  ICAI  systems,  227,  229 
with  inexact  knowledge,  180 
inference  network,  158 
inference  rules,  159 
in  INTERNIST,  198-199,  200-201 
in  IRIS,  212-213 
ISPEC,  212-214 
knowledge  sources  in,  125,  126,  326,  342, 

348 
logic  in  DBMS,  172   173 
in  medical   diagnosis  systems,    177,    180- 

181 
meta-knowledge  in,  85,  89,  240-241,  267, 

269 
modularity  of,  83,  125-129,  155,  263 
multiple,  229 

partitioned  semantic  net,  159 
problem-solving  grammars,  229 
procedural,  9,  151-152,  229,  261 
procedural  net,  151,  280 
production  rules,    83,    87,    128,    187-188, 

212-213,  229,  261-263 
program  schema,  319 
in  PROSPECTOR,  158-160 
in  SCHOLAR,  236-237 
script,  243 
semantic  network,  146,  212-213,  229,  236- 

237,  316,  323 
semantic  primitive  in  MYCIN,  187 
spaces  in  partitioned  semantic  nets,  159 
for  synthetic  chemistry,  134-138 
taxonomic  network,  159 
uncertainty  in,  180-181,  188-189,  193, 

215,  221 
Representation  of  programming  knowledge. 

See  also  Knowledge  engineering, 
conditional-formation  principle,  357 
in  DEDALUS,  355-363 
design  notebook  in  Programmer's 

Apprentice,  348 
generalization  principle,  360-361 
Internal  problem  description  (IPD),  in 

NLPQ,  372  373 
in  LIBRA,  376  378 
in  PECOS,  350  353 


plan  in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  343 
plan  library  in  Programmer's  Apprentice, 

344,  348 
procedure-formation  principle,  359-360 
recursion-formation  principle,  358 

Representation  of  programs  in  AP  systems. 
See  also  Program  specification, 
program  model,  327,  329-330,  333,  375 
program  net,  327,  329,  330,  332 
program  schema,  319 
in  PSI,  327 

Resolution  theorem  proving,  11,  313 

Reverse  chemical  reactions,  136 

Revision  procedure,  74 

Rheumatology  consultation  system,  222 

Risch  algorithm,  82 

ROBOT,  164 

Robot  planning,  73 

Root  structure  in  INTERNIST,  201 

ROSIE,  84 

Rule-based  system.  See  Production  systems. 

Rule  model,  91,  97-101 

RULEGEN  in  Meta-DENDRAL,  120 

RULEMOD  in  Meta-DENDRAL,  120 

Run-time  environment,  3,  9 

RX,  180 

SAD-SAM,  4 

SAFE,  301,  302,  304,  310,  336  342 

status  of,  341   342 
SAIL,  11,  317 

associations,  41 

BAIL,  70 

control  structures,  52-53 

coroutining,  53 

data  structures,  41   42 

demons,  52 

items,  41 

multiprocessing,  52 

pattern  matching,  62-63 

programming  environment,  69-70 
Schema,  91,  319 

SCHOLAR,  227,  229,  232,  236-241,  242, 
246,  267,  292 

NLS-SCHOLAR,  236 

sample  protocol,  238 
Schooling,  291.   See  also  Education. 
Scope  of  variables.  See  Variable  scoping. 
Scoring  of  hypotheses,  200 
Scripts  in  WHY,  243 
SCSIMP,  145 
SDM,  172 


Subject  Index 


425 


Search,  72.  See  also  Combinatorial 
explosion;  Control  structure; 
Reasoning  strategies. 

best-first,  141 

depth-first,  50,  189-190 

heuristics  to  limit,  313 

methods,  39 

in  SYNCHEM,  141 
SECS,  105,  134-142 
Segment  variable,  61 
Selection  sort,  352 
Self-description  of  CHI,  334-335 
Self-reflective  programs,  27.  See  also 
Flexibility  of  production  rules; 
Programs  as  data. 

and  automatic  programming,  297-298,  318 

and  explanation,  6-7,  89 

FOL,  13 

HACKER,  318 

and  learning,  6-7,  89,  318 

in  LISP,  6-7,  298 

and  meta- knowledge  in  production 
systems,  89,  267 

in  TEIRESIAS,  89 
Semantic  data  model  (SDM),  172 
Semantic  grammar,  160,  250-251 
Semantic  model,  118 

Semantic  network,  30,  32,  146,  212-213,  229, 
231,  238,  316,  323,  372 

intersection  search  in,  239-240 

partitioned,  in  PROSPECTOR,  159 

in  SCHOLAR,  236-237 
Semantic  pattern  matching,  144-145 
Semantic  primitives  in  MYCIN,  187 
Semantic  query  optimization,  171 
Sequence  extrapolation,  116 
Sequential  diagnosis,  179 
Sequential  processing,  200 
Set,  34 

Set  theory,  283-290 
Shelf  in  INTERNIST,  199 
SHRDLU,  10,  60 
Sign  in  medical  diagnosis,  178 
Simplification  of  expressions,  144 
Simulation.     See  also  Expertise  module  of 
ICAI  systems. 

in  ICAI,  229-230,  245-246,  251 

of  laboratory  reactions,  114 
Simulation  programs 

automated  synthesis  of,   in  NLPQ,  370- 
374 
Simultaneous  goals,  361 
SIN,  143 
SIR,  11 


SMALLTALK,  293 

Socratic  tutoring  method,  237,  242-246 

heuristic  rules  for,  in  WHY,  242-243 

tutorial  goals,  244 

in  WHY,  234 
Software,  299.  See  also  Programming. 
SOPHIE,  227,  230,  231,  247  253,  292-293 

sample  dialogue,  248-250 

SOPHIE-I,  230,  247-250 

SOPHIE-II,  252 
Spaces  in  partitioned  semantic  nets,  159 
SPADE,  232 
Spaghetti  stack 

in  CONNIVER,  10 

in  QLISP,  12 
Specialization  of  fragmentation  rules,  120 
Specification  of  programs.   See  Program 

specification. 
Spectroscopy,  104 
Speech  understanding,  31,  150 
Spelling  correction,  164 

SRI  computer-based  consultant  (CBC),  150- 
154 

sample  dialogue  from,  153-154 
SSL  in  Protosystem  I,  364-369 
Stack  frames,  45 
State  Description  Compiler,  317 
Statistical  learning,  118 
Status  of  hypothesis  in  CASNET,  195 
Stereochemistry,  113,  140 
Stochastic  learning  models,  231 
Storage  allocation,  18.  See  also  Variable 

scoping. 
Strategy  for  control.  See  Control  structure; 

Reasoning  strategies. 
STRIPS,  11,  73 
Structure 

determination,  102 

elucidation,  102,  111 
Structure-generation  algorithm,  106,  111 
Structured  growth  as  programming  regimen, 

65 
Structured  programming,  66 
Student  model,  225,  229,  235,  265.   See  also 
Diagnosis  of  student  misconceptions. 

as  bugs,  231-233 

conceptual  bug  in,  279-280 

constructive  bug  in,  234 

critic  in,  233 

diagnostic,  233,  279-280 

differential  modeling  of,  255-256 

in  GUIDON,  270-271 

in  ICAI  systems,  231-233 

in  the  MACSYMA  Advisor,  232 


426 


Subject  Index 


Student  model  (continued) 

noise  in,  260 

overlay  model  of,  231,  256,  261,  270,  282 

plan  recognition  in,  232 

problem-solving  grammar  in,  232 

procedural  net  in,  280 

sources  of  information  for,  232 

in  SPADE,  232 

and  stochastic  learning  models,  231 
Subgoal 

in  backward  chaining,  190 

in  conflict  resolution,  361 

selection  function  for,  141 
Subgraph,  130 

isomorphism,  32 
Substructure 

key,  137 

search,  114 

specifications,  112 
Summarization  of  proofs  in  EXCHECK,  283, 

287-289 
Superatoms,  111 
Syllabus  in  VVUMPUS,  230 
Symbol  manipulation,  3-5,  15 
Symbolic  algorithms,  144 
Symbolic  execution,  323 

meta-evaluation  in  SAFE,  340 

in  SAFE,  336,  339-340 
Symbolic  reasoning,  79,  82 
Symptom  in  medical  diagnosis,  178 
SYNCHEM,  85,  105,  134-142 

SYNCHEM2,  137,  140 
SYNCOM,  138 

Syntactic  query  optimization,  171 
Synthesis  of  molecular  structures,  102,  134- 
142 

synthesis  routes,  134 

synthesis  tree,  134 
Synthetic  chemistry,  105,  134-142 

Tags  in  CONNIVER,  38 
Target  language  for  automatic 

programming,  300 
GPSS,  in  NLPQ,  370 
LISP,  28,  355 
Target  structure  of  synthesis  process,   134, 

136 
TAXIS,  172 
Taxonomic  net,  159 
Teacherless  learning,  293 
Team  of  procedures  in  QLISP,  12 
TED,  166   167,  170 
TEIRESIAS,  57,  84,  85,  87-101,   130,   182, 

191    192 


sample  protocol  from,  92-101 
Text  generation,  239 
Theorem  in  PLANNER,  9,  38,  48,  73 
Theorem  proving,  62 

as  approach  to  AP,  301,  308-309,  312-314 
resolution,  313 
Theory  of  computation,  15 
Theory  formation,  84.   See  also  Hypothesis. 
Therapy  selection 

drug-preference  categories,  191 
in  MYCIN,  184,  191 
THINGLAB,  293 
THNOT,  74 
Thresholding  in  medical  decision  making, 

181 
Tools  for  building  expert  systems,  84 
AGE,  84,  126 
EMYCIN,  84,  183,  276 
EXPERT,  217-222 
GUIDON,  267-278 
IRIS,  212-216 
Top-down  processing,  201.   See  also 
Backward  chaining;  Consequent 
reasoning;  Control  structure; 
Reasoning  strategies. 
Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle,  22-24,  79 
TQA,  165 
Traces 

completeness  of,  308 
generic,  308 

problem-solver  generated,  324-325 
protocols  from,  308,  322-325 
in  PSI,  329,  330-334 
Training  instances  in  DENDRAL,  117 
Transfer  of  expertise,  72,  80,  81-83,  88-89, 
116.  See  also  Expert  system;  Knowledge 
acquisition;  Knowledge  engineering. 
Transformation  of  programs.  See  Automatic 
programming;  Production  systems; 
Program  transformation  as  approach 
to  AP. 
Transforms  in  synthetic  chemistry,  136 
Transparency  of  reasoning,  89.   See  also 

Opacity. 
Treatment-regimen  system,  206 
Triggering,  73,  121,  203-204 
Troubleshooting,  247-253.  See  also 

Diagnosis. 
Truth  maintenance,  72-76 
Tuple  in  QLISP,  34,  39-41 
Turtle  geometry,  291-292 
Tutor  module  of  ICAI  system,  263,  266 


Subject  Index 


427 


Tutorial  dialogue.  See  Dialogue 

management;  Intelligent  computer- 
assisted  instruction;  Tutoring 
strategies  in  ICAI. 
Tutorial  goals,  244 
Tutorial  programs,  225-294 
Tutorial  rule,  267,  272 

Tutoring  module  of  ICAI  systems,  233-235 

Tutoring  strategies  in  ICAI,  227-228,  233, 

237.  See  also  Diagnosis  of  student 

misconceptions;  Dialogue  management. 

case-method  tutor,  235,  242 

computer  coach,  231,  234,  254-255,  257- 

259,  261-266 
computer  gaming,  234,  252,  254,  261-266 
constructive  bug,  234,  254 
in  GUIDON,  272-273 
issues  and  examples,  256 
opportunistic,  275-276 
pedagogical  style  in,  275-276 
principles  of,  259 
in  SCHOLAR,  237-238 
Socratic  method,  234 
tutorial  goals  in,  244 
TYPE  property,  199 

Ultrasound  image  analysis,  177 
Uncertainty,   188-191,   215,  271,  277,   195- 
196,  221,  131.  See  also  Certainty  factor; 
Reasoning  strategies. 

in  CASNET,  193 

in  FUZZY,  13 

in  INTERNIST,  197 

representation  of,  180 
Unification,  61-62 
Unity  path  in  MYCIN,  191 
User  education  in  MACSYMA,  144,  146-148 
User  interface,  81.  See  also  Dialogue 
management. 

computer-generated  speech  in  EXCHECK, 
283 

in  CONGEN,  112 

cooperative  responses  in  COOP,  167 

in  DBMS,  164-171 

graphics  in  SECS,  139 

and  human  engineering,  84 

in  ICAI,  227 

incremental  query  formulation,  167 

in  KLAUS,  169-170 

laser  pointer,  150 

on-line  assistance  in  MACSYMA,  144, 
146-148 


menu  driver  in  RENDEZVOUS,  167 
mixed-initiative  dialogue,   160,  234,  236- 

238,  247,  272,  311,  326,  329-332,  370 
natural  discussion  of  proofs  in  EXCHECK, 

283-284 
natural-language,  150,  164-167,  192,  227 
in  PROSPECTOR,  155 
speech,  150,  153-154 
for  synthetic  chemistry  programs,  135 
vision,  153-154 
User  model,  150.   See  also  Plan  recognition; 

Student  model. 

V  in  CHI,  334 
Validation 

of  AP  systems.  See  Verification  of 
synthesized  code. 

of  expert  systems,  182,  192,  211,  267 

of  ICAI  systems,  280 
Variable  scoping,  32-33 

dynamic,  18,  33 
Verification  of  synthesized  code 

in  DEDALUS,  355 

in  Programmer's  Apprentice,  344-347 

of  synthesized  program  in  AP,  320 
Verification  trees  in  EXCHECK,  289 
Version  space,  121 
Very  high  level  language,  315 

AP2,  337 

in  DEDALUS,  355 

for  program  specification,  300,  309 

in  PSI,  326 

SSL  in  Protosystem  I,  364-369 

V,  334 
Vision  in  the  SRI  computer-based 

consultant,  153 
VM,  180,  206 

Well-formed  programs  in  SAFE,  338-340 
WEST,  232,  234,  254-260,  261,  267,  292 

evaluation  of,  260 

WEST-I,  230,  231 
WHY,  229,  234,  235,  241,  242-246,  267 

sample  dialogue  from,  243-244 
WUMPUS,  230,  234,  261-266,  267,  288,  292 
WUSOR,  261-266,  292 

sample  protocol  from,  264-265 

X-ray  image  analysis,  177 

Zero-order  theory  of  mass  spectrometry,  118 


ABOUT  THIS  BOOK 


The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence  was  designed  and  edited  by  Dianne 
Kanerva,  who  also  established  the  production  procedures  and  managed  the 
production  team  that  typeset  the  volumes. 

The  Handbook  is  unusual  in  that,  from  the  soliciting  and  writing  of 
manuscripts  through  the  production  of  camera-ready  copy,  it  was  prepared 
entirely  through  the  facilities  of  the  three  computer  systems  (SUMEX,  SCORE, 
and  SAIL)  available  to  the  Heuristic  Programming  Project  at  Stanford  Univer- 
ity.  Volumes  II  and  III  were  typeset  at  the  Department  of  Computer  Science 
using  Donald  Knuth's  Tau  Epsilon  Chi  (TgX),  a  computer-based  typesetting 
system  designed  for  mathematical  text.  The  text  of  the  volumes  is  set  in 
the  Computer  Modern  family  of  fonts  designed  by  Knuth  with  his  META- 
FONT  system.  Intermediate  copy  was  produced  with  a  Xerox  Dover  laser 
printer;  final  camera-ready  copy  was  produced  with  an  Alphatype  CRS  photo- 
typesetter. 

Jose  Gonzalez  was  responsible  for  tailoring  and  implementing  a  TgX 
macro  package  designed  by  Max  Diaz  to  the  requirements  of  the  Handbook. 
Gonzalez  prepared  the  camera-ready  copy  of  Volumes  II  and  III  of  the  Hand- 
book and  participated  in  editing.  Dikran  Karagueuzian  prepared  and  typeset 
the  bibliographies  and  name  indexes  of  these  last  two  volumes.  The  other 
individuals  who  participated  in  typesetting  the  Handbook  were  David  Eppstein 
(especially  the  design  of  macros  for  the  figures  in  Chap.  XV  and  for  the 
indexes),  Jonni  Kanerva  (especially  the  layout  and  typesetting  of  Chap.  XIIl), 
and  Janet  Feigenbaum  and  Barbara  Laddaga  (especially  the  initial  applica- 
tion of  T^X  to  the  task).  Christopher  Tucci  operated  the  Alphatype  CRS 
photo  typesetter . 

Printing,  binding,  jacket  design,  and  artwork  are  by  the  publisher,  William 
Kaufmann,  Inc. 


428 


The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence 

Volumes  I  and  II  by  Avron  Barr  and  Edward  A.  Feigenbaum 
Volume  HI  by  Paul  R.  Cohen  and  Edward  A.  Feigenbaum 


VOLUME  I 


I.  Introduction 

A.  Artificial  Intelligence 

B.  The  AI  Handbook 

C.  The  AI  literature 

II.  Search 

A.  Overview 

B.  Problem  representation 

1.  State-space  representation 

2.  Problem-reduction  representation 

3.  Game  trees 

C.  Search  methods 

1.  Blind  state-space  search 

2.  Blind  AND/OR  graph  search 

3.  Heuristic  state-space  search 

a.  Basic   concepts  in   heuristic  search 

b.  A* — Optimal  search  for  an  optimal  solution 

c.  Relaxing  the  optimality  requirement 

d.  Bidirectional  search 

4.  Heuristic  search  of  an  AND/OR  graph 

5.  Game  tree  search 

a.  Minimax  procedure 

b.  Alpha-beta  pruning 

c.  Heuristics  in  game  tree  search 

D.  Sample  search  programs 

1.  Logic  Theorist 

2.  General  Problem  Solver 

3.  Gelernter's  geometry  theorem-proving  machine 

4.  Symbolic  integration  programs 

5.  STRIPS 

6.  ABSTRIPS 

DI.    Knowledge   Representation 

A.  Overview 

B.  Survey  of  representation  techniques 

C.  Representation  schemes 

1.  Logic 

2.  Procedural  representations 

3.  Semantic  networks 

4.  Production  systems 

5.  Direct  (analogical)  representations 

6.  Semantic  primitives 

7.  Frames  and  scripts 

rV.    Understanding    Natural   Language 

A.   Overview 

R.  Machine  translation 

C.  Grammars 

1.  Formal  grammars 

2.  Transformational  grammars 

3.  Systemic  grammar 

4.  Case  grammars 

D.  Parsing 

1.  Overview  of  parsing  techniques 

2.  Augmented  transition  networks 


3.  The  General  Syntactic  Processor 

E.  Text  generation 

F.  Natural  language  processing  systems 

1.  Early  natural  language  systems 

2.  Wilks's  machine  translation  system 

3.  LUNAR 

4.  SHRDLU 

5.  MARGIE 

6.  SAM  and  PAM 

7.  LIFER 

Understanding   Spoken    Language 

A.  Overview 

B.  Systems  architecture 

C.  The  ARPA  SUR  projects 

1.  HEARSAY 

2.  HARPY 

3.  HWIM 

4.  The  SRI/SDC  speech  systems 


volume    n 


VI.    Programming   Languages   for   AI   Research 

A.  Overview 

B.  LISP 

C.  AI  programming-language  features 

1.  Overview 

2.  Data  structures 

3.  Control  structures 

4.  Pattern  matching 

5.  Programming  environment 

D.  Dependencies  and  assumptions 

VQ.    Applications-oriented   AI   Research:    Science 

A.  Overview 

B.  TEIRESIAS 

C.  Applications  in   chemistry 

1.  Chemical  analysis 

2.  The  DENDRAL  programs 

a.  Heuristic  DENDRAL 

b.  CONGEN  and  its  extensions 

c.  Meta-DENDRAL 

3.  CRYSALIS 

4.  Applications  in  organic  synthesis 

D.  Other  scientific  applications 

1.  MACSYMA 

2.  The  SRI  Computer-based  Consultant 

3.  PROSPECTOR 

4.  Artificial  Intelligence  in  database  management 

Vill.   Applications-oriented   AI   Research:    Medicine 

A.  Overview 

B.  Medical  systems 

1.  MYCIN 

2.  CASNET 

3.  INTERNIST 


1. 

Present  Illness  Program 

5. 

Digitalis  Therapy  Advisor 

6. 

IRIS 

7. 

EXPERT 

DC.   , 

\.pplications-oriented   AI   Research:    Education 

A. 

Overview 

B. 

ICAI  systems  design 

C. 

Intelligent  CAI  systems 

1. 

SCHOLAR 

2. 

WHY 

3. 

SOPHIE 

4. 

WEST 

5. 

WUMPUS 

6. 

GUIDON 

7. 

BUGGY 

8. 

EXCHECK 

D.   Other  applications  of  AI  to  education 

X.   Automatic   Programming 

A.  Overview 

B.  Methods  of  program  specification 

C.  Basic  approaches 

D.  Automatic  programming  systems 

1.  PSI  and  CHI 

2.  SAFE 

3.  The  Programmer's  Apprentice 

4.  PECOS 

5.  DEDALUS 

6.  Protosystem  I 

7.  NLPQ 

8.  LIBRA 


volume    m 


XI.    Models   of  Cognition 

A.  Overview 

B.  General  Problem  Solver 

C.  Opportunistic  problem  solving 

D.  EPAM 

E.  Semantic  network  models  of  memory 

1.  Quillian's  semantic  memory  system 

2.  HAM 

3.  ACT 

4.  MEMOD 

F.  Belief  systems 

XH.   Automatic   Deduction 

A.  Overview 

B.  The  resolution  rule  of  inference 

C.  Nonresolution  theorem   proving 

D.  The  Boyer-Moore  Theorem  Prover 

E.  Nonmonotonic  logics 

F.  Logic  programming 

Xm.   Vision 

A.  Overview 

B.  Blocks-world  understanding 

1.  Roberts 

2.  Guzman 

3.  Falk 

4.  Huffman-Clowes 


5.  Waltz 

6.  Shirai 

7.  Mack  worth 

8.  Kanade 

C.  Early  processing  of  visual  data 

1.  Visual  input 

2.  Color 

3.  Preprocessing 

4.  Edge  detection  and  line  finding 

5.  Region  analysis 

6.  Texture 

D.  Representation  of  scene  characteristics 

1.  Intrinsic   images 

2.  Motion 

3.  Stereo  vision 

4.  Range  finders 

5.  Shape- from  methods 

6.  Three-dimensional  shape  description 

and  recognition 

E.  Algorithms  for  vision 

1.  Pyramids  and  quad  trees 

2.  Template  matching 

3.  Linguistic  methods  for  computer  vision 

4.  Relaxation  algorithms 

F.  Devices  and  systems 

1.  Robotic  vision 

2.  Organization  and  control  of  vision  systems 

3.  ACRONYM 

XTV.    Learning   and   Inductive   Inference 

A.  Overview 

B.  Rote  learning 

1.  Issues 

2.  Rote  learning  in  Samuel's  Checkers  Player 

C.  Learning  by  taking  advice 

1.  Issues 

2.  Mostow's  operationalizer 

D.  Learning  from  examples 

1.  Issues 

2.  Learning  in  control 

and  pattern-recognition  systems 

3.  Learning  single  concepts 

a.  Version  space 

b.  Data-driven  knowledge-space  operators 

c.  Generating  and  testing  plausible  hypotheses 

d.  Schema  instantiation 

4.  Learning  multiple  concepts 

a.  AQ11 

b.  Meta-DENDRAL 

c.  AM 

5.  Learning  to  perform  multiple-step  tasks 

a.  Samuel's  Checkers  Player 

b.  Waterman's  Poker  Player 

c.  HACKER 

d.  LEX 

e.  Grammatical   inference 

XV.    Planning   and   Problem    Solving 

A.  Overview 

B.  STRIPS  and  ABSTRIPS 

C.  Nonhierarchical  planning 

D.  Hierarchical  planners 

1.  NOAH 

2.  MOLGEN 

E.  Refinement  of  skeletal  plans 


"As  to  artificial  intelligence,  we  have  hardly  begun  to  under- 
stand what  this  abundant  and  cheap  intellectual  power  will  do  to 
our  lives.  It  has  already  started  to  change  physically  the  research 
laboratories  and  the  manufacturing  plants.  It  is  difficult  for  the 
mind  to  grasp  the  ultimate  consequences  for  man  and 
society  .  .  ." 

—Jean  Riboud,  Chairman  and  President 
Schlumberger  Limited 


What  is  a  "heuristic  problem-solving  program?"  How  do  com- 
puters understand  English?  What  are  "semantic  nets"  or 
"frames?"  Can  computer  programs  outperform  human  ex- 
perts? Such  questions — asked  by  scientists,  engineers,  students, 
and  hobbyists  encountering  Artificial  Intelligence  for  the  first 
time — can  now  be  readily  answered  by  The  Handbook  of 
Artificial  Intelligence,  a  work  which  makes  the  full  scope  of  im- 
portant techniques  and  concepts  of  AI  available  for  the  first 
time  to  the  rapidly  expanding  world  of  computer  technologists 
and  users. 

The  scope  of  this  handbook  is  broad:  over  two  hundred  short  ar- 
ticles covering  all  of  the  important  ideas,  techniques,  and 
systems  developed  during  twenty-five  years  of  research  in  the  AI 
field.  The  articles  are  written  for  people  with  no  background  in 
AI.  Some  articles  serve  as  overviews,  discussing  the  various 
approaches  within  a  subfield,  the  issues,  and  the  problems.  The 
handbook  is  a  reference  work,  a  textbook,  a  guide  to  program- 
ming techniques  and  to  the  extensive  literature  of  the  field,  and  a 
book  for  intellectual  browsing.  Jargon  has  been  eliminated  in 
each  of  the  short,  penetrating  articles,  and  the  hierarchical 
organization  of  the  book  allows  readers  to  choose  how  deeply 
they  wish  to  delve  into  a  particular  subject. 

Conceived  and  produced  at  Stanford  University's  Department 
of  Computer  Science,  with  contributions  from  universities  and 
laboratories  across  the  nation,  The  Handbook  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  promises  to  become  the  standard  reference  work  in 
the  rapidly  growing  AI  field. 


ISBN  0-86576-006-3 


William  Kaufmann,  Inc.     •    95  First  Street    •    Los  Altos,  California 


