T 


©if. 


J    L 


©dk 


Avron 
oarr^ 

rEdwa.rcl  A. 
reigenbaurn 


^H 


VOLUME 


Avron 
5arr& 

Fdwqrd  A 

reigenboum 


This  three-volume  work  contains  some  200 
articles  on  AI  research — the  design  of  com- 
puter programs  that  exhibit  near-human  levels 
of  intelligence.  Each  article  describes  a  key 
concept,  an  important  programming  techni- 
que, or  one  of  the  outstanding  examples  of  AI 
programs.  In  addition,  there  are  overview  ar- 
ticles about  approaches  within  a  subfield,  the 
issues,  and  the  problems. 

Volume  I  contains  five  chapters,  as  well  as 
an  index  and  bibliography.  The  first  chapter 
discusses  the  goals  of  AI  research,  the  history 
of  the  field,  and  the  current  active  areas  of 
research.  It  includes  an  article  on  The  Hand- 
book itself  that  describes  how  the  book  is 
organized.  Finally,  there  is  an  article  on  the 
literature  of  the  field,  explaining  how  to  access 
journal  articles  and  technical  reports  for  fur- 
ther reading. 

Chapters  two  and  three  cover  the  key  con- 
cept of  "search,"  computer  problem-solving 
techniques,  search-space  and  problem- 
reduction  algorithms,  heuristic  search  and 
minimax  methods,  computer  implementations 
of  search  techniques,  techniques  for  represent- 
ing knowledge  in  computer  programs,  basic 
representation  paradigms  in  AI,  mathematical 
knowledge,  semantic  networks,  production 
systems,  frames,  etc. 

Chapter  four  describes  AI  research  on 
"natural  languages":  grammars  and  parsing 
techniques  that  have  been  employed  in  AI  pro- 
grams, programs  that  translate  from  one 
language  to  another,  methods  for 
"generating"  text  to  express  what  the  com- 
puter wants  to  say,  including  the  ten  most  im- 
portant programs  in  this  area. 

Finally,  Chapter  five  discusses  the  design  of 
programs  that  understand  spoken  language. 
Major  projects  are  all  described  in  some  detail, 
and  the  chapter's  overview  article  discusses 
current  status,  problems,  and  directions  of 
research. 


Systemic  grammar 
I.  Case  grammars 
Parsing 

Overview  of  parsing  techniques 
}.  Augmented  transition  networks 

The  General  Syntactic  Processor 
Text  generation 
Natural  language  processing  systems 

Early  natural  language  systems 
I.  Wilks's  machine  translation  system 

LUNAR 

SHRDLU 
;.  MARGIE 
!.  SAM  and  PAM 

LIFER 


iderstanding  Spoken  Language 

)verview 

peech  systems  architecture 

^he  ARPA  SUR  projects 

HEARSAY 

HARPY 

HWIM 

The  SRI/SDC  speech  systems 


ial   Intelligence 


volume  n 


rogramming  Languages  for  AI  Research 

Historical  overview 

features  of  AI  programming  languages 

.  Overview  and  comparison 

.  Data  structures 

.  Control  structures 

.  Pattern  matching 

.  Programming  environment 

.  Truth  maintenance 

Vlajor  AI  programming  languages 

LISP 

PLANNER  and  CONNIVER 

QLISP 

SAIL 

POP-2 

FUZZY 


ipplications-oriented  AI  Research:  Science  and  Mathematit 

Overview  of  applications-oriented  AI  research 
TEIRESIAS-Issues  in  designing  expert  systems 
Research  on  applications  in  chemistry 

Applications  in  chemical  analysis 

The  DENDRAL  programs 

a.  DENDRAL 

b.  CONGEN  and  its  extensions 

c.  Meta-DENDRAL 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2012 


http://archive.org/details/handbookofartific01barr 


The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence 


The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence 


Volume  I 


Edited  by 

Avron  Barr   and  Edward  A.  Feigenbaum 

Department  of  Computer  Science 
Stanford  University 


HeurisTech  Press  William  Kaufmann,  Inc. 

Stanford,  California  Los  Altos,  California 


Library  of  Congress  Cataloging  in  Publication  Data: 

The  handbook  of  artificial  intelligence. 

Bibliography:  p.  363 

Includes  index. 

1.  Artificial  intelligence.     I.  Barr,  Avron,  1949- 

n.  Feigenbaum,  Edward  A. 
Q335.H36  001.53'5  80-28621 

ISBN  0-86576-004-7  (set) 
ISBN  0-86576-005-5  (Vol.  I) 


Copyright  ©  1981  by  William  Kaufmann,  Inc. 


All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  publication  may  be 
reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system,  or  transmitted, 
in  any  form  or  by  any  means,  electronic,  mechanical, 
photocopying,  recording,  or  otherwise,  without  the  prior 
written  permission  of  the  publisher.  For  further  infor- 
mation, write  to:  Permissions,  William  Kaufmann,  Inc., 
One  First  Street,  Los  Altos,  California  94022. 

10  987654321 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


To  the  graduate  students 


CONTENTS   OF  VOLUME  I 


List  of  Contributors  /  ix 
Preface  /  xi 

I.  Introduction  /  1 

A.  Artificial  Intelligence  /  3 

B.  The  AI  Handbook  /  12 

C.  The  AI  literature  /  14 

E.  Search  /  19 

A.  Overview  /  21 

B.  Problem  representation  /  32 

1.  State-space  representation  /  32 

2.  Problem- reduction  representation  /  36 

3.  Game  trees  /  43 

C.  Search  methods  /  46 

1.  Blind  state-space  search  /  46 

2.  Blind  AND/OR  Graph  search  /  54 

3.  Heuristic  state- space  search  /  58 

a.  Basic  concepts  in  heuristic  search  /  58 

b.  A* — Optimal  search  for  an  optimal  solution  /  64 

c.  Relaxing  the  optimality  requirement  /  67 

d.  Bidirectional  search  /  72 

4.  Heuristic  search  of  an  AND/OR  graph  /  74 

5.  Game  tree  search  /  84 

a.  Minimax  procedure  /  84 

b.  Alpha-beta  pruning  /  88 

c.  Heuristics  in  game  tree  search  /  94 

D.  Sample  search  programs  /  109 

1.  Logic  Theorist     /  109 

2.  General  Problem  Solver  /  113 

3.  Gelernter's  geometry  theorem-proving  machine  /  119 

4.  Symbolic  integration  programs  /  123 

5.  STRIPS  /  128 

6.  ABSTRIPS  /  135 


viii  Contents 


m.  Knowledge  Representation  /  141 

A.  Overview  /  143 

B.  Survey  of  representation  techniques  /  153 

C.  Representation  schemes  /  160 

1.  Logic  /  160 

2.  Procedural  representations  /  172 

3.  Semantic  networks  /  180 

4.  Production  systems  /  190 

5.  Direct  (analogical)  representations  /  200 

6.  Semantic  primitives  /  207 

7.  Frames  and  scripts  /  216 

IV.  Understanding  Natural  Language  /  223 

A.  Overview  /  225 

B.  Machine  translation  /  233 

C.  Grammars  /  239 

1.  Formal  grammars  /  239 

2.  Transformational  grammars  /  245 

3.  Systemic  grammar  /  249 

4.  Case  grammars  /  252 

D.  Parsing  /  256 

1.  Overview  of  parsing  techniques  /  256 

2.  Augmented  transition  networks  /  263 

3.  The  General  Syntactic  Processor  /  268 

E.  Text  generation  /  273 

F.  Natural  language  processing  systems  /  281 

1.  Early  natural  language  systems  /  281 

2.  Wilks's  machine  translation  system  /  288 

3.  LUNAR  /  292 

4.  SHRDLU  /  295 

5.  MARGIE  /  300 

6.  SAM  and  PAM  /  306 

7.  LIFER  /  316 

V.  Understanding  Spoken  Language  /  323 

A.  Overview  /  325 

B.  Systems  architecture  /  332 

C.  The  ARPA  SUR  projects  /  343 

1.  HEARSAY  /  343 

2.  HARPY  /  349 

3.  HWIM  /  353 

4.  The  SRI/SDC  speech  systems  /  358 

Bibliography  for  Volume  I  /  363 
Name  Index  for  Volume  1/391 
Subject  Index  for  Volume  I  /  397 


LIST  OF  CONTRIBUTORS 


The  following  people  have  made  the  Handbook  a  reality.  Together,  over 
the  last  five  years,  they  have  combed  the  entire  literature  of  AI  and 
have  attempted  to  make  a  coherent  presentation  of  this  very  diverse 
field.  These  researchers  and  students,  from  Stanford  and  other  AI 
centers,  have  contributed  to  Volumes  I  and  n  or  are  now  engaged  in 
preparing  Volume  HI  (being  edited  by  Paul  R.  Cohen). 


Chapter  Editors 


Janice  Aikins 

James  S.  Bennett 

Victor  Ciesielski  (Rutgers  U) 

William  J.  Clancey 

Paul  R.  Cohen 

James  E.  Davidson 

Thomas  Dietterich 


Robert  Elschlager 
Lawrence  Fagan 
Anne  v.d.L.  Gardner 
Takeo  Kanade  (CMU) 
Jorge  Phillips 
Steve  Tappel 
Stephen  Westfold 


Contributors 


Robert  Anderson  (Rand) 

Douglas  Appelt 

David  Arnold 

Michael  Ballantyne  (u  Texas) 

David  Barstow  (Schlumberger) 

Peter  Biesel  (Rutgers  U) 
Lee  Blaine  (IMSSS) 

W.  W.  Bledsoe  (U  Texas) 

Rodney  Brooks 
Bruce  Buchanan 
Richard  Chestek 
Kenneth  Clarkson 
Randall  Davis  (MIT) 
Gerard  Dechen 
Johan  de  Kleer  (Xerox) 


Jon  Doyle 

R.  Geoff  Dromey  (u  Wollongong) 

Richard  Duda  (Fairchild) 

Robert  Engelmore 

Ramez  El-Masri  (Honeywell) 

Susan  Epstein  (Rutgers  U) 

Robert  Filman  (Indiana  U) 

Fritz  Fisher 

Christian  Freksa  (UC  Berkeley) 

Peter  Friedland 

Richard  Gabriel 

Michael  Genesereth 

Neil  Goldman  (ISI) 

Ira  Goldstein  (Xerox) 

George  Heidorn  (IBM) 


List  of  Contributors 


Douglas  Hofstadter  (Indiana  U) 
Elaine  Kant  (CMU) 
William  Laaser  (Xerox) 
Douglas  Lenat 
William  Long  (MIT) 
Robert  London 
Pamela  McCorduck 
Robert  Moore  (SRI) 
Richard  Pattis 
Neil  C.  Rowe 
Gregory  Ruth  (MIT) 
Daniel  Sagalowicz  (SRI) 
Behrokh  Samadi 


William  Scherlis  (CMU) 
Andrew  Silverman 
Donald  Smith  (Rutgers  U) 
Phillip  Smith  (U  Waterloo) 
Reid  G.   Smith  (Canadian  DREA) 
William  Swartout  (MIT) 
William  van  Melle 
Richard  Waldinger  (SRI) 
Richard  Waters  (MIT) 
Sholom  Weiss  (Rutgers  U) 
David  Wilkins  (SRI) 
Terry  Winograd 


Reviewers 


Harold  Abelson  (MIT) 
Saul  Amarel  (Rutgers  U) 
Robert  Balzer  (ISI) 
Harry  Barrow  (Fairchild) 
Thomas  Binford 
Daniel  Bobrow  (Xerox) 
John  Seely  Brown  (Xerox) 
Richard  Burton  (Xerox) 
Lewis  Creary 
Andrea  diSessa  (MIT) 
Daniel  Dolata  (UC  Santa  Cruz) 
Lee  Erman  (ISI) 
Adele  Goldberg  (Xerox) 
Cordell  Green  (SCI) 
Norman  Haas  (SRI) 
Kenneth  Kahn  (MIT) 


Jonathan  King 

Casimir  Kulikowski  (Rutgers  U) 

Brian  P.  McCune  (Al&DS) 

Donald  Michie  (U  Edinburgh) 

Nils  Nilsson  (SRI) 

Glen  Ouchi  (UC  Santa  Cruz) 

Ira  Pohl  (UC  Santa  Cruz) 

Herbert  Simon  (CMU) 

David  E.  Smith 

Dennis  Smith 

Mark  Stefik  (Xerox) 

Albert  Stevens  (BBN) 

Allan  Terry 

Perry  Thorndyke  (Rand) 

Donald  Walker  (SRI) 

Keith  Wescourt  (Rand) 


Production 


Lester  Ernest 
Marion  Hazen 
David  Fuchs 
Dianne  Kanerva 


Roy  Nordblom 
Thomas  Rindfleisch 
Ellen  Smith 
Helen  Tognetti 


PREFACE 


Artificial  Intelligence  is  of  growing  interdisciplinary  interest  and 
practical  importance.  People  with  widely  varying  backgrounds  and  pro- 
fessions are  discovering  new  ideas  and  new  tools  in  this  young  science. 
Theory-minded  psychologists  have  developed  new  models  of  the  mind 
based  on  the  fundamental  concepts  of  AI — symbol  systems  and  infor- 
mation processing.  Linguists  are  also  interested  in  these  basic  notions, 
as  well  as  in  AI  work  in  computational  linguistics,  aimed  at  producing 
programs  that  actually  understand  language.  And  philosophers,  in 
considering  the  progress,  problems,  and  potential  of  this  work  toward 
nonhuman  intelligence,  have  sometimes  found  new  perspectives  on  the 
age-old  problems  of  the  nature  of  mind  and  knowledge. 

In  other  spheres  of  activity,  people  often  first  come  across  AI  in  the 
form  of  some  "expert"  system  that  is  being  applied  experimentally  in 
their  own  area — chemical  data  interpretation,  symbolic  integration, 
infectious  disease  diagnosis,  DNA  sequencing,  computer  systems  debug- 
ging, structural  engineering,  computer-chip  design,  and  so  on.  As  the 
cost  of  computation  continues  to  fall,  many  new  computer  applications 
become  viable.  Since,  for  many  of  these,  there  are  no  mathematical 
"cores"  to  structure  the  calculational  use  of  the  computer,  such  areas 
will  inevitably  be  served  by  symbolic  models  and  symbolic  inference 
techniques.  Yet  those  who  understand  symbolic  computation  have  been 
speaking  largely  to  themselves  for  the  first  25  years  of  AI's  history.  We 
feel  that  it  is  urgent  for  AI  to  "go  public"  in  the  manner  intended  by 
this  three-volume  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence. 


xii  Preface 

Since  the  Handbook  project  began  in  1975,  dozens  of  researchers 
have  labored  to  produce  short,  jargon- free  explanations  of  AI  pro- 
gramming techniques  and  concepts.  With  these  volumes,  we  have  tried 
to  build  bridges  to  be  crossed  by  engineers,  by  professionals  and 
scientists  in  other  fields,  and  by  our  own  colleagues  in  computer  science. 
We  have  tried  to  cover  the  breadth  and  depth  of  AI,  presenting  general 
overviews  of  the  scientific  issues,  as  well  as  detailed  discussions  of 
particular  techniques  and  exemplary  computer  systems.  And,  most 
important,  we  have  presented  the  key  concepts — search,  divide-and- 
conquer,  semantic  nets,  means-ends  analysis,  hierarchical  planning,  ATNs, 
procedural  knowledge,  blackboard  architecture,  scripts  and  frames,  goal- 
directed  and  data-driven  processing,  learning,  and  many  more — in  the 
context  of  their  actual  application  in  AI.  If  they  were  presented  more 
abstractly,  the  unique  perspective  afforded  by  AI  research  on  these 
universal  ideas  would  be  lost.  Throughout,  we  have  tried  to  keep  in 
mind  the  reader  who  is  not  a  specialist  in  AI. 

In  short,  we  have  tried  to  present  a  survey  of  AI  research  that  is 
motivated  historically  and  scientifically,  without  attempting  to  present  a 
new  synthesis  of  this  young,  multifaceted,  rapidly  changing  field.  One 
can  view  these  Handbook  volumes  as  an  encyclopedia  of  AI  programming 
techniques,  their  successful  applications,  some  of  their  limitations,  and 
the  computational  concepts  that  have  been  used  to  describe  them. 
Readers  from  different  fields  will  interpret  these  data  in  different 
ways — we  hope  that  many  of  you  will  find  useful  new  ideas  and  new 
perspectives. 

The  Handbook  contains  several  different  kinds  of  articles.  Key  AI 
concepts  and  techniques  are  described  in  core  articles  (e.g.,  heuristic 
search,  semantic  nets).  Important  individual  AI  programs  (e.g.,  SHRDLU, 
MACSYMA,  PROSPECTOR)  are  presented  in  separate  articles  that  indi- 
cate, among  other  things,  the  designer's  goals,  the  techniques  employed, 
and  the  reasons  why  the  program  is  important.  The  problems  and 
approaches  in  each  major  area  are  discussed  in  overview  articles,  which 
should  be  particularly  useful  to  those  who  seek  a  summary  of  the 
underlying  issues  that  motivate  AI  research. 

We  intend  that  the  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence  be  a  living 
and  changing  reference  work.  In  particular,  we  hope  that  our  colleagues 
will  take  time  to  alert  us  to  errors  we  have  made,  of  omission  or 
commission,  and  that  we  have  an  opportunity  to  correct  these  in  future 
editions. 


Preface  xiii 


Acknowledgments 

Many  people  have  contributed  to  the  Handbook  project.  On  pages 
ix-x  is  an  alphabetical  list  of  those  who  have  been  involved  so  far, 
including  article  contributors,  reviewers,  and  the  chapter  editors  who 
have  spent  months  working  the  individual  chapters  into  coherent  pre- 
sentations of  a  particular  AI  subarea.  The  following  is  as  accurate  a 
reconstruction  as  possible  of  the  contributions  to  this  first  volume  over 
the  last  five  years. 

The  "Search"  chapter  was  written  by  Anne  Gardner,  starting  from 
some  articles  prepared  for  a  problem  seminar  in  the  spring  of  1975. 
Background  material  was  made  available  by  Nils  Nilsson,  who  also  read 
earlier  drafts,  as  did  Bruce  Buchanan,  Lewis  Creary,  James  Davidson, 
Ira  Pohl,  Reid  Smith,  Mark  Stefik,  and  David  Wilkins. 

"Representation  of  Knowledge"  was  edited  by  Avron  Barr  and  James 
Davidson.  The  article  on  logic  was  written  by  Robert  Filman,  semantic 
nets  by  Douglas  Appelt,  semantic  primitives  by  Anne  Gardner,  and 
frames  by  James  Bennett.  Mark  Stefik  carefully  reviewed  an  early  draft 
of  this  chapter. 

Anne  Gardner,  James  Davidson,  and  Avron  Barr  edited  "Under- 
standing Natural  Language."  Articles  were  worked  on  by  Janice  Aikins, 
Rodney  Brooks,  William  Clancey,  Paul  Cohen,  Gerard  Dechen,  Richard 
Gabriel,  Norman  Haas,  Douglas  Hofstadter,  Andrew  Silverman,  Phillip 
Smith,  Reid  Smith,  William  van  Melle,  and  David  Wilkins.  Neil  Gold- 
man reviewed  an  early  draft  of  the  chapter.  Terry  Winograd  made 
background  material  available  and  also  reviewed  an  early  draft. 

"Understanding  Spoken  Language"  was  prepared  by  Lawrence  Fagan, 
Paul  Cohen,  and  Avron  Barr,  with  helpful  comments  from  James  Ben- 
nett, Lee  Erman,  and  Donald  Walker. 

The  professional  editor  responsible  for  the  form  of  the  final  copy, 
including  electronic  typesetting  and  page  design,  was  Dianne  Kanerva. 
Earlier  in  the  project's  history,  professional  editing  on  several  chapters 
was  done  by  Helen  Tognetti.  Ellen  Smith  also  assisted  in  this  impor- 
tant work. 

The  book  was  set  in  Computer  Modern  fonts  (Knuth,  1979)  and  was 
produced  directly  on  a  computer-driven  phototypesetting  device.  Pub- 
lisher William  Kaufmann  and  his  staff  have  been  patient  and  helpful 
throughout  this  process. 


xiv  Preface 

The  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  of  the  Department  of  De- 
fense and  the  Biotechnology  Resources  Program  of  the  National  Insti- 
tutes of  Health  supported  the  Handbook  project  as  part  of  their  long- 
standing and  continuing  efforts  to  develop  and  disseminate  the  science 
and  technology  of  AI.  Earlier  versions  of  Handbook  material  were 
distributed  as  technical  reports  of  the  Stanford  Computer  Science 
Department.  The  electronic  text-preparation  facilities  available  to  Stan- 
ford computer  scientists  on  the  SAIL,  SCORE,  and  SUMEX  computers 
were  used. 

We  wish  specially  to  acknowledge  Anne  Gardner,  whose  scholarship 
during  the  early  years  of  the  Handbook  project  was  invaluable,  and 
inspirational. 

Finally,  let  us  not  forget  that  many  of  the  programs  described 
herein  as  landmark  events  in  the  history  of  AI  were  labored  over  single- 
handedly  by  graduate  students  trying  to  implement  their  thesis  ideas. 
These  AI  systems  have  consistently  been  among  the  most  complex  and 
innovative  computer  programs  of  their  day.  They  stand  as  a  tribute  to 
the  caliber  and  creativity  of  those  who  have  been  drawn  to  AI  research. 


Chapter  I 


Introduction 


CHAPTER  I:     INTRODUCTION 


A.  Artificial  Intelligence  /  8 

B.  The  AI  Handbook  /  12 

C.  The  AI  Literature  /  14 


A.     ARTIFICIAL  INTELLIGENCE 

Artificial  Intelligence  (AI)  is  the  part  of  computer  science  con- 
cerned with  designing  intelligent  computer  systems,  that  is,  systems  that 
exhibit  the  characteristics  we  associate  with  intelligence  in  human 
behavior — understanding  language,  learning,  reasoning,  solving  problems, 
and  so  on.  Many  believe  that  insights  into  the  nature  of  the  mind  can 
be  gained  by  studying  the  operation  of  such  programs.  Since  the  field 
first  evolved  in  the  mid-1950s,  AI  researchers  have  invented  dozens  of 
programming  techniques  that  support  some  sort  of  intelligent  behavior. 
The  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence  is  an  encyclopedia  of  the  major 
developments  of  the  field's  first  25  years — programs,  programming  tech- 
niques, and  the  computational  concepts  used  to  describe  them. 

Whether  or  not  they  lead  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  mind, 
there  is  every  evidence  that  these  developments  will  lead  to  a  new, 
intelligent  technology  that  may  have  dramatic  effects  on  our  society. 
Experimental  AI  systems  have  already  generated  interest  and  enthusiasm 
in  industry  and  are  being  developed  commercially.  These  experimental 
systems  include  programs  that 

1.  solve   some   hard   problems  in   chemistry,   biology,   geology,   engi- 
neering, and  medicine  at  human-expert  levels  of  performance, 

2.  manipulate    robotic    devices    to   perform    some    useful,    repetitive, 
sensory-motor  tasks,  and 

3.  answer  questions  posed  in  simple  dialects  of  English  (or  French, 
Japanese,  or  any  other  natural  language,  as  they  are  called). 

There  is  every  indication  that  useful  AI  programs  will  play  an  important 
part  in  the  evolving  role  of  computers  in  our  lives — a  role  that  has 
changed,  in  our  lifetimes,  from  remote  to  commonplace  and  that,  if 
current  expectations  about  computing  cost  and  power  are  correct,  is 
likely  to  evolve  further  from  useful  to  essential. 

The  Handbook  is  composed  of  short  articles  about  AI  concepts, 
techniques,  and  systems,  grouped  into  chapters  that  correspond  to  the 
major  subdivisions  of  the  field.  This  first  article  of  the  Handbook 
discusses  what  we  mean  by  "artificial  intelligence,"  both  in  terms  of  the 
interests  and  methods  of  the  people  doing  AI  research  and  in  terms  of 
the  kinds  of  intelligent  programs  they  have  studied.  We  hope  that  this 
brief  introduction  will  elucidate  not  only  the  potentially  dramatic  impact 
of  intelligent  technology   on   society,   but   also   the   possibilities   that  AI 


4  Introduction  I 

research  affords  for  new  insights  into  the  puzzle  that  human  intelligence 
is.  The  other  two  articles  in  this  introductory  chapter  are  meant  as 
study  guides:  One  describes  the  Handbook  itself — its  organization,  what 
is  in  it  and  what  is  not — while  the  second  offers  guides  for  finding  rel- 
evant material  in  the  literature. 

The  Origins  of  Artificial  Intelligence 

Scientific  fields  emerge  as  the  concerns  of  scientists  congeal  around 
various  phenomena.  Sciences  are  not  defined,  they  are  recognized. 
(Newell,  1973a,  p.  1) 

The  intellectual  currents  of  the  times  help  direct  scientists  to  the  study 
of  certain  phenomena.  For  the  evolution  of  AI,  the  two  most  important 
forces  in  the  intellectual  environment  of  the  1930s  and  1940s  were 
mathematical  logic,  which  had  been  under  rapid  development  since  the 
end  of  the  19th  century,  and  new  ideas  about  computation.  The  logical 
systems  of  Frege,  Whitehead  and  Russell,  Tarski,  and  others  showed 
that  some  aspects  of  reasoning  could  be  formalized  in  a  relatively  simple 
framework.  Mathematical  logic  has  continued  to  be  an  active  area  of 
investigation  in  AI,  in  part  because  logico- deductive  systems  have  been 
successfully  implemented  on  computers.  But  even  before  there  were 
computers,  the  mathematical  formalization  of  logical  reasoning  shaped 
people's  conception  of  the  relation  between  computation  and  intelligence. 

Ideas  about  the  nature  of  computation,  due  to  Church,  Turing,  and 
others,  provided  the  link  between  the  notion  of  formalization  of 
reasoning  and  the  computing  machines  about  to  be  invented.  What  was 
essential  in  this  work  was  the  abstract  conception  of  computation  as 
symbol  processing.  The  first  computers  were  numerical  calculators  that 
appeared  to  embody  little,  if  any,  real  intelligence.  But  before  these 
machines  were  even  designed,  Church  and  Turing  had  seen  that  num- 
bers were  an  inessential  aspect  of  computation — they  were  just  one  way 
of  interpreting  the  internal  states  of  the  machine.  Turing,  who  has 
been  called  the  Father  of  AI,  not  only  invented  a  simple,  universal,  and 
nonnumerical  model  of  computation,  but  also  argued  directly  for  the 
possibility  that  computational  mechanisms  could  behave  in  a  way  that 
would  be  perceived  as  intelligent.  Douglas  Hofstadter's  book  Godel, 
Escher,  Bach:  an  Eternal  Golden  Braid  (1979)  gives  a  thorough  and 
fascinating  account  of  the  development  of  these  ideas  about  logic  and 
computation  and  of  their  relation  to  AI. 

As  Allen  Newell  and  Herbert  Simon  point  out  in  the  "Historical 
Addendum"  to  their  classic  work  Human  Problem  Solving  (1972),  there 
were    other    strong    intellectual    currents    from    several    directions    that 


A  Artificial  Intelligence  5 

converged  in  the  middle  of  this  century  in  the  people  who  founded  the 
science  of  Artificial  Intelligence.  The  concepts  of  cybernetics  and  self- 
organizing  systems  of  Wiener,  McCulloch,  and  others  focused  on  the 
macroscopic  behavior  of  "locally  simple"  systems.  The  cyberneticists 
influenced  many  fields  because  their  thinking  spanned  many  fields, 
linking  ideas  about  the  workings  of  the  nervous  system  with  information 
theory  and  control  theory,  as  well  as  with  logic  and  computation.  The 
ideas  of  the  cyberneticists  were  part  of  the  Zeitgeist,  and  in  many  cases 
they  influenced  the  early  workers  in  AI  directly  as  their  teachers. 

What  eventually  connected  these  diverse  ideas  was,  of  course,  the 
development  of  the  computing  machines  themselves,  guided  by  Babbage, 
Turing,  von  Neumann,  and  others.  It  was  not  long  after  the  machines 
became  available  that  people  began  to  try  to  write  programs  to  solve 
puzzles,  play  chess,  and  translate  texts  from  one  language  to  another — 
the  first  AI  programs.  What  was  it  about  computers  that  triggered 
the  development  of  AI?  Many  ideas  about  computing  relevant  to  AI 
emerged  in  the  early  designs — ideas  about  memories  and  processors, 
about  systems  and  control,  and  about  levels  of  languages  and  programs. 
But  the  single  attribute  of  the  new  machines  that  brought  about  the 
emergence  of  a  new  science  was  their  very  complexity,  encouraging  the 
development  of  new  and  more  direct  ways  of  describing  complex 
processes — in  terms  of  complicated  data  structures  and  procedures  with 
hundreds  of  different  steps. 

Computers,  Complexity,  and  Intelligence 

As  Pamela  McCorduck  notes  in  her  entertaining  historical  study  of 
AI,  Machines  Who  Think  (1979),  there  has  been  a  long-standing  con- 
nection between  the  idea  of  complex  mechanical  devices  and  intel- 
ligence. Starting  with  the  fabulously  intricate  clocks  and  mechanical 
automata  of  past  centuries,  people  have  made  an  intuitive  link  between 
the  complexity  of  a  machine's  operation  and  some  aspects  of  their  own 
mental  life.  Over  the  last  few  centuries,  new  technologies  have  resulted 
in  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  complexity  we  can  achieve  in  the  things 
we  build.  Modern  computers  are  orders  of  magnitude  more  complex 
than  anything  man  has  built  before. 

The  first  work  on  computers  in  this  century  focused  on  the  kinds  of 
numerical  computations  that  had  previously  been  performed  collabo- 
ratively by  teams  of  hundreds  of  clerks,  organized  so  that  each  did  one 
small  subcalculation  and  passed  his  results  on  to  the  clerk  at  the  next 
desk.  Not  long  after  the  dramatic  success  demonstrated  by  the  first  dig- 
ital computers  with  these  elaborate  calculations,  people  began  to  explore 


6  Introduction  I 

the  possibility  of  more  generally  intelligent  mechanical  behavior — could 
machines  play  chess,  prove  theorems,  or  translate  languages? 

They  could,  but  not  very  well.  The  computer  performs  its  calcu- 
lations following  the  step-by-step  instructions  it  is  given — the  method 
must  be  specified  in  complete  detail.  Most  computer  scientists  are  con- 
cerned with  designing  new  algorithms,  new  languages,  and  new  machines 
for  performing  tasks  like  solving  equations  and  alphabetizing  lists — 
tasks  that  people  perform  with  methods  they  can  explicate.  However, 
people  cannot  specify  how  they  decide  which  move  to  make  in  a  chess 
game  or  how  they  determine  that  two  sentences  "mean  the  same  thing." 

The  realization  that  the  detailed  steps  of  almost  all  intelligent 
human  activity  were  unknown  marked  the  beginning  of  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence as  a  separate  part  of  computer  science.  AI  researchers  inves- 
tigate different  kinds  of  computation  and  different  ways  of  describing 
computation  in  an  effort  not  just  to  create  intelligent  artifacts,  but  also 
to  understand  what  intelligence  is.  Their  basic  tenet  is  that  human 
intellectual  capacity  will  be  best  described  in  the  terms  that  we  invent 
to  describe  AI  programs.  However,  we  are  just  beginning  to  learn 
enough  about  those  programs  to  know  how  to  describe  them.  The 
computational  ideas  discussed  in  this  book  have  been  used  in  programs 
that  perform  many  different  tasks,  sometimes  at  the  level  of  human 
performance,  often  much  worse.  Most  of  these  methods  are  obviously 
not  the  same  ones  that  people  use  to  perform  the  tasks — some  of  them 
might  be. 

Consider,  for  example,  computer  programs  that  play  chess.  Current 
programs  are  quite  proficient — the  best  experimental  systems  play  at  the 
human  "expert"  level,  but  not  as  well  as  human  chess  "masters."  The 
programs  work  by  searching  through  a  space  of  possible  moves,  that  is, 
considering  the  alternative  moves  and  their  consequences  several  steps 
ahead  in  the  game,  just  as  human  players  do.  Computers  can  search 
through  thousands  of  moves  in  the  same  time  it  takes  human  players  to 
search  through  a  dozen  or  so,  and  techniques  for  efficient  searching 
constitute  some  of  the  core  ideas  of  AI.  The  reason  that  computers 
cannot  beat  the  best  human  players  is  that  looking  ahead  is  not  all 
there  is  to  chess — since  there  are  too  many  possible  moves  to  search 
exhaustively,  alternatives  must  be  evaluated  without  knowing  for  sure 
which  will  lead  to  a  winning  game,  and  this  is  one  of  those  abilities 
that  human  experts  cannot  explicate.  Psychological  studies  have  shown 
that  chess  masters  have  learned  to  "see"  thousands  of  meaningful 
configurations  of  pieces  when  they  look  at  a  chess  position,  which 
presumably  helps  them  decide  on  the  best  move,  but  no  one  has  yet 
designed  a  computer  program  that  can  identify  these  configurations. 


A  Artificial  Intelligence  7 

The  Status  of  Artificial  Intelligence 

Within  most  scientific  disciplines  there  are  several  distinct  areas  of 
research,  each  with  its  own  specific  interests,  research  techniques,  and 
terminology.  In  AI,  these  specializations  include  research  on  language 
understanding,  vision  systems,  problem  solving,  AI  tools  and  program- 
ming languages,  automatic  programming,  and  several  others.  As  is 
apparent  from  its  chapter  headings,  the  Handbook  is  organized  around 
the  different  subareas,  as  are  most  reviews  of  progress  in  AI.  (See,  e.g., 
Nilsson's  thorough,  and  surprisingly  current,  survey  of  AI  research, 
written  in  1974.)  The  following  discussion  of  the  status  of  AI  attempts 
to  cut  across  the  subfields,  identifying  some  aspects  of  intelligent  be- 
havior and  indicating  the  state  of  relevant  AI  research. 

There  is  an  important  philosophical  point  here  that  we  will  sidestep. 
Doing  arithmetic  or  learning  the  capitals  of  all  the  countries  of  the 
world,  for  example,  are  certainly  activities  that  indicate  intelligence  in 
humans.  The  issue  here  is  whether  a  computer  system  that  can  per- 
form these  tasks  can  be  said  to  know  or  understand  anything.  This 
point  has  been  discussed  at  length  (see,  e.g.,  Searle,  1980,  and  appended 
commentary),  and  we  will  avoid  it  here  by  describing  the  behaviors  as 
intelligent  and  not  concerning  ourselves  with  how  to  describe  the  ma- 
chines that  produce  them.  Many  intelligent  activities  besides  numerical 
calculation  and  information  retrieval  have  been  accomplished  by  pro- 
grams. Many  key  thought  processes — like  recognizing  people's  faces  and 
reasoning  by  analogy — are  still  puzzles;  they  are  performed  so  "un- 
consciously" by  people  that  adequate  computational  mechanisms  have 
not  been  postulated  for  them. 

One  word  of  caution.  Like  the  different  subfields  of  AI,  the  dif- 
ferent behaviors  discussed  here  are  not  at  all  independent.  Separating 
them  out  is  just  a  convenient  way  of  indicating  what  current  AI 
programs  can  do  and  what  they  can't  do.  Most  AI  research  projects 
are  concerned  with  many,  if  not  all,  of  these  aspects  of  intelligence. 

Problem  solving.  The  first  big  "successes"  in  AI  were  programs  that 
could  solve  puzzles  and  play  games  like  chess.  Techniques  like  looking 
ahead  several  moves  and  dividing  difficult  problems  into  easier  sub- 
problems  evolved  into  the  fundamental  AI  techniques  of  search  and 
problem  reduction.  Today's  programs  play  championship-level  checkers 
and  backgammon,  as  well  as  very  good  chess.  Another  problem- solving 
program  that  integrates  mathematical  formulas  symbolically  has  attained 
very  high  levels  of  performance  and  is  being  used  by  scientists  and 
engineers  across  the  country.  Some  programs  can  even  improve  their 
performance  with  experience. 


8  Introduction  I 

As  discussed  above,  the  open  questions  in  this  area  involve  capa- 
bilities that  human  players  have  but  cannot  articulate,  like  the  chess 
master's  ability  to  see  the  board  configuration  in  terms  of  meaningful 
patterns.  Another  basic  open  question  involves  the  original  conceptu- 
alization of  a  problem,  called  in  AI  the  choice  of  problem  represen- 
tation. Humans  often  solve  a  problem  by  finding  a  way  of  thinking 
about  it  that  makes  the  solution  easy — AI  programs,  so  far,  must  be 
told  how  to  think  about  the  problems  they  solve  (i.e.,  the  space  in 
which  to  search  for  the  solution). 

Logical  reasoning.  Closely  related  to  problem  and  puzzle  solving 
was  early  work  on  logical  deduction.  Programs  were  developed  that 
could  "prove"  assertions  by  manipulating  a  database  of  facts,  each 
represented  by  discrete  data  structures  just  as  they  are  represented  by 
discrete  formulas  in  mathematical  logic.  These  methods,  unlike  many 
other  AI  techniques,  could  be  shown  to  be  complete  and  consistent. 
That  is,  so  long  as  the  original  facts  were  correct,  the  programs  could 
prove  all  theorems  that  followed  from  the  facts,  and  only  those  theo- 
rems. 

Logical  reasoning  has  been  one  of  the  most  persistently  investigated 
subareas  of  AI  research.  Of  particular  interest  are  the  problems  of 
finding  ways  of  focusing  on  only  the  relevant  facts  in  a  large  database 
and  of  keeping  track  of  the  justifications  for  beliefs  and  updating  them 
when  new  information  arrives. 

Language.  The  domain  of  language  understanding  was  also  inves- 
tigated by  early  AI  researchers  and  has  consistently  attracted  interest. 
Programs  have  been  written  that  answer  questions  posed  in  English  from 
an  internal  database,  that  translate  sentences  from  one  language  to 
another,  that  follow  instructions  given  in  English,  and  that  acquire 
knowledge  by  reading  textual  material  and  building  an  internal  data- 
base. Some  programs  have  even  achieved  limited  success  in  interpreting 
instructions  spoken  into  a  microphone  instead  of  typed  into  the 
computer.  Although  these  language  systems  are  not  nearly  so  good  as 
people  are  at  any  of  these  tasks,  they  are  adequate  for  some 
applications.  Early  successes  with  programs  that  answered  simple 
queries  and  followed  simple  directions,  and  early  failures  at  machine 
translation,  have  resulted  in  a  sweeping  change  in  the  whole  AI 
approach  to  language.  The  principal  themes  of  current  language- 
understanding  research  are  the  importance  of  vast  amounts  of  general, 
commonsense  world  knowledge  and  the  role  of  expectations,  based  on  the 
subject  matter  and  the  conversational  situation,  in  interpreting  sentences. 


A  Artificial  Intelligence  9 

The  state  of  the  art  of  practical  language  programs  is  represented 
by  useful  "front  ends"  to  a  variety  of  software  systems.  These  pro- 
grams accept  input  in  some  restricted  form — they  cannot  handle  some  of 
the  nuances  of  English  grammar  and  are  useful  for  interpreting  sentences 
only  within  a  relatively  limited  domain  of  discourse.  There  has  been 
very  limited  success  at  translating  AI  results  in  language  and  speech 
understanding  programs  into  ideas  about  the  nature  of  human  language 
processing. 

Programming.  Although  perhaps  not  an  obviously  important  aspect 
of  human  cognition,  programming  itself  is  an  important  area  of  re- 
search in  AI.  Work  in  this  field,  called  automatic  programming,  has 
investigated  systems  that  can  write  computer  programs  from  a  variety  of 
descriptions  of  their  purpose — examples  of  input/output  pairs,  high-level 
language  descriptions,  and  even  English  descriptions  of  algorithms. 
Progress  has  been  limited  to  a  few,  fully  worked-out  examples.  Re- 
search on  automatic  programming  may  result  not  only  in  semiautomat- 
ed  software- development  systems,  but  also  in  AI  programs  that  learn 
(i.e.,  modify  their  behavior)  by  modifying  their  own  code.  Related  work 
in  the  theory  of  programs  is  fundamental  to  all  AI  research. 

Learning.  Certainly  one  of  the  most  salient  and  significant  aspects 
of  human  intelligence  is  the  ability  to  learn.  This  is  a  good  example  of 
cognitive  behavior  that  is  so  poorly  understood  that  very  little  progress 
has  been  made  in  achieving  it  in  AI  systems.  There  have  been  several 
interesting  attempts,  including  programs  that  learn  from  examples,  from 
their  own  performance,  and  from  being  told.  But  in  general,  learning  is 
not  noticeable  in  AI  systems. 

Expertise.  Recently  the  area  of  expert  systems,  or  "knowledge 
engineering,"  has  emerged  as  a  road  to  successful  and  useful  applications 
of  AI  techniques.  Typically,  the  user  interacts  with  an  expert  system  in 
a  "consultation  dialogue,"  just  as  he  would  interact  with  a  human  who 
had  some  type  of  expertise — explaining  his  problem,  performing  sug- 
gested tests,  and  asking  questions  about  proposed  solutions.  Current  ex- 
perimental systems  have  achieved  high  levels  of  performance  in  consul- 
tation tasks  like  chemical  and  geological  data  analysis,  computer  system 
configuration,  structural  engineering,  and  even  medical  diagnosis.  Expert 
systems  can  be  viewed  as  intermediaries  between  human  experts,  who 
interact  with  the  systems  in  "knowledge  acquisition"  mode,  and  human 
users  who  interact  with  the  systems  in  "consultation  mode."  Fur- 
thermore, much  research  in  this  area  of  AI  has  focused  on  endowing 
these  systems  with  the  ability  to  explain  their  reasoning,  both  to  make 


10  Introduction  I 

the  consultation  more  acceptable  to  the  user  and  to  help  the  human 
expert  find  errors  in  the  system's  reasoning  when  they  occur. 

Current  research  deals  with  a  variety  of  problems  in  the  design  of 
expert  systems.  These  systems  are  built  through  the  painstaking  inter- 
action of  a  domain  expert,  who  may  not  be  able  to  articulate  all  of  his 
knowledge,  and  the  systems  designer;  the  knowledge-acquisition  process  is 
the  big  bottleneck  in  the  construction  of  expert  systems.  Current 
systems  are  limited  in  scope  and  do  not  have  the  same  sense  as  humans 
have  about  knowing  when  they  might  be  wrong.  New  research  involves 
using  the  systems  to  teach  novices  as  well  as  to  consult  with  prac- 
titioners. 

Robotics  and  vision.  Another  part  of  AI  research  that  is  receiving 
increasing  attention  involves  programs  that  manipulate  robot  devices. 
Research  in  this  field  has  looked  at  everything  from  the  optimal  move- 
ment of  robot  arms  to  methods  of  planning  a  sequence  of  actions  to 
achieve  a  robot's  goals.  Although  more  complex  systems  have  been 
built,  the  thousands  of  robots  that  are  being  used  today  in  industrial 
applications  are  simple  devices  that  have  been  programmed  to  perform 
some  repetitive  task.  Most  industrial  robots  are  "blind,"  but  some  see 
through  a  TV  camera  that  transmits  an  array  of  information  back  to 
the  computer.  Processing  visual  information  is  another  very  active,  and 
very  difficult,  area  of  AI  research.  Programs  have  been  developed  that 
can  recognize  objects  and  shadows  in  visual  scenes,  and  even  identify 
small  changes  from  one  picture  to  the  next,  for  example,  for  aerial 
reconnaissance. 

Systems  and  languages.  In  addition  to  work  directly  aimed  at 
achieving  intelligence,  the  development  of  new  tools  has  always  been  an 
important  aspect  of  AI  research.  Some  of  the  most  important  contri- 
butions of  AI  to  the  world  of  computing  have  been  in  the  form  of  spin- 
offs. Computer- systems  ideas  like  time-sharing,  list  processing,  and 
interactive  debugging  were  developed  in  the  AI  research  environment. 
Specialized  programming  languages  and  systems,  with  features  designed 
to  facilitate  deduction,  robot  manipulation,  cognitive  modeling,  and  so 
on,  have  often  been  rich  sources  of  new  ideas.  Most  recently,  several 
knowledge-representation  languages — computer  languages  for  encoding 
knowledge  and  reasoning  methods  as  data  structures  and  procedures — 
have  been  developed  in  the  last  five  years  to  explore  a  variety  of  ideas 
about  how  to  build  reasoning  programs.  Terry  Winograd's  article 
"Beyond  Programming  Languages"  (1979)  discusses  some  of  his  ideas 
about  the  future  of  computing,  inspired,  in  part,  by  his  AI  research. 


Artificial  Intelligence  11 


Invitation 


There  has  been  much  activity  and  progress  in  the  25-year  history  of 
AI.  And  there  is  more  activity  now  than  ever.  AI  is  a  relatively  well- 
funded  discipline,  principally,  in  the  United  States,  by  the  Defense 
Department's  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  and  other  government 
agencies.  There  are  active  AI  research  groups  in  other  countries,  in- 
cluding Japan,  Canada,  Britain,  France,  Germany,  Australia,  Italy,  and 
the  USSR.  Increasing  research  support  is  coming  from  the  private 
sector,  where  interest  in  using  and  marketing  AI  programs  is  on  the 
rise.  The  real  shortage  is  people — there  are  only  a  few  AI  research 
groups  in  universities  and  corporate  laboratories;  in  terms  of  the  number 
of  people  involved,  the  field  is  still  quite  small. 

So,  let  us  end  this  introduction  with  an  invitation  to  those  of  you 
who  are  not  working  in  AI:  to  join  us  in  this  rapidly  moving  field. 
The  excitement  of  creating  a  powerful  new  technology  is  coupled  in  AI, 
as  perhaps  in  no  other  field  these  days,  with  the  potential  for  stumbling 
upon  new  insights  into  one  of  the  big  questions:  Physicists  ask  what 
kind  of  place  this  universe  is  and  seek  to  characterize  its  behavior 
systematically.  Biologists  ask  what  it  means  for  a  physical  system  to  be 
living.  We  in  AI  wonder  what  kind  of  information-processing  system  can 
ask  such  questions. 


B.     THE  AI  HANDBOOK 

By  the  mid-1970s,  the  science  and  technology  of  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence had  matured  to  the  point  at  which  widespread  and  significant 
application  appeared  to  be  possible.  The  move  to  application,  though 
deemed  desirable  by  both  researchers  and  supporters,  was  inhibited  by 
two  factors.  First,  there  was  no  cadre  of  industrial  scientists  and  engi- 
neers schooled  in  the  principles  and  techniques  of  the  field.  This  was  a 
problem  of  education.  Most  scientists  and  engineers,  though  very  knowl- 
edgeable about  the  "standard"  computer  methods  (e.g.,  numerical  and 
statistical  methods,  simulation  methods),  simply  had  never  heard  about 
symbolic  computation  or  Artificial  Intelligence.  There  were  so  few 
courses  in  so  few  places,  and  so  little  literature  accessible  to  and  com- 
prehensible by  newcomers,  that  ignorance  of  AI  and  how  to  use  it  was 
almost  total.  Second,  too  few  new  people  were  being  trained  in  AI, 
partly  as  a  result  of  the  same  lack  of  written  material  that  could  be 
easily  taught  and  easily  learned. 

The  project  to  write  a  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence  was  begun 
as  an  attempt  to  fill  this  void.  Initially,  the  Handbook  was  conceived  as 
a  self-help  encyclopedia  to  which  the  aspiring  practitioner  could  turn  for 
explanations  of  fundamental  ideas,  descriptions  of  methods,  and  discus- 
sions of  well-known  programs  as  case  studies.  (This  early  goal  has  not 
been  completely  satisfied — within  the  limits  of  our  energy  there  always 
seemed  to  be  a  few  loose  threads  and  uncovered  topics.)  As  work  pro- 
gressed, it  became  clear  that  the  material  would  be  of  great  use  to  the 
Computer  Science  student  studying  AI,  as  an  adjunct  to  a  course  or 
under  the  guidance  of  a  faculty  member,  and  our  focus  shifted  some- 
what toward  this  important  audience. 

The  Handbook  has  turned  out  to  be  the  most  comprehensive  ref- 
erence work  ever  produced  of  the  material  that  constitutes  the  science 
and  technology  of  AI.  But  it  is  not  a  synthesis  of  that  material,  and  it 
is  not  a  text. 

A  typical  chapter  of  the  Handbook  represents,  first,  the  efforts  of 
Stanford  graduate  students  in  AI  to  collect  relevant  material  and  draft 
sections;  second,  the  effort  of  a  chapter  editor  to  clarify,  reorganize, 
often  rewrite  the  draft  material,  and  prepare  useful  overview  sections; 
third,  the  efforts  of  the  Handbook  editors  to  ensure  a  certain  homo- 
geneity of  style,  completeness  of  material,  correctness  of  material  as 
checked   by  specialists   they   consulted,   and   of  course  comprehensibility; 


B  The  AI  Handbook  13 

and  fourth,  the  effort  of  a  professional  book  editor  to  add  the  final 
polish  necessary  for  book  form. 

The  Handbook's  organization,  printed  on  the  inside  covers,  is  not  the 
only  way  to  divide  up  the  material  of  AI.  Some  topics  belong  in  more 
than  one  place.  Other  topics  do  not  fit  comfortably  under  any  of  our 
categories.  We  hope  the  chosen  structure  will  help  the  reader  to  find 
what  he  is  looking  for  most  of  the  time.  When  this  fails,  there  are 
many  cross-references  in  each  article  that  will  point  the  way,  as  well  as 
an  extensive  index  for  each  volume. 

The  literature  references  after  each  article  are  extensive  but  certainly 
not  exhaustive.  We  reference  those  readings  that  we  thought  would  be 
of  most  use  to  our  intended  audience.  The  field  of  Artificial  Intelligence 
is  young  and  its  literature  is  not  immense,  so  the  references  listed  with 
each  article  should  prove  to  be  adequate  indirect  pointers  to  just  about 
everything  published  on  the  subject. 


C.     THE  AI  LITERATURE 

One  of  the  goals  of  the  Handbook  of  Artificial  Intelligence  is  to 
assist  researchers  and  students  in  finding  relevant  material  in  the  lit- 
erature. Artificial  Intelligence  is  a  relatively  young  discipline  and  does 
not  have  a  vast  bibliography.  Nevertheless,  it  is  becoming  increasingly 
difficult  to  find  and  follow  publications  of  interest,  partly  because  of  the 
diversity  of  the  backgrounds  of  researchers  and  the  variety  of  journals 
in  which  they  publish.  Throughout  the  Handbook  there  are  extensive 
citations  of  the  "best  next  things  to  read"  on  each  of  the  topics 
covered.  This  article  is  an  attempt  to  map  out  roughly  the  geography 
of  the  field's  literature  and  to  suggest  further  readings  of  general 
interest. 

Early  Work  (Through  1965) 

The  early  period  of  AI  research,  through  the  mid-1960s,  is  well  rep- 
resented in  the  collections  of  papers  entitled  Computers  and  Thought  and 
Semantic  Information  Processing,  which  were  edited  by  Feigenbaum  and 
Feldman  (1963)  and  Minsky  (1968),  respectively.  Both  collections  con- 
tain papers  about  the  history  of  AI  ideas  as  well  as  republications  of 
reports  on  important  early  AI  systems,  many  of  which  were  done  by 
graduate  students  as  part  of  their  research  for  doctoral  dissertations. 
Human  Problem  Solving  by  Newell  and  Simon  (1972)  also  contains  a 
"Historical  Addendum,"  giving  their  view  of  the  origins  of  the  discipline. 
This  classic  book  on  information  processing  psychology  summarizes  and 
synthesizes  their  15  years  of  pioneering  research  into  computational 
models  of  human  cognition. 

The  series  of  edited  volumes  entitled  Machine  Intelligence  started 
publication  in  1967  and  now  includes  nine  collections  of  papers  by  many 
of  the  most  influential  AI  researchers.  Finally,  McCorduck  (1979)  gives 
an  insightful  history  of  the  early  days  of  AI,  focusing  on  the  researchers 
themselves,  in  her  entertaining  book  Machines  Who  Think. 

The  Middle  Period  (1966-1975) 

The  publication  of  Understanding  Natural  Language  by  Winograd 
(1972)  was  a  landmark  in  the  period  of  extensive  AI  research  in  lan- 
guage processing.  Other  books  describing  related  work  of  this  period 
include   the  collections  of  papers   entitled    Computer  Models   of  Thought 


C  The  AI  Literature  15 

and  Language  (Schank  and  Colby,  1973),  The  Psychology  of  Computer 
Vision  (Winston,  1975),  and  Representation  and  Understanding  (Bobrow 
and  Collins,  1975).  Several  papers  on  knowledge  representation  in  the 
last  two  volumes  were  especially  influential  and  discuss  topics  of  active 
interest. 

Nilsson  (1974)  provides  an  excellent  short  survey  of  all  of  the 
different  AI  research  areas  in  the  early  1970s,  showing  their  inter- 
relations and  state  of  progress.  Nilsson  also  wrote  an  influential  text- 
book of  Artificial  Intelligence  (1971),  bringing  together  core  ideas  in 
search  and  theorem  proving. 

Textbooks  and  Other  General  Introductions 

In  recent  years  there  have  been  several  books  discussing  AI  and 
related  topics  aimed  at  the  nontechnical  audience.  These  include  Arti- 
ficial Intelligence  and  Natural  Man  by  Boden  (1977)  and  the  book  by 
McCorduck  (1979)  mentioned  above.  Also  of  interest  along  these  lines  is 
Simon's  short,  but  great,  Sciences  of  the  Artificial  (1969).  The  book 
Gbdel,  Escher,  Bach:  an  Eternal  Golden  Braid,  by  Hofstadter  (1979), 
discusses  the  development  of  some  important  ideas  about  the  formal- 
ization of  reasoning  and  their  relation  to  AI.  These  books  try  to  ex- 
plain what  is  important  and  interesting  about  AI  and  how  research  in 
AI  progresses  through  its  programs. 

Although  somewhat  more  technical,  the  books  by  Norman  and 
Rumelhart  (1975)  and  Schank  and  Abelson  (1977)  develop,  from  first 
principles,  entire  conceptual  systems  for  building  AI  programs  (especially 
systems  for  natural  language  understanding).  In  a  similar  vein,  Ander- 
son and  Bower  (1973)  present  a  self-contained  introduction  to  AI- related 
work  in  models  of  human  cognition,  specifically  the  modeling  of  human 
sentence-memory. 

The  general  textbooks  on  AI  available  now  include  those  by  Jackson 
(1974),  Raphael  (1976),  and  Winston  (1977),  as  well  as  a  completely  new 
text  by  Nilsson  (1980).  Winston's  book,  Artificial  Intelligence,  includes 
a  useful  introduction  to  programming  in  LISP,  the  language  of  pref- 
erence for  AI  research.  Nilsson's  recent  book  attempts  to  present  all  of 
AI  from  a  formal  perspective,  stressing  the  fundamental  ideas  of  search, 
logic,  and  productions.  Winograd's  forthcoming  Language  as  a  Cognitive 
Process  is  an  excellent  introduction  to  AI  research  in  understanding 
natural  language  and  related  work  in  the  representation  of  knowledge. 

Charniak,  Riesbeck,  and  McDermott's  Artificial  Intelligence  Program- 
ming (1980)  is  a  thorough  introduction  to  LISP  programming  techniques. 
Siklossy    (1976)    has   written    a   good,    elementary   introduction    to    LISP 


16  Introduction  I 

programming,   called  Let's    Talk  LISP.     A  more  technical  treatment  of 
LISP  is  Anatomy  of  LISP  by  Allen  (1978). 

Recent  Technical  Publications 

Recent  AI  research  is  described  in  the  collections  of  papers  on  in- 
ference systems  edited  by  Waterman  and  Hayes-Roth  (1978),  on  vision 
systems  edited  by  Hanson  and  Riseman  (1978a),  on  speech  understanding 
edited  by  Lea  (1980b),  on  knowledge  representation  edited  by  Findler 
(1979),  and  on  a  variety  of  MIT  research  projects  edited  by  Winston 
and  Brown  (1979).  These  collections  all  contain  some  excellent  research 
reports,  although,  of  course,  they  don't  exhaustively  cover  current  work 
in  the  field.  Also  of  interest  is  the  research  of  Lehnert  (1978)  and  Mar- 
cus (1980)  on  natural  language  understanding,  Barstow  (1979)  on  auto- 
matic programming,  and  Lindsay,  Buchanan,  Feigenbaum,  and  Lederberg 
(1980)  and  Davis  and  Lenat  (in  press)  on  expert  systems. 

Journals  and  Conferences 

Current  research  typically  appears  first  in  technical  reports  from  the 
AI  laboratories  at  universities  and  private  companies.  These  laboratories 
include  those  at  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  Carnegie- 
Mellon  University,  Stanford  University,  SRI  International,  Inc.,  the  Rand 
Corporation,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  XEROX  Palo  Alto  Re- 
search Center,  Yale  University,  Rutgers  University,  Edinburgh  Univer- 
sity, Rochester  University,  the  University  of  Massachusetts,  the  Univer- 
sity of  Texas,  the  University  of  Maryland,  and  many  others.  Short 
papers  on  very  current  research,  as  well  as  longer  review  papers,  can  be 
found  in  the  proceedings  of  the  large  AI  conferences:  the  biennial 
International  Joint  Conference  on  AI  (IJCAI)  and  the  annual  national 
meeting  of  the  American  Association  for  Artificial  Intelligence  (AAAI). 
Important  AI  papers  can  also  often  be  found  in  the  proceedings  of  the 
conference  on  Theoretical  Issues  in  Natural  Language  Processing 
(TINLAP),  the  annual  meetings  of  the  Association  for  Computational 
Linguistics  (ACL),  and  the  Artificial  Intelligence  in  Medicine  workshops 
(AIM). 

The  refereed  journals  and  periodicals  publish  high-quality,  current 
research  papers.  These  include  the  journal  Artificial  Intelligence  and  the 
journal  of  the  Cognitive  Science  Society,  entitled  Cognitive  Science. 
Also,  the  ACL  publishes  a  journal,  called  the  American  Journal  of 
Computational  Linguistics.  The  SIGART  Newsletter,  published  by  the 
special  interest  group  on  artificial  intelligence  of  the  Association  for 
Computing  Machinery  (ACM),  and  the  European  AISB  Newsletter,  contain 


C  The  AI  Literature  17 

news,  book  reviews,  and  short  articles  on  current  activity.     Finally,  the 
AAAI  has  started  publication  of  a  semitechnical  AI  Magazine. 

Other  periodical  publications  sometimes  containing  AI  papers  include 
the  journals  Cognition,  International  Journal  of  Man-Machine  Studies, 
Behavioral  and  Brain  Sciences,  Transactions  on  Pattern  Recognition  and 
Machine  Intelligence  of  the  Institute  of  Electronic  and  Electrical  Engi- 
neers (IEEE),  Communications  of  the  Association  for  Computing  Machin- 
ery (CACM),  the  interdisciplinary  newsletter  Cognition  and  Brain  Theory, 
and  the  popular  magazine  entitled  Robotics  Age. 

Recommendations 

Readings  on  specific  areas  of  AI  research  are,  of  course,  suggested 
after  each  article  in  the  Handbook.  Almost  all  of  the  books  mentioned  in 
this  article  contain  some  material  that  would  be  appropriate  for,  and  of 
interest  to,  the  general  reader.  Serious  students  of  AI  these  days  follow 
the  various  AI  conference  proceedings,  the  two  journals  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence and  Cognitive  Science,  the  SIGART  and  AISB  newletters,  and  the 
AI  Magazine. 


Chapter  II 


Search 


CHAPTER  H:     SEARCH 


A.  Overview  /  21 

B.  Problem  Representation  /  82 

1.  State-space  Representation  /  32 

2.  Problem-reduction  Representation  /  86 
8.  Game  Trees  /  48 

C.  Search  Methods  /  46 

1.  Blind  State-space  Search  /  46 

2.  Blind  AND/OR  Graph  Search  /  54 
8.  Heuristic  State-space  Search  /  58 

a.  Basic  Concepts  in  Heuristic  Search  /  58 

b.  A* — Optimal  Search  for  an  Optimal  Solution  /  64 

c.  Relaxing  the  Optimality  Requirement  /  67 

d.  Bidirectional  Search  /  72 

4-  Heuristic  Search  of  an  AND/OR  Graph  /  74 
5.  Game  Tree  Search  /  84 

a.  Minimax  Procedure  /  84 

b.  Alpha-Beta  Pruning  /  88 

c.  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  /  94 

D.  Sample  Search  Programs  /  109 

1.  Logic  Theorist  /  109 

2.  General  Problem  Solver  /  118 

8.  Gelernter's  Geometry  Theorem-proving  Machine  /  119 

4.  Symbolic  Integration  Programs  /  128 

5.  STRIPS  /  128 

6.  ABSTRIPS  /  135 


A.     OVERVIEW 

In  Artificial  Intelligence,  the  terms  problem  solving  and  search 
refer  to  a  large  body  of  core  ideas  that  deal  with  deduction,  inference, 
planning,  commonsense  reasoning,  theorem  proving,  and  related  pro- 
cesses. Applications  of  these  general  ideas  are  found  in  programs  for 
natural  language  understanding,  information  retrieval,  automatic  pro- 
gramming, robotics,  scene  analysis,  game  playing,  expert  systems,  and 
mathematical  theorem  proving.  In  this  chapter  we  examine  search  as  a 
tool  for  problem  solving  in  a  more  limited  area.  Most  of  the  examples 
to  be  considered  in  detail  are  problems  that  are  relatively  easy  to 
formalize.    Some  typical  problems  are: 

1.  finding  the  solution  to  a  puzzle, 

2.  finding  a  proof  for  a  theorem  in  logic  or  mathematics, 

3.  finding    the    shortest    path    connecting    a    set    of   nonequidistant 
points  (the  traveling- salesman  problem), 

4.  finding  a  sequence  of  moves  that  will  win  a  game,  or  the  best 
move  to  make  at  a  given  point  in  a  game, 

5.  finding  a  sequence  of  transformations  that  will  solve  a  symbolic 
integration  problem. 

Organization  of  the  Chapter 

This  overview  takes  a  general  look  at  search  in  problem  solving, 
indicating  some  connections  with  topics  considered  in  other  chapters. 
The  articles  in  the  next  section,  Section  n.B,  describe  the  problem 
representations  that  form  the  basis  of  search  techniques.  The  detailed 
examples  there  of  state- space  and  problem- reduction  representations  will 
clarify  what  is  meant  by  words  like  search  and  problem  solving  in  AI. 
Readers  to  whom  the  subject  of  search  is  new  are  encouraged  to  turn 
to  those  articles  for  more  concrete  presentations  of  the  fundamental 
ideas.  Section  n.B  also  discusses  game  trees,  which  are  a  historically 
and  conceptually  important  class  of  representations. 

Section  n.C  deals  with  the  algorithms  that  use  these  various  problem 
representations.  Blind  search  algorithms,  which  treat  the  search  space 
syntactically,  are  contrasted  with  heuristic  methods,  which  use  infor- 
mation about  the  nature  and  structure  of  the  problem  domain  to  limit 
the  search.    Various  search  algorithms  are  presented  in  full. 


22  Search  II 

Finally,  Section  n.D  reviews  some  well-known  early  programs  based 
on  search.  It  also  describes  two  programs,  STRIPS  and  ABSTRIPS,  that 
introduce  the  closely  related  topic  of  planning  in  problem  solving.  This 
general  topic,  however,  is  treated  more  fully  in  Chapter  XVI,  in 
Volume  m. 

Components  of  Search  Systems 

Problem- solving  systems  can  usually  be  described  in  terms  of  three 
main  components.  The  first  of  these  is  a  database,  which  describes  both 
the  current  task-domain  situation  and  the  goal.  The  database  can 
consist  of  a  variety  of  different  kinds  of  data  structures  including  arrays, 
lists,  sets  of  predicate  calculus  expressions,  property  list  structures,  and 
semantic  networks.  In-  theorem  proving,  for  example,  the  current  task- 
domain  situation  consists  of  assertions  representing  axioms,  lemmas,  and 
theorems  already  proved;  the  goal  is  an  assertion  representing  the 
theorem  to  be  proved.  In  information-retrieval  applications,  the  current 
situation  consists  of  a  set  of  facts,  and  the  goal  is  the  query  to  be 
answered.  In  robot  problem  solving,  a  current  situation  is  a  world  model 
consisting  of  statements  describing  the  physical  surroundings  of  the 
robot,  and  the  goal  is  a  description  that  is  to  be  made  true  by  a 
sequence  of  robot  actions. 

The  second  component  of  problem- solving  systems  is  a  set  of  oper- 
ators that  are  used  to  manipulate  the  database.  Some  examples  of 
operators  include: 

1.  in   theorem   proving,   rules  of  inference   such   as   modus  ponens 
and  resolution; 

2.  in  chess,  rules  for  moving  chessmen; 

3.  in    symbolic   integration,    rules   for    simplifying   the   forms   to   be 
integrated,    such   as   integration   by   parts   or   trigonometric   sub- 
stitution. 

Sometimes  the  set  of  operators  consists  of  only  a  few  general  rules  of 
inference  that  generate  new  assertions  from  existing  ones.  Usually  it  is 
more  efficient  to  use  a  large  number  of  very  specialized  operators  that 
generate  new  assertions  only  from  very  specific  existing  ones. 

The  third  component  of  a  problem- solving  system  is  a  control  strat- 
egy for  deciding  what  to  do  next — in  particular,  what  operator  to  apply 
and  where  to  apply  it.  Sometimes  control  is  highly  centralized,  in  a 
separate  control  executive  that  decides  how  problem- solving  resources 
should  be  expended.  Sometimes  control  is  diffusely  spread  among  the 
operators  themselves. 


A  Overview  23 

The  choice  of  a  control  strategy  affects  the  contents  and  organi- 
zation of  the  database.  In  general,  the  object  is  to  achieve  the  goal  by 
applying  an  appropriate  sequence  of  operators  to  an  initial  task- domain 
situation.  Each  application  of  an  operator  modifies  the  situation  in 
some  way.  If  several  different  operator  sequences  are  worth  considering, 
the  representation  often  maintains  data  structures  showing  the  effects  on 
the  task  situation  of  each  alternative  sequence.  Such  a  representation 
permits  a  control  strategy  that  investigates  various  operator  sequences  in 
parallel  or  that  alternates  attention  among  a  number  of  sequences  that 
look  relatively  promising.  This  is  the  character  of  most  of  the  algo- 
rithms considered  in  this  chapter;  they  assume  a  database  containing  de- 
scriptions of  multiple  task-domain  situations  or  states  (see,  e.g.,  Article 
n.Ci).  .,  It  may  be,  however,  that  the  description  of  a  task-domain 
situation  is  too  large  for  multiple  versions  to  be  stored  explicitly;  in  this 
case,  a  backtracking  control  strategy  may  be  used  (see  Article  VI.B3,  in 
Vol.  n).  A  third  approach  is  possible  in  some  types  of  problems  such 
as  theorem  proving,  where  the  application  of  operators  can  add  new 
assertions  to  the  description  of  the  task-domain  situation  but  never  can 
require  the  deletion  of  existing  assertions.  In  this  case,  the  database 
can  describe  a  single,  incrementally  changing  task-domain  situation; 
multiple  or  alternative  descriptions  are  unnecessary.  (See  Chap,  xn,  in 
Vol.  m.) 

Reasoning  Forward  and  Reasoning  Backward 

The  application  of  operators  to  those  structures  in  the  database  that 
describe  the  task-domain  situation — to  produce  a  modified  situation — is 
often  called  reasoning  forward.  The  object  is  to  bring  the  situation,  or 
problem  state,  forward  from  its  initial  configuration  to  one  satisfying  a 
goal  condition.  For  example,  an  initial  situation  might  be  the  place- 
ment of  chessmen  on  the  board  at  the  beginning  of  the  game;  the 
desired  goal,  any  board  configuration  that  is  a  checkmate;  and  the 
operators,  rules  for  the  legal  moves  in  chess. 

An  alternative  strategy,  reasoning  backward,  involves  another  type  of 
operator,  which  is  applied,  not  to  a  current  task-domain  situation,  but 
to  the  goal.  The  goal  statement,  or  problem  statement,  is  converted  to 
one  or  more  subgoals  that  are  (one  hopes)  easier  to  solve  and  whose 
solutions  are  sufficient  to  solve  the  original  problem.  These  subgoals  may 
in  turn  be  reduced  to  sub-subgoals,  and  so  on,  until  each  of  them  is 
accepted  to  be  a  trivial  problem  or  its  subproblems  have  been  solved. 
For  example,  given  an  initial  goal  of  integrating  l/(cos2  x)  dx,  and  an 
operator   permitting    l/(cos  x)   to   be   rewritten   as    sec  x,    one    can   work 


24  Search  II 

backward  toward  a  restatement  of  the  goal  in  a  form  whose  solution  is 
immediate:     The  integral  of  sec2  x  is  tan  x. 

The  former  approach  is  said  to  use  forward  reasoning  and  to  be 
data  driven  or  bottom-up.  The  latter  uses  backward  reasoning  and  is  goal 
directed  or  top-down.  The  distinction  between  forward  and  backward 
reasoning  assumes  that  the  current  task- domain  situation  or  state  is 
distinct  from  the  goal.  If  one  chooses  to  say  that  a  current  state  is  the 
state  of  having  a  particular  goal,  the  distinction  naturally  vanishes. 

Much  human  problem- solving  behavior  is  observed  to  involve 
reasoning  backward,  and  many  artificial  intelligence  programs  are  based 
on  this  general  strategy.  In  addition,  combinations  of  forward  and 
backward  reasoning  are  possible.  One  important  AI  technique  involving 
forward  and  backward  reasoning  is  called  means- ends  analysis;  it  in- 
volves comparing  the  current  goal  with  a  current  task- domain  situation 
to  extract  a  difference  between  them.  This  difference  is  then  used  to 
index  the  (forward)  operator  most  relevant  to  reducing  the  difference.  If 
this  especially  relevant  operator  cannot  be  immediately  applied  to  the 
present  problem  state,  subgoals  are  set  up  to  change  the  problem  state 
so  that  the  relevant  operator  can  be  applied.  After  these  subgoals  are 
solved,  the  relevant  operator  is  applied  and  the  resulting,  modified 
situation  becomes  a  new  starting  point  from  which  to  solve  for  the 
original  goal.    (See  Articles  n.D2  and  n.D5.) 

State  Spaces  and  Problem  Reduction 

A  problem- solving  system  that  uses  forward  reasoning  and  whose 
operators  each  work  by  producing  a  single  new  object — a  new  state — 
in  the  database  is  said  to  represent  problems  in  a  state- space  repre- 
sentation (see  Article  n.Bi). 

For  backward  reasoning,  a  distinction  may  be  drawn  between  two 
cases.  In  one,  each  application  of  an  operator  to  a  problem  yields 
exactly  one  new  problem,  whose  size  or  difficulty  is  typically  slightly  less 
than  that  of  the  previous  problem.  Systems  of  this  kind  will  also  be 
referred  to,  in  this  chapter,  as  employing  state-space  representations. 
Two  instances  of  such  representations  are  presented  later  in  the  chapter. 
One  example  is  the  Logic  Theorist  program  (Article  n.Di);  the  other  is 
the  backward-reasoning  part  of  Pohl's  bidirectional  search  (Articles  n.Cl 
and  n.C3d). 

A  more  complex  kind  of  backward  reasoning  occurs  if  applying  an 
operator  may  divide  the  problem  into  a  set  of  subproblems,  perhaps 
each  significantly  smaller  than  the  original.  An  example  would  be  an  op- 


A  Overview  25 

erator  changing  the  problem  of  integrating  2/ (3?  - 1)  dx  into  the  three 
subproblems  of  integrating  l/(x-l)dx,  integrating  -l/(x+l)  dx,  and 
adding  the  results.  A  system  using  this  kind  of  backward  reasoning, 
distinguished  by  the  fact  that  its  operators  can  change  a  single  object 
into  a  conjunction  of  objects,  will  be  said  to  employ  a  problem-reduction 
representation.  The  relation  between  problem-reduction  and  state-space 
representations  is  examined  further  at  the  end  of  Article  n.B2. 

There  may  or  may  not  be  constraints  on  the  order  in  which  the 
subproblems  generated  by  a  problem-reduction  system  can  be  solved. 
Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  original  problem  is  to  integrate 
(f  (x) -\- g  (x))  dx.  Applying  the  obvious  operator  changes  it  to  the  new 
problem  consisting  of  two  integrations,  f(x)  dx  and  g(x)  dx.  Depending  on 
the  representation,  the  new  problem  can  be  viewed  as  made  up  of  either 

(a)  two    integration    subproblems    that    can    be    solved   in    any    order   or 

(b)  two  integration  subproblems  plus  the  third  subproblem  of  summing 
the  integrals.  In  the  latter  case,  the  third  task  cannot  be  done  until 
the  first  two  have  been  completed. 

Besides  the  state- space  and  problem-reduction  approaches,  other 
variations  on  problem  representation  are  possible.  One  is  used  in  game- 
playing  problems,  which  differ  from  most  other  problems  by  virtue  of 
the  presence  of  adversary  moves.  A  game-playing  problem  must  be 
represented  in  a  way  that  takes  into  account  the  opponent's  possible 
moves  as  well  as  the  player's  own.  The  usual  representation  is  a  game 
tree  (see  Article  n.B3),  which  shares  many  features  of  a  problem- 
reduction  representation.  Another  variation  is  relevant  to  theorem- 
proving  systems,  many  of  which  use  forward  reasoning  and  operators 
(rules  of  inference)  that  act  on  conjunctions  of  objects  in  the  database. 
Although  the  representations  discussed  here  assume  that  each  operator 
takes  only  a  single  object  as  input,  it  is  possible  to  define  a  theorem- 
proving  representation  that  provides  for  multiple-input,  single-output 
operators  (Kowalski,  1972;  see  also  Chap,  xn,  in  Vol.  m). 

Graph  Representation 

In  either  a  state-space  or  a  problem-reduction  representation, 
achieving  the  desired  goal  can  be  equated  with  finding  an  appropriate 
finite  sequence  of  applications  of  available  operators.  While  what  one  is 
primarily  interested  in — the  goal  situation  or  the  sequence  that  leads  to 
it— may  depend  on  the  problem,  the  term  search  can  always  be  under- 
stood, without  misleading  consequences,  as  referring  to  the  search  for  an 
appropriate  operator  sequence. 


26  Search  II 

Tree  structures  are  commonly  used  in  implementing  control  strat- 
egies for  the  search.  In  a  state- space  representation,  a  tree  may  be 
used  to  represent  the  set  of  problem  states  produced  by  operator 
applications.  In  such  a  representation,  the  root  node  of  the  tree 
represents  the  initial  problem  situation  or  state.  Each  of  the  new  states 
that  can  be  produced  from  this  initial  state  by  the  application  of  just 
one  operator  is  represented  by  a  successor  node  of  the  root  node. 
Subsequent  operator  applications  produce  successors  of  these  nodes,  and 
so  on.  Each  operator  application  is  represented  by  a  directed  arc  of  the 
tree.  In  general,  the  states  are  represented  by  a  graph  rather  than  by  a 
tree,  since  there  may  be  different  paths  from  the  root  to  any  given 
node.  Trees  are  an  important  special  case,  however,  and  it  is  usually 
easier  to  explain  their  use  than  that  of  graphs.    (See  Article  n.Bi.) 

Besides  these  ordinary  trees  and  graphs,  which  are  used  for  state- 
space  representations,  there  are  also  specialized  ones  called  AND/ OR 
graphs  that  are  used  with  problem- solving  methods  involving  problem 
reduction.  For  problems  in  which  the  goal  can  be  reduced  to  sets  of 
subgoals,  AND/ OR  graphs  provide  a  means  for  keeping  track  of  which 
subgoals  have  been  attempted  and  which  combinations  of  subgoals  are 
sufficient  to  achieve  the  original  goal.     (See  Article  n.B2.) 

The  Search  Space 

The  problem  of  producing  a  state  that  satisfies  a  goal  condition  can 
now  be  formulated  as  the  problem  of  searching  a  graph  to  find  a  node 
whose  associated  state  description  satisfies  the  goal.  Similarly,  search 
based  on  a  problem-reduction  representation  can  be  formulated  as  the 
search  of  an  AND/ OR  graph. 

It  should  be  noted  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  the  graph  to 
be  searched  and  the  tree  or  graph  that  is  constructed  as  the  search 
proceeds.  In  the  latter,  nodes  and  arcs  can  be  represented  by  explicit 
data  structures;  the  only  nodes  included  are  those  for  which  paths  from 
the  initial  state  have  actually  been  discovered.  This  explicit  graph, 
which  grows  as  the  search  proceeds,  will  be  referred  to  as  a  search 
graph  or  search  tree. 

In  contrast,  the  graph  to  be  searched  is  ordinarily  not  explicit.  It 
may  be  thought  of  as  having  one  node  for  every  state  to  which  there  is 
a  path  from  the  root.  It  may  even  be  thought  of,  less  commonly,  as 
having  one  node  for  every  state  that  can  be  described,  whether  or  not  a 
path  to  it  exists.  The  implicit  graph  will  be  called  the  state  space  or, 
if  generalized  to  cover  non- state- space  representations  such  as  AND/OR 
graphs  or  game  trees,  the  search  space.  Clearly,  many  problem  domains 


A  Overview  27 

(such  as  theorem  proving)  have  an  infinite  search  space,  and  the  search 
space  in  others,  though  finite,  is  unimaginably  large.  Estimates  of 
search- space  size  may  be  based  on  the  total  number  of  nodes  (however 
defined)  or  on  other  measures.  In  chess,  for  example,  the  number  of 
different  complete  plays  of  the  average-length  game  has  been  estimated 
at  10120  (Shannon,  1950,  1956),  although  the  number  of  "good"  games  is 
much  smaller  (see  Good,  1968).  Even  for  checkers,  the  size  of  the 
search  space  has  been  estimated  at  1040  (Samuel,  1963). 

Searching  now  becomes  a  problem  of  making  just  enough  of  the 
search  space  explicit  in  a  search  graph  to  contain  a  solution  of  the 
original  goal.  If  the  search  space  is  a  general  graph,  the  search  graph 
may  be  a  subgraph,  a  subgraph  that  is  also  a  tree,  or  a  tree  obtained 
by  representing  distinct  paths  to  one  search  space  node  with  duplicate 
search  graph  nodes. 

Limiting  Search 

The  critical  problem  of  search  is  the  amount  of  time  and  space 
necessary  to  find  a  solution.  As  the  chess  and  checkers  estimates 
suggest,  exhaustive  search  is  rarely  feasible  for  nontrivial  problems. 
Examining  all  sequences  of  n  moves,  for  example,  would  require 
operating  in  a  search  space  in  which  the  number  of  nodes  grows 
exponentially  with  n.  Such  a  phenomenon  is  called  a  combinatorial 
explosion. 

There  are  several  complementary  approaches  to  reducing  the  number 
of  nodes  that  a  search  must  examine.  One  important  way  is  to  recast 
the  problem  so  that  the  size  of  the  search  space  is  reduced.  A  dra- 
matic, if  well-known,  example  is  the  mutilated  chessboard  problem: 

Suppose  two  diagonally  opposite  corner  squares  are  removed  from  a 
standard  8  by  8  square  chessboard.  Can  31  rectangular  dominoes, 
each  the  size  of  exactly  two  squares,  be  so  placed  as  to  cover 
precisely  the  remaining  board?     (Raphael,  1976,  p.  31) 

If  states  are  defined  to  be  configurations  of  dominoes  on  the  mutilated 
board,  and  an  operator  has  the  effect  of  placing  a  domino,  the  search 
space  for  this  problem  is  very  large.  If,  however,  one  observes  that 
every  domino  placed  must  cover  both  a  red  square  and  a  black  one  and 
that  the  squares  removed  are  both  of  one  color,  the  answer  is 
immediate.  Unfortunately,  little  theory  exists  about  how  to  find  good 
problem  representations.  Some  of  the  sorts  of  things  such  a  theory 
would  need  to  take  into  account  are  explored  by  Amarel  (1968),  who 
gives  a  sequence  of  six  representations  for  a  single  problem,  each  re- 
ducing the  search-space  size  by  redefining  the  states  and  operators. 


28  Search  II 

A  second  aspect  concerns  search  efficiency  within  a  given  search 
space.  Several  graph-  and  tree- searching  methods  have  been  developed, 
and  these  play  an  important  role  in  the  control  of  problem- solving 
processes.  Of  special  interest  are  those  graph- searching  methods  that 
use  heuristic  knowledge  from  the  problem  domain  to  help  focus  the 
search.  In  some  types  of  problems,  these  heuristic  search  techniques  can 
prevent  a  combinatorial  explosion  of  possible  solutions.  Heuristic  search 
is  one  of  the  key  contributions  of  AI  to  efficient  problem  solving. 
Various  theorems  have  been  proved  about  the  properties  of  search 
techniques,  both  those  that  do  and  those  that  do  not  use  heuristic 
information.  Briefly,  it  has  been  shown  that  certain  types  of  search 
methods  are  guaranteed  to  find  optimal  solutions  (when  such  exist). 
Some  of  these  methods,  under  certain  comparisons,  have  also  been 
shown  to  find  solutions  with  minimal  search  effort.  Graph-  and  tree- 
searching  algorithms,  with  and  without  the  use  of  heuristic  information, 
are  discussed  at  length  in  Section  n.C. 

A  third  approach  addresses  the  question:  Given  one  representation 
of  a  search  problem,  can  a  problem- solving  system  be  programmed  to 
find  a  better  representation  automatically?  The  question  differs  from 
that  of  the  first  approach  to  limiting  search  in  that  here  it  is  the 
program,  not  the  program  designer,  that  is  asked  to  find  the  improved 
representation.  One  start  on  answering  the  question  was  made  by  the 
STRIPS  program  (Article  n.D5).  STRIPS  augments  its  initial  set  of 
operators  by  discovering,  generalizing,  and  remembering  macro- operators, 
composed  of  sequences  of  primitive  operators,  as  it  gains  problem- solving 
experience.  Another  idea  was  used  in  the  ABSTRIPS  program  (Article 
n.D6),  which  implements  the  idea  of  planning,  in  the  sense  of  defining 
and  solving  problems  in  a  search  space  from  which  unimportant  details 
have  been  omitted.  The  details  of  the  solution  are  filled  in  (by  smaller 
searches  within  the  more  detailed  space)  only  after  a  satisfactory  outline 
of  a  solution,  or  plan,  has  been  found.  Planning  is  a  major  topic  itself; 
for  further  discussion,  see  Chapter  XVI,  in  Volume  m. 

The  Meaning  of  Heuristic  and  Heuristic  Search 

Although  the  term  heuristic  has  long  been  a  key  word  in  AI,  its 
meaning  has  varied  both  among  authors  and  over  time.  In  general,  its 
usage  is  illustrated  by  example  better  than  by  definition,  and  several 
of  the  prime  examples  are  included  in  the  programs  of  Section  n.D. 
However,  a  brief  review  of  the  ways  heuristic  and  heuristic  search  have 
been  used  may  provide  a  useful  warning  against  taking  any  single 
definition  too  seriously. 


A  Overview  29 

As  an  adjective,  the  most  frequently  quoted  dictionary  definition  for 
heuristic  is  "serving  to  discover."  As  a  noun,  referring  to  an  obscure 
branch  of  philosophy,  the  word  meant  the  study  of  the  methods  and 
rules  of  discovery  and  invention  (see  Polya,  1957,  p.  112). 

When  the  term  came  into  use  to  describe  AI  techniques,  some 
writers  made  a  distinction  between  methods  for  discovering  solutions  and 
methods  for  producing  them  algorithmically.  Thus,  Newell,  Shaw,  and 
Simon  stated  in  1957:  "A  process  that  may  solve  a  given  problem,  but 
offers  no  guarantees  of  doing  so,  is  called  a  heuristic  for  that  problem" 
(Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon,  1963b,  p.  114).  But  this  meaning  was  not 
universally  accepted.     Minsky,  for  example,  said  in  a  1961  paper: 

The  adjective  "heuristic,"  as  used  here  and  widely  in  the  literature, 
means  related  to  improving  problem-solving  performance;  as  a  noun  it  is 
also  used  in  regard  to  any  method  or  trick  used  to  improve  the 
efficiency  of  a  problem-solving  program.  .  .  .  But  imperfect  meth- 
ods are  not  necessarily  heuristic,  nor  vice  versa.  Hence  "heuristic" 
should  not  be  regarded  as  opposite  to  "foolproof;  this  has  caused 
some  confusion  in  the  literature.     (Minsky,  1963,  p.  407n.) 

These  two  definitions  refer,  though  vaguely,  to  two  different  sets — 
devices  that  improve  efficiency  and  devices  that  are  not  guaranteed. 
Feigenbaum  and  Feldman  (1963)  apparently  limit  heuristic  to  devices 
with  both  properties: 

A  heuristic  (heuristic  rule,  heuristic  method)  is  a  rule  of  thumb, 
strategy,  trick,  simplification,  or  any  other  kind  of  device  which 
drastically  limits  search  for  solutions  in  large  problem  spaces. 
Heuristics  do  not  guarantee  optimal  solutions;  in  fact,  they  do  not 
guarantee  any  solution  at  all;  all  that  can  be  said  for  a  useful  heuristic 
is  that  it  offers  solutions  which  are  good  enough  most  of  the  time.  (p.  6; 
italics  in  original) 

Even  this  definition,  however,  does  not  always  agree  with  common 
usage,  because  it  lacks  a  historical  dimension.  A  device  originally 
introduced  as  a  heuristic  in  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman 's  sense  may  later 
be  shown  to  guarantee  an  optimal  solution  after  all.  When  this  hap- 
pens, the  label  heuristic  may  or  may  not  be  dropped.  It  has  not  been 
dropped,  for  example,  with  respect  to  the  A*  algorithm  (Article  n.C3b). 
Alpha-beta  pruning  (Article  n.C5b),  on  the  other  hand,  is  no  longer 
called  a  heuristic. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  definitions  quoted  above,  ranging  in 
time  from  1957  to  1963,  refer  to  heuristic  rules,  methods,  and  programs, 
but  they  do  not  use   the  term   heuristic   search.     This   composite  term 


30  Search  II 

appears  to  have  been  first  introduced  in  1965  in  a  paper  by  Newell  and 
Ernst,  "The  Search  for  Generality"  (see  Newell  and  Simon,  1972, 
p.  888).  The  paper  presented  a  framework  for  comparing  the  methods 
used  in  problem- solving  programs  up  to  that  time.  The  basic  frame- 
work, there  called  heuristic  search,  was  the  one  called  state-space  search 
in  the  present  chapter.  Blind  search  methods  were  included  in  the 
heuristic  search  paradigm. 

A  similar  meaning  for  heuristic  search  appears  in  Newell  and  Simon 
(1972,  pp.  91-105).  Again,  no  contrast  is  drawn  between  heuristic 
search  and  blind  search;  rather,  heuristic  search  is  distinguished  from  a 
problem- solving  method  called  generate  and  test.  The  difference  between 
the  two  is  that  the  latter  simply  generates  elements  of  the  search  space 
(i.e.,  states)  and  tests  each  in  turn  until  it  finds  one  satisfying  the  goal 
condition;  whereas  in  heuristic  search  the  order  of  generation  can  depend 
both  on  information  gained  in  previous  tests  and  on  the  characteristics 
of  the  goal.  But  the  Newell  and  Simon  distinction  is  not  a  hard  and 
fast  one.  By  the  time  of  their  1976  Turing  Lecture,  they  seem  to  have 
collapsed  the  two  methods  into  one: 

Heuristic  Search.  A  second  law  of  qualitative  structure  for  AI  is 
that  symbol  systems  solve  problems  by  generating  potential 
solutions  and  testing  them,  that  is,  by  searching.  (Newell  and 
Simon,  1976,  p.  126) 

In  the  present  chapter,  the  meaning  attached  to  heuristic  search 
stems  not  from  Newell  and  Simon  but  from  Nilsson,  whose  1971  book 
provides  the  most  detailed  and  influential  treatment  of  the  subject  that 
has  yet  appeared.  For  Nilsson,  the  distinction  between  heuristic  search 
and  blind  search  is  the  important  one.  Blind  search  corresponds 
approximately  to  the  systematic  generation  and  testing  of  search- space 
elements,  but  it  operates  within  a  formalism  that  leaves  room  for 
additional  information  about  the  specific  problem  domain  to  be 
introduced,  rather  than  excluding  it  by  definition.  If  such  information, 
going  beyond  that  needed  merely  to  formulate  a  class  of  problems  as 
search  problems,  is  in  fact  introduced,  it  may  be  possible  to  restrict 
search  drastically.  Whether  or  not  the  restriction  is  foolproof,  the 
search  is  then  called  heuristic  rather  than  blind. 

References 

See  Amarel  (1968),  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman  (1963),  Good  (1968), 
Jackson  (1974),  Kowalski  (1972),  Minsky  (1963),  Newell  and  Ernst 
(1965),    Newell,    Shaw,    and    Simon    (1963b),    Newell    and    Simon    (1972, 


A  Overview  31 

1976),    Nilsson    (1971),    Polya    (1957),    Raphael    (1976),    Samuel    (1963), 
Shannon  (1950,  1956),  and  Vanderbrug  and  Minker  (1975). 


B.     PROBLEM  REPRESENTATION 


Bl.     State-space  Representation 


A  state- space  representation  of  a  problem  employs  two  kinds  of 
entities:  states,  which  are  data  structures  giving  "snapshots"  of  the 
condition  of  the  problem  at  each  stage  of  its  solution,  and  operators, 
which  are  means  for  transforming  the  problem  from  one  state  to 
another. 

A  straightforward  example  of  state- space  representation  is  the  sim- 
ple, well-known  puzzle  called  the  8-puzzle.  An  8-puzzle  is  a  square  tray 
containing  eight  square  tiles  of  equal  size,  numbered  1  to  8.  The  space 
for  the  ninth  tile  is  vacant  (see  Fig.  Bl-1). 


2 

1 

6 

4 

8 

7 

5 

3 

Figure  Bl-1.    An  8-puzzle. 

A  tile  may  be  moved  by  sliding  it  vertically  or  horizontally  into  the 
empty  square.  The  problem  is  to  transform  some  particular  tile  config- 
uration, say,  that  of  Figure  Bl-1,  into  another  given  tile  configuration, 
say,  that  of  Figure  Bl-2. 


1 

2 

3 

8 

4 

7 

6 

5 

Figure  Bl-2.    A  solution  configuration 
of  the  8-puzzle. 


Bl  State-space  Representation  33 

A  state  is  a  particular  configuration  of  tiles;  each  state  might  be 
represented  by  a  3  X  3  matrix,  similar  to  Figures  Bl-1  and  Bl-2.  The 
operators,  corresponding  to  possible  moves,  might  be  defined  with  sep- 
arate operators  for  each  of  tiles  1  through  8.  However,  a  more  concise 
definition  is  made  possible  by  viewing  the  empty  square  as  the  object  to 
be  moved  and  stating  the  operators  in  terms  of  the  movements  of  this 
square.     In  this  formulation,  only  four  operators  are  used: 

UP  Move  the  blank  up  one  square, 

DOWN  Move  the  blank  down  one  square, 

LEFT  Move  the  blank  left  one  square, 

RIGHT  Move  the  blank  right  one  square. 

An  operator  may  be  inapplicable  in  certain  states,  as  when  it  would 
move  the  blank  outside  the  tray  of  tiles. 

The  set  of  all  attainable  states  of  a  problem  is  often  called  its  state 
space.  The  8-puzzle,  for  example,  has  a  state  space  of  size  9!/2 — since 
there  are  9!  configurations  of  the  tiles  but  only  half  this  number  can  be 
reached  from  any  given  starting  configuration.  This  comes  to  only 
181,440  possible  states.  For  comparison,  see  the  discussion  of  chess  and 
checkers  in  Article  n.A. 

The  four  operators  defined  for  the  8-puzzle  form  a  set  of  partial 
functions  on  the  state  space:  Each  operator,  if  it  applies  to  a  given 
state  at  all,  returns  exactly  one  new  state  as  its  result.  In  more  complex 
problems,  however,  the  operators  often  contain  variables.  If,  for  a  par- 
ticular state  and  operator,  the  variables  can  be  instantiated  in  more 
than  one  way,  then  each  instantiation  yields  one  new  state,  and  the 
operators  of  the  problem,  if  they  are  to  be  considered  as  defining 
functions,  are  more  accurately  termed  operator  schemata. 

The  complete  specification  of  a  state- space  problem  has  three  com- 
ponents. One  is  a  set  0  of  operators  or  operator  schemata.  In  addition, 
one  must  define  a  set  S  of  one  or  more  initial  states  and  find  a 
predicate  defining  a  set  G  of  goal  states.  A  state-space  problem  is  then 
the  triple  (S,  0,  G).  A  solution  to  the  problem  is  a  finite  sequence  of 
applications  of  operators  that  changes  an  initial  state  into  a  goal  state. 

A  state  space  can  be  treated  as  a  directed  graph  whose  nodes  are 
states  and  whose  arcs  are  operators  transforming  one  state  to  another. 
For  example,  if  state  1  is  a  state  to  which  any  of  three  operators  can 
be  applied,  transforming  it  to  state  2,  3,  or  4,  then  the  corresponding 
graph  would  be  as  in  Figure  Bl-3.  Nodes  2,  3,  and  4  are  called  the 
successors  of  node  1. 


34 


Search 


n 


node 
2 


node 

1 


node 
3 


node 
4 


Figure  Bl-3.     Directed  arcs. 

In  graph  notation,  a  solution  to  a  state-space  problem  is  a  path 
from  an  initial  node  to  a  goal  node.  In  Figure  Bl-4,  one  solution  would 
be  an  application  of  operator  B  twice,  followed  by  operator  D,  to  reach 
the  indicated  goal  node  or  final  state.  There  may  be  other  final  states 
and  multiple  ways  to  reach  a  particular  final  state. 

initial  state 

* 

operator  A  /   \  operator  B 
state  1 


operator  C 
state  4 


operator  B 
state  3 
operator  D 

final  state 


Figure  Bl-4.    A  state-space  graph. 

A  common  variation  on  state- space  problems  requires  finding  not 
just  any  path  but  one  of  minimum  cost  between  an  initial  node  and  a 
goal  node.  In  this  case,  each  arc  of  the  graph  is  labeled  with  its  cost. 
An  example  is  the  traveling- salesman  problem:  Given  a  number  of 
cities  to  be  visited  and  the  mileage  between  each  pair  of  cities,  find  a 
minimum-mileage  trip  beginning  and  ending  at  city  A  that  visits  each  of 
the  other  cities  exactly  once.  A  sample  mileage  chart  and  the  corre- 
sponding state-space  graph  are  shown  in  Figure  Bl-5.  Because  different 
paths  to  the  same  city  represent  distinct  partial  solutions,  each  state  is 
identified  not  just  as  a  city  name  but  as  a  list  of  the  cities  visited  so 
far. 


Bl 


State-space  Representation 


35 


A 

— 

4                 6 

10 

B 

7 

10 

C 

— 

5 

D 

Mi 

leage   chart 

4 
AB 


10 


ABC 


ABD 


10 


6 
AC 


ACB 


ACD 


10 


10 


10 


10 
AD 


10 


ADB 


ABCD    ABDC    ACBD    ACDB    ADBC 


ADC 


ADCB 


ABCDA   ABDCA   ACBDA   ACDBA   ADBCA   ADCBA 

Figure  Bl-5.     The  state- space  graph  for 

a  traveling- salesman  problem. 

The  desired  solution  is  A-B-D-C-A,  or  its  reversal,  with  a  total 
mileage  of  25.  (The  two  bottom  levels  of  the  graph  could  be  omitted, 
since  the  mileage  of  each  tour  of  n  cities  is  determined  by  the  first 
n-1  cities  chosen  to  be  visited.) 

Because  the  state-space  graph  is  usually  too  large  to  represent 
explicitly,  the  problem  of  searching  for  a  solution  becomes  one  of 
generating  just  enough  of  the  graph  to  contain  the  desired  solution 
path.    Search  methods  are  discussed  in  Articles  n.Ci  and  n.C3. 


References 

See  Nilsson  (1971). 


B2.     Problem-reduction  Representation 

Often  distinguished  from  the  state- space  representation  of  problems 
is  a  technique  called  problem-reduction  representation.  In  the  problem- 
reduction  approach,  the  principal  data  structures  are  problem  de- 
scriptions or  goals.  An  initial  problem  description  is  given;  it  is  solved 
by  a  sequence  of  transformations  that  ultimately  change  it  into  a  set  of 
subproblems  whose  solutions  are  immediate.  The  transformations  per- 
mitted are  defined  as  operators.  An  operator  may  change  a  single 
problem  into  several  subproblems;  to  solve  the  former,  all  the  sub- 
problems  must  be  solved.  In  addition,  several  different  operators  may 
be  applicable  to  a  single  problem,  or  the  same  operator  may  be  appli- 
cable in  several  different  ways.  In  this  case,  it  suffices  to  solve  the 
subproblems  produced  by  any  one  of  the  operator  applications.  A 
problem  whose  solution  is  immediate  is  called  a  primitive  problem. 
Thus,  a  problem  representation  using  problem  reduction  is  defined  by  a 
triple  consisting  of — 

1.  an  initial  problem  description, 

2.  a  set  of  operators  for  transforming  problems  to  subproblems, 

3.  a  set  of  primitive  problem  descriptions. 

Reasoning  proceeds  backward  from  the  initial  goal. 

An  Example 

An  example  that  lends  itself  nicely  to  problem-reduction  repre- 
sentation is  the  famous  Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle.  In  one  common  version 
there  are  three  disks,  A,  B,  and  C,  of  graduated  sizes.  There  are  also 
three  pegs,  1,  2,  and  3.  Initially  the  disks  are  stacked  on  peg  1,  with 
A,  the  smallest,  on  top  and  C,  the  largest,  at  the  bottom.  The 
problem  is  to  transfer  the  stack  to  peg  3,  as  in  Figure  B2-1,  given  that 
(a)  only  one  disk  can  be  moved  at  a  time  and  (b)  no  disk  may  be 
placed  on  top  of  a  smaller  disk. 


Initial  State 


Goal  State 


A  - 
B  — 
C  


peg  1   peg  2   peg  3 


-  A 

-  B 

C 


peg  1   peg  2   peg  3 


Figure  B2-1.     The  Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle. 


B2 


Problem-reduction  Representation 


37 


Only  one  operator  need  be  used  in  the  solution:  Given  distinct 
pegs  i,  j,  and  k,  the  problem  of  moving  a  stack  of  size  n  >  1  from 
peg  %  to  peg  k  can  be  replaced  by  the  three  problems: 


1.  moving  a  stack  of  size 

2.  moving  a  stack  of  size 

3.  moving  a  stack  of  size 


n  - 

1 

from 

i  to 

; 

1 

from 

i  to 

k 

n  - 

1 

from 

;  to 

k 

The  only  primitive  problem  is  that  of  moving  a  single  disk  from  one 
peg  to  another,  provided  no  smaller  disk  is  on  the  receiving  peg.  If  a 
smaller  disk  were  present,  this  problem  would  be  unsolvable  (in  view  of 
the  definition  of  the  only  available  operator). 

Each  problem  description  can  now  be  given  by  specifying  the  size  n 
of  the  stack  to  be  moved,  the  number  of  the  sending  peg,  and  the 
number  of  the  receiving  peg.  The  original  problem,  moving  a  stack  of 
three  disks  from  peg  1  to  peg  3,  would  then  be  represented  as  (n  =  3, 
1  to  3),  and  the  transformation  of  the  original  problem  to  primitive 
problems  can  be  represented  by  a  tree,  as  shown  in  Figure  B2-2: 

(i) 

n=3 
1   to  3 


(2) 
n=2 
1   to  2 


(3) 
n=l 
1   to  3 


n=2 
2  to  3 


(5) 
n=l 

1   to  3 


(6) 
n=l 
1   to  2 


(?) 
n=l 

3  to  2 


(J) 

n=l 

2  to  1 


(9) 
n=l 
2  to  3 


(10) 
n=l 
1   to  3 


Figure  B2-2.     Solution  of  the  Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle. 


There  happen  to  be  two  possible  operator  sequences  that  transform 
the  original  problem  to  primitive  problems:  Apply  the  operator  to 
node  1,  then  node  2,  and  then  node  4;  or  apply  the  operator  to  node  1, 
then  node  4,  and  then  node  2.  Since  node  3  is  a  primitive  problem,  it 
needs  no  further  attention.  Node  2  represents  the  subproblem  of 
moving  the  top  two  disks  on  peg  1  to  peg  2.  This  subproblem  is 
solved  by  expanding  it  to  the  primitive  problems  at  nodes  5,  6, 
and  7 — which  are  solved  by  moving  the  smallest  disk  to  peg  3,  moving 


38 


Search 


n 


the  middle  disk  to  peg  2,   and  finally  putting  the  small  disk  back  on 
top  of  the  middle  one. 

The  sequence  of  operators  to  be  applied  should  be  distinguished 
from  the  sequence  of  actions  to  be  taken  to  achieve  the  goal.  In  the 
Tower  of  Hanoi  example,  the  actions  are  the  actual  movements  of  the 
disks.  This  sequence  is  given  by  the  terminal  nodes  of  the  tree,  read 
left  to  right.  Whether  or  not  it  is  considered  important  to  assemble 
such  a  sequence  of  actions  depends  on  the  particular  problem  domain. 

AND/OR  Graphs 

In  the  example  above,  a  tree  was  used  to  display  a  problem- 
reduction  solution  to  the  Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle.  The  tree  notation 
must  be  generalized  if  it  is  to  represent  the  full  variety  of  situations 
that  may  occur  in  problem  reduction.  This  generalized  notation  for 
problem  reduction  is  called  an  AND/OR  graph. 

According  to  one  common  formulation  (Nilsson,  1971),  an  AND/OR 
graph  is  constructed  according  to  the  following  rules: 

1.  Each  node  represents  either  a  single  problem  or  a  set  of  prob- 
lems to  be  solved.  The  graph  contains  a  start  node  correspond- 
ing to  the  original  problem. 

2.  A  node  representing  a  primitive  problem,  called  a  terminal  node, 
has  no  descendants. 

3.  For  each  possible  application  of  an  operator  to  problem  P, 
transforming  it  to  a  set  of  subprobiems,  there  is  a  directed  arc 
from  P  to  a  node  representing  the  resulting  subproblem  set. 
For  example,  Figure  B2-3  illustrates  the  reduction  of  P  to  three 
different  subproblem  sets:  A,  B,  and  C.  Since  P  can  be  solved 
if  any  one  of  sets  A,  B,  or  C  can  be  solved,  A,  B,  and  C  are 
called  OR  nodes. 


Figure  B2-3.    An  AND/OR  tree. 


B2  Problem-reduction  Representation  39 

4.  Figure  B2-3  illustrates  further  the  composition  of  sets  A,  B,  and 

C.  Here,  A  =  {£),£'},  B  consists  of  a  single  (unnamed)  problem, 
and  C==  {F,  G,  H}.  In  general,  for  each  node  representing  a  set 
of  two  or  more  subproblems,  there  are  directed  arcs  from  the 
node  for  the  set  to  individual  nodes  for  each  subproblem.  Since 
a  set  of  subproblems  can  be  solved  only  if  its  members  can  all 
be  solved,  the  subproblem  nodes  are  called  AND  nodes.  To 
distinguish  them  from  OR  nodes,  the  arcs  leading  to  AND-node 
successors  of  a  common  parent  are  joined  by  a  horizontal  line. 

5.  A  simplification  of  the  graph  produced  by  rules  3  and  4  may  be 
made  in  the  special  case  where  only  one  application  of  an 
operator  is  possible  for  problem  P  and  where  this  operator 
produces  a  set  of  more  than  one  subproblem.  As  Figure  B2-4 
illustrates,  the  intermediate  OR  node  representing  the  subproblem 
set  may  then  be  omitted.  (Another  example  of  this  construc- 
tion was  given  in  Fig.  B2-2.) 


Figure  B2-4.    An  AND/OR  tree  with  one 
operator  at  problem  P. 


In  the  figures  above,  every  node  represents  a  distinct  problem  or  set 
of  problems.  Since  each  node  except  the  start  node  has  just  one 
parent,  the  graphs  are  in  fact  AND/OR  trees.  As  a  variation  on 
Figure  B2-3,  assume  that  problem  A  is  reducible  to  D  and  E;  and  prob- 
lem C,  to  E,  G,  and  H.  Then  E  may  be  represented  either  by  two 
distinct  nodes,  or  by  a  single  node  as  shown  in  Figure  B2-5.  The 
choice  makes  a  difference  in  the  search  algorithms,  which  are  discussed 
later  in  the  chapter.  For  example,  if  node  E  is  in  turn  reducible  to  C, 
the  general  graph  representation  simply  adds  another  directed  arc  to 
Figure  B2-5,  but  the  corresponding  tree  becomes  infinite. 


40 


Search 


n 


Figure  B2-5.    An  AND/OR  graph. 


The  constructions  discussed  so  far  concern  graphs  depicting  the 
entire  problem  search  space.  To  find  a  solution  to  the  initial  problem, 
one  need  only  build  enough  of  the  graph  to  demonstrate  that  the  start 
node  can  be  solved.  Such  a  subgraph  is  called  a  solution  graph  or,  in 
the  more  restricted  case  of  an  AND/OR  tree,  a  solution  tree.  The 
following  rules  apply: 

A  node  is  solvable  if — 

1.  it  is  a  terminal  node  (a  primitive  problem), 

2.  it  is  a  nonterminal  node  whose  successors  are  AND  nodes  that 
are  all  solvable,  or 

3.  it  is  a  nonterminal  node  whose  successors  are  OR  nodes  and  at 
least  one  of  them  is  solvable. 

Similarly,  a  node  is  unsolvable  if — 

1.  it  is  a  nonterminal  node  that  has  no  successors  (a  nonprimitive 
problem  to  which  no  operator  applies), 

2.  it  is  a  nonterminal  node  whose  successors  are  AND  nodes  and 
at  least  one  of  them  is  unsolvable,  or 

3.  it  is  a  nonterminal  node  whose  successors  are  OR  nodes  and  all 
of  them  are  unsolvable. 

Methods   of  searching  an  AND/ OR   graph   for   such   a   solution  are   dis- 
cussed in  Articles  n.C2  and  n.C4. 

Relation  Between  Problem-reduction  and  State-space  Representations 

Some  interesting  general  relationships  can  be  found  between  problem- 
reduction  and  state- space  representations.  In  the  first  place,  although 
one  representation  often  seems  the  more  natural  for  a  given  problem,  it 


B2  Problem-reduction  Representation  41 

is  often  possible  to  recast  the  problem  definition  so  that  it  uses  the 
other  form.  For  example,  the  Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle  can  also  be  solved 
by  a  state-space  search  using  operators  that  move  a  single  disk  and  that 
represent  all  the  legal  moves  in  a  given  configuration.  In  comparison  to 
the  problem-reduction  representation,  which  in  fact  gives  an  algorithm 
for  solving  the  puzzle,  the  state-space  representation  would  be  a  poor 
one  since  it  leaves  room  for  searching  down  unnecessarily  long  paths. 

Second,  it  is  possible  to  translate  mechanically  between  state- space 
representations  and  problem-reduction  representations  without  any  fun- 
damental shift  in  the  way  a  problem  is  viewed.  The  ways  of  making 
such  translations  can  provide  helpful  insight  into  many  search  programs 
in  which  the  concepts  of  state- space  and  problem-reduction  representa- 
tion appear  to  be  intermixed.  Several  translation  schemes  are  described 
below.  (Some  readers  may  wish  to  skip  the  following  material  at  first 
reading.) 

State-space  to  problem-reduction  representation.  Two  approaches 
suggest  themselves  for  translating  state-space  representations  to  problem- 
reduction  representations.  In  one,  the  state- space  graph  is  understood  as 
an  AND/ OR  graph  containing  only  OR  nodes.  Each  state  of  the  state- 
space  version  corresponds  to  the  problem  of  getting  from  that  state  to  a 
goal  state,  and  a  goal  state  of  the  state  space  becomes  the  primitive 
problem  of  getting  from  that  goal  state  to  itself.  In  other  words,  data 
structures  representing  states  are  simply  reinterpreted  as  representing 
problem  descriptions,  where  a  problem  consists  of  state  information 
together  with  an  implicit  goal. 

Alternately,  there  is  a  slight  variation  of  the  first  approach  that 
requires  redefining  the  operators  of  the  state- space  representation.  Each 
such  operator,  taking  state  i  to  state  j,  becomes  an  operator  applicable 
to  the  problem  of  getting  from  state  i  to  a  goal  state.  Its  effect  is  to 
reduce  the  problem  to  a  pair  of  subproblems:  (a)  go  from  state  i  to 
state  j  (a  primitive  problem)  and  (b)  go  from  state  j  to  a  goal  state. 
Figure  B2-6  illustrates  this  correspondence. 

State  i  Go  from  state  i  to  goal  state 

State  j 

Go  from  state  i        Go  from  state  j 
to  state  j        to  goa I  state 
(a  primitive  problem) 
00  (b) 

Figure  B2-6.     (a)  Part  of  a  state- space  tree;  (b)  the  corresponding 
part  of  an  AND/ OR  (problem-reduction)  tree. 


42  Search  II 

Problem-reduction  to .  state- space  representation.  The  translation  from 
a  problem-reduction  representation  to  a  state- space  representation  is  a 
little  more  complex,  assuming  that  the  problem-reduction  operators  in 
fact  produce  AND  nodes.  The  initial  problem  of  the  problem-reduction 
representation  can  be  understood  as  having  two  components:  (a)  the 
description  of  the  goal  to  be  achieved,  as  discussed  at  the  beginning  of 
this  article,  and  (b)  the  description  of  an  initial  state  of  the  world. 
These  components  will  be  denoted  g0  and  s0,  respectively.  Some  ex- 
amples are 

1.  0O  =  a  theorem  to  be  proved,  and 

Sq  =  the  axioms  from  which  to  prove  it; 

2.  0q  =  a  configuration  of  objects  to  be  achieved,  and 
Sq  =  their  existing  configuration. 

Each  state  S  of  the  corresponding  state- space  representation  is  a  pair 
consisting  of  a  stack  of  goals  {gv  .  .  .,  g0)  to  be  achieved  and  a  current 
state  s  of  the  world.  Thus,  the  initial  state  Sq  of  the  state- space  repre- 
sentation is  Sq  =  {(go),  s0).  A  final  state  is  one  in  which  the  stack  of 
goals  to  be  achieved  has  been  emptied. 

For  each  problem-reduction  operator,  mapping  a  problem  or  goal  g 
to  a  set  of  subgoals  {gm, . . .,  <7n},  the  state-space  representation  has  a 
corresponding  operator  mapping  state  Sv  where  S1=  (($, . . .,  g0),  s),  to 
a  state  S2  in  which  {<?m, . .  .,  <7n}  have  been  added  to  the  top  of  the 
goal  stack  (in  the  order  in  which  they  should  be  carried  out,  if 
relevant),    and    the    state    of   the    world    5    is    unchanged;    that    is,    S2 

=  ((0m>  •  •  •»  9w  9v  •  •  •>  9q),  s)- 

The  state-space  representation  also  needs  a  second  type  of  operator, 

which  becomes  applicable  whenever  the  goal  on  top  of  the  stack 
represents  a  primitive  problem.  Its  function  is  to  remove  that  primitive 
problem  from  the  stack  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  change  the  state  s  to 
reflect  its  solution.  In  the  Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle,  for  example,  the  new 
state  would  reflect  the  changed  position  of  a  single  disk.  In  a  theorem- 
proving  problem,  the  new  state  would  differ  from  the  old  one  by  the 
addition  of  one  formula  to  those  that  had  been  given  as  axioms  or 
established  from  having  solved  previous  subproblems.  A  representation 
of  this  type  is  used  explicitly  in  Fikes  and  Nilsson's  STRIPS  program, 
described  in  Article  n.D5. 

References 

See  Jackson  (1974)  and  Nilsson  (1971). 


B3.     Game  Trees 

Most  games  played  by  computer  programs,  including  checkers,  chess, 
Go,  and  tic-tac-toe,  have  several  basic  features  in  common.  There  are 
two  players  who  alternate  in  making  moves.  At  each  turn,  the  rules 
define  both  what  moves  are  legal  and  the  effect  that  each  possible  move 
will  have;  there  is  no  element  of  chance.  In  contrast  to  card  games  in 
which  the  players'  hands  are  hidden,  each  player  has  complete  in- 
formation about  his  opponent's  position,  including  the  choices  open  to 
him  and  the  moves  he  has  made.  The  game  begins  from  a  specified 
state,  often  a  configuration  of  men  on  a  board.  It  ends  in  a  win  for 
one  player  and  a  loss  for  the  other,  or  possibly  in  a  draw. 

A  complete  game  tree  is  a  representation  of  all  possible  plays  of 
such  a  game.  The  root  node  is  the  initial  state,  in  which  it  is  the  first 
player's  turn  to  move.  Its  successors  are  the  states  he  can  reach  in  one 
move,  their  successors  are  the  states  resulting  from  the  other  player's 
possible  replies,  and  so  on.  Terminal  states  are  those  representing  a 
win,  loss,  or  draw.  Each  path  from  the  root  node  to  a  terminal  node 
gives  a  different  complete  play  of  the  game. 

An  important  difference  between  a  game  tree  and  a  state- space  tree 
(Article  n.Bi)  is  that  the  game  tree  represents  moves  of  two  opposing 
players,  say,  A  and  B,  whereas  the  arcs  of  a  state-space  tree  are  all 
"moves"  of  a  single  problem- solving  agent.  An  AND/ OR  tree  (Article 
n.B2),  however,  is  sufficient  to  reflect  this  opposition.  The  game  tree  is 
ordinarily  drawn  to  represent  only  one  player's  point  of  view.  In  a 
game  tree  drawn  from  A'&  standpoint,  A's  possible  moves  from  a  given 
position  are  represented  by  OR  nodes  since  they  are  alternatives  under 
his  own  control.  The  moves  that  B  might  make  in  return  are  AND 
nodes,  since  they  represent  sets  of  moves  to  which  A  must  be  able  to 
respond.  Because  the  players  take  turns,  OR  nodes  and  AND  nodes 
appear  at  alternate  levels  of  the  tree.  In  the  language  of  AND/ OR 
graphs,  the  tree  displays  the  search  space  for  the  problem  of  showing 
that  A  can  win.  A  node  representing  a  win  for  A  corresponds  to  a 
primitive  problem;  a  node  representing  a  win  for  B  or  a  draw,  to  an 
unsolvable  problem.  Unlike  the  usual  AND/ OR  graph  terminology,  both 
of  these  kinds  of  nodes  will  be  called  terminal  nodes. 

As  an  example,  Figure  B3-1  shows  a  portion  of  the  game  tree  for 
tic-tac-toe.  The  players  are  X  and  0,  X  has  the  first  move,  and  the 
tree  is  drawn  from  X's  standpoint.  Positions  are  considered  identical  if 
one  can  be  obtained  from  the  other  by  rotation  or  reflection  of  the  grid. 


44 


Search 


n 


*** 

*** 

*** 

1 

X** 

*** 

1 

*** 

*** 

*x* 

X** 

*** 

1 

*** 

*** 

1 

0** 

*x* 

*** 

*0* 

*x* 

*** 

1 

1 

*0* 

1 
xo* 

1 

*0* 

1 

*0* 

*x* 

*x* 

XX* 

*x* 

X** 

*** 

*** 

*x* 

Figure  B3-1.    A  game  tree  for  Tic-tac-toe. 

The  tree  could  also  be  drawn  from  O's  standpoint,  even  though  X 
has  the  first  move.  In  this  case,  the  AND  nodes  would  become  OR 
nodes,  and  vice  versa,  and  the  labels  "win"  and  "lose"  would  be 
reversed.  An  alternate  formulation  of  game  trees,  not  explicitly  dis- 
tinguishing between  AND  and  OR  nodes,  is  given  in  Article  n.C5a. 

Methods    of    searching    a    game    tree    for    a    winning    strategy    are 


B3  Game  Trees  45 

discussed  in  Section  n.C5.  As  with  search  in  other  domains,  the  source 
of  difficulty  in  challenging  games  is  the  unimaginably  large  search  space. 
A  complete  game  tree  for  checkers,  for  instance,  which  is  harder  than 
tic-tac-toe  but  far  simpler  than  chess  or  Go,  has  been  estimated  as 
having  about  1040  nonterminal  nodes  (Samuel,  1963).  If  one  assumed 
that  these  nodes  could  be  generated  at  the  rate  of  3  billion  per  second, 
generation  of  the  whole  tree  would  still  require  around  1021  centuries! 

References 

See  Nilsson  (1971)  and  Samuel  (1963). 


C.     SEARCH  METHODS 
CI.     Blind  State-space  Search 

As  discussed  in  Article  n.Bi,  a  problem  in  the  state-space  search 
paradigm  is  defined  by  a  triple  (S,  0,  G),  where 

S  is  a  set  of  one  or  more  initial  states, 
0  is  a  set  of  operators  on  states,  and 
G  is  a  set  of  goal  states. 

The  state  space  is  commonly  identified  with  a  directed  graph  in  which 
each  node  is  a  state  and  each  arc  represents  the  application  of  an 
operator  transforming  a  state  to  a  successor  state.  A  solution  is  a  path 
from  a  start  state  to  a  goal  state.  Goal  states  may  be  defined  either 
explicitly  or  as  the  set  of  states  satisfying  a  given  predicate. 

The  search  for  a  solution  is  conducted  by  making  explicit  just 
enough  of  the  state- space  graph  to  contain  a  solution  path.  If  the  order 
in  which  potential  solution  paths  are  considered  is  arbitrary,  using  no 
domain- specific  information  to  judge  where  the  solution  is  likely  to  lie, 
the  search  is  called  blind  search.  Although  blind  search  is  impracticable 
for  nontrivial  problems,  because  of  the  large  proportion  of  the  state 
space  it  may  explore,  it  provides  a  useful  foundation  for  the  under- 
standing of  heuristic  search  techniques,  discussed  in  Section  n.C3. 

Several  blind-search  methods  are  described  below;  they  differ  from 
one  another  mainly  in  the  order  in  which  nodes  are  examined.  In  each 
case,  it  is  assumed  that  there  is  a  procedure  for  finding  all  the  suc- 
cessors of  a  given  node — that  is,  all  the  states  that  can  be  reached  from 
the  current  state  by  a  single  operator  application.  Such  a  procedure  is 
said  to  expand  the  given  node. 

The  first  three  algorithms  also  make  two  other  assumptions: 

1.  The  state-space  graph  is  a  tree.  The  implication  is  that  there  is 
only  one  start  state  (the  root)  and  that  the  path  from  the  start 
node  to  any  other  node  is  unique.  Modifications  to  the  search 
methods  needed  for  a  general  directed  graph  are  noted  in 
Nilsson  (1971)  and  in  Article  n.C3a. 

2.  Whenever  a  node  is  expanded,  creating  a  node  for  each  of  its 
successors,  the  successor  nodes  contain  pointers  back  to  the  par- 
ent node.  When  a  goal  node  is  finally  generated,  this  feature 
makes  it  possible  to  trace  the  solution  path. 


CI 


Blind  State-space  Search 


47 


Breadth- first  Search 

The  breadth-first  method  expands  nodes  in  order  of  their  proximity 
to  the  start  node,  measured  by  the  number  of  arcs  between  them.  In 
other  words,  it  considers  every  possible  operator  sequence  of  length  n 
before  any  sequence  of  length  n+1.  Thus,  although  the  search  may  be 
an  extremely  long  one,  it  is  guaranteed  eventually  to  find  the  shortest 
possible  solution  sequence  if  any  solution  exists. 

Breadth-first  search  is  described  by  the  following  algorithm: 

1.  Put  the  start  node  on  a  list,  called  OPEN,  of  unexpanded 
nodes.  If  the  start  node  is  a  goal  node,  a  solution  has  been 
found. 

2.  If  OPEN  is  empty,  no  solution  exists. 

3.  Remove  the  first  node,  n,  from  OPEN  and  place  it  in  a  list, 
called  CLOSED,  of  expanded  nodes. 

4.  Expand  node  n.     If  it  has  no  successors,  go  to  (2). 

5.  Place  all  successors  of  node  n  at  the  end  of  the  OPEN  list. 

6.  If  any  of  the  successors  of  node  n  is  a  goal  node,  a  solution  has 
been  found.     Otherwise,  go  to  (2). 

As  an  example  of  breadth-first  search,  consider  a  world  consisting  of 
a  table  and  three  toy  blocks.  The  initial  state  of  the  world  is  that 
blocks  2  and  3  are  on  the  table,  and  block  1  is  on  top  of  block  2  (see 
Fig.  Cl-1).  We  wish  to  reach  a  goal  state  in  which  the  three  blocks 
are  stacked  with  block  1  on  top,  block  2  in  the  middle,  and  block  3  on 
the  bottom. 


In  i  tia I    state 


Goa I    state 


Figure  Cl-1.    A  sample  problem  for  breadth- first  search. 


The  only  operator  is  MOVE  X  to  Y,  which  moves  object  X  onto 
another  object,  Y.  As  preconditions  to  applying  the  operator,  it  is 
required  (a)  that  X,  the  object  to  be  moved,  be  a  block  with  nothing 
on  top  of  it  and  (b)  that  if  Y  is  a  block,  there  must  be  nothing  on  Y. 
Finally,  the  operator  is  not  to  be  used  to  generate  the  same  state  more 
than  once.  (This  last  condition  can  be  checked  from  the  lists  of  ex- 
panded and  unexpanded  nodes.) 


48 


Search 


n 


Figure  CI- 2  shows  the  search  tree  generated  by  the  breadth-first 
algorithm.  The  nodes  are  states  SQ  through  S10;  node  S^  for  example, 
corresponds  to  the  successor  state  of  £0  reached  by  "MOVE  block  1  to 
the  table."  The  nodes  are  generated  and  expanded  in  the  order  given 
by  their  numbers,  that  is,  S0,  51?  S2,  . . .,  S10.  When  the  algorithm  ter- 
minates, finding  S10  to  be  the  goal,  the  list  of  expanded  nodes  contains 
S0  through  S5,  and  the  OPEN  list  still  contains  Sq  through  S10. 


SO: 

l 

2  3 

SI: 

S2: 

l 

S3: 

3 

1   2  3 

2  3 

1 

2 

S8:    2 

S4:    2 

S5:        2                     3         S7:'      3 

1 

1   3 

13                 12                 12 

3 

S9: 

3 

S10: 

1 

2 

2 

1 

3 

Figi 

ire  C 

1-2. 

The  search 

tree 

for  Figure 

CM. 

Uniform- cost  Search 

The  breadth-first  algorithm  can  be  generalized  slightly  to  solve  the 
problem  of  finding  the  cheapest  path  from  the  start  state  to  a  goal 
state.  A  nonnegative  cost  is  associated  with  every  arc  joining  two 
nodes;  the  cost  of  a  solution  path  is  then  the  sum  of  the  arc  costs 
along  the  path.  The  generalized  algorithm  is  called  a  uniform- cost 
search.  If  all  arcs  have  equal  cost,  the  algorithm  reduces  to  breadth-first 
search.  The  need  for  assigning  costs  to  the  arcs  is  illustrated  by  the 
traveling- salesman  problem,  described  in  Article  n.Bi,  where  the  different 
distances  between  cities  correspond  to  the  arc  costs  and  the  problem  is 
to  minimize  the  total  distance  traveled. 

In  the  uniform-cost  algorithm  given  below,  the  cost  of  the  arc  from 
node  i  to  node  j  is  denoted  by  c(i,j).  The  cost  of  a  path  from  the 
start  node  to  any  node  i  is  denoted  g(i). 


CI  Blind  State-space  Search  49 

1.  Put  the  start  node,  s,  on  a  list,  called  OPEN,  of  unexpanded 
nodes.  If  the  start  node  is  a  goal  node,  a  solution  has  been 
found.     Otherwise,  set  g(s)  =  0. 

2.  If  OPEN  is  empty,  no  solution  exists. 

3.  Select  from  OPEN  a  node  i  such  that  g(i)  is  minimum.  If 
several  nodes  qualify,  choose  node  i  to  be  a  goal  node  if  there 
is  one;  otherwise,  choose  among  them  arbitrarily.  Move  node  i 
from  OPEN  to  a  list,  CLOSED,  of  expanded  nodes. 

4.  If  node  i  is  a  goal  node,  a  solution  has  been  found. 

5.  Expand  node  i     If  it  has  no  successors,  go  to  (2). 

6.  For  each  successor  node  j  of  node  i,  compute  g(j)  =  g{i) 
+  c  (i,  j )  and  place  all  the  successor  nodes  j  in  OPEN. 

7.  Go  to  (2). 

Depth- first  Search 

Depth-first  search  is  characterized  by  the  expansion  of  the  most  re- 
cently generated,  or  deepest,  node  first.  Formally,  the  depth  of  a  node 
in  a  tree  is  defined  as  follows: 

1.  The  depth  of  the  start  node  is  0. 

2.  The  depth  of  any  other  node  is  one  more  than  the  depth  of  its 
predecessor. 

As  a  consequence  of  expanding  the  deepest  node  first,  the  search  follows 
a  single  path  through  the  state  space  downward  from  the  start  node; 
only  if  it  reaches  a  state  that  has  no  successors  does  it  consider  an 
alternate  path.  Alternate  paths  systematically  vary  those  previously 
tried,  changing  only  the  last  n  steps  while  keeping  n  as  small  as 
possible. 

In  many  problems,  of  course,  the  state- space  tree  may  be  of  infinite 
depth,  or  at  least  may  be  deeper  than  some  known  upper  bound  on  the 
length  of  an  acceptable  solution  sequence.  To  prevent  consideration  of 
paths  that  are  too  long,  a  maximum  is  often  placed  on  the  depth  of 
nodes  to  be  expanded,  and  any  node  at  that  depth  is  treated  as  if  it 
had  no  successors.  It  should  be  noted  that,  even  if  such  a  depth  bound 
is  used,  the  solution  path  found  is  not  necessarily  the  shortest  one. 
The  following  algorithm  describes  depth-first  search  with  a  depth  bound: 

1.  Put  the  start  node  on  a  list,  OPEN,  of  unexpanded  nodes.  If  it 
is  a  goal  node,  a  solution  has  been  found. 

2.  If  OPEN  is  empty,  no  solution  exists. 

3.  Move  the  first  node,  n,  on  OPEN  to  a  list,  CLOSED,  of  ex- 
panded nodes. 

4.  If  the  depth  of  node  n  is  equal  to  the  maximum  depth,  go 
to  (2). 


50 


Search 


n 


5.  Expand  node  n.     If  it  has  no  successors,  go  to  (2). 

6.  Place  all  successors  of  node  n  at  the  beginning  of  OPEN. 

7.  If  any  of  the  successors  of  node  n  is  a  goal  node,  a  solution  has 
been  found.     Otherwise  go  to  (2). 

As  an  example,  consider  the  following  simple  problem:  A  pawn  is 
required  to  move  through  the  matrix  in  Figure  Cl-3  from  top  to 
bottom.  The  pawn  may  enter  the  matrix  anywhere  in  the  top  row. 
From  a  square  containing  0,  the  pawn  must  move  downward  if  the 
square  below  contains  0;  otherwise,  it  must  move  horizontally.  From  a 
square  containing  1,  no  further  moves  are  possible.  The  goal  is  to 
reach  a  square  containing  0  in  the  bottom  row.  A  depth  bound  of  5  is 
assumed. 


3       4 


1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

0 

0 

0 

Figure  Cl-3.    A  sample  problem  for  depth-first  search. 


The  search  tree  generated  by  the  depth-first  algorithm  is  shown  in 
Figure  Cl-4.  At  node  S0,  the  pawn  has  not  yet  entered  the  grid.  At 
the  other  nodes,  its  position  is  given  as  a  pair  of  the  form  (row 
number,  column  number).  The  numbering  of  nodes  gives  the  order  in 
which  they  are  moved  out  of  the  OPEN  list  of  unexpanded  nodes. 
When  the  algorithm  terminates,  the  OPEN  list  contains  «917  (a  goal 
node)  and  S18;  all  other  nodes  are  on  the  expanded  list.  The  solution 
found,  which  is  one  move  longer  than  the  minimum,  calls  for  the  pawn 
to  enter  at  (1,  3),  move  one  square  right,  and  then  go  straight  down  to 
(4,  4).  Had  no  depth  bound  been  used,  the  tree  would  have  been  one 
level  deeper,  since  node  512  has  a  successor,  (4, 1).  Since  the  algorithm 
treats  the  state  space  as  a  tree,  not  as  a  general  graph,  it  does  not 
discover  that  the  distinct  nodes  S2  and  59  in  fact  represent  the  same 
state.  Consequently,  the  search  downward  from  S$  duplicates  the  work 
already  done  from  52. 


CI 


Blind  State-space  Search 


51 


so 


S] 

(1,1) 


S2 
(1,2) 


S3 
(2,2) 


S8 
(1,3) 


S9     S14 
(1,2)   (1,4) 


S4   S7       S10     S15 
(2,1)  (2,3)     (2,2)    (2,4) 


S5 
(3,1) 


S6 
(4,1) 


Sll   S13    S16 
(2,1)  (2,3)   (3,4) 


S12 
(3,1) 


S17 
(4,4) 


S18 
(1,4) 


Figure  Cl-4.     The  search  tree  for  Figure  Cl-3. 


Bidirectional  Search 

Each  of  the  algorithms  given  above  uses  forward  reasoning,  working 
from  the  start  node  of  a  state-space  tree  towards  a  goal  node  and  using 
operators  that  each  map  a  node  i  to  a  successor  node  j.  In  some  cases, 
the  search  could  equally  well  use  backward  reasoning,  moving  from  the 
goal  state  to  the  start  state.  An  example  of  this  is  the  8-puzzle,  in 
which  (a)  the  goal  state  can  be  fully  described  in  advance  and  (b)  it  is 
easy  to  define  inverse  operators — each  applicable  operator  mapping 
node  j  to  a  predecessor  node  i  Since  backward  search  through  a  tree 
is  trivial,  it  is  assumed  that  node  j  can  have  more  than  one 
predecessor — that  is,  several  inverse  operators  may  apply  at  node  j. 
For  example,  in  the  pawn-maze  problem,  Figure  Cl-4,  position  (1,  2) — 
at  nodes  S2  and  Sg — would  have  both  nodes  S0  and  Ss  as  predecessors. 

Forward  and  backward  reasoning  can  be  combined  into  a  technique 
called  bidirectional  search.  The  idea  is  to  replace  a  single  search  graph, 
which  is  likely  to  grow  exponentially,  by  two  smaller  graphs — one 
starting  from  the  initial  state  and  one  starting  from  the  goal.  The 
search  terminates  (roughly)  when  the  two  graphs  intersect. 

A  bidirectional  version  of  the  uniform-cost  algorithm,  guaranteed  to 


52  Search  II 

find  the  shortest  solution  path  through  a  general  state-space  graph, 
is  due  to  Pohl  (1969,  1971).  Empirical  data  for  randomly  generated 
graphs  showed  that  Pohl's  algorithm  expanded  only  about  one-fourth  as 
many  nodes  as  unidirectional  search. 

An  algorithm  for  blind  bidirectional  search  is  given  in  detail  below. 
A  related  algorithm  for  heuristic  bidirectional  search  is  discussed  in 
Article  n.C3d. 

The  following  notation  is  used  in  the  algorithm: 

1.  The  start  node  is  s;  the  goal  or  terminal  node,  t. 

2.  S-OPEN  and  S-CLOSED  are  lists  of  unexpanded  and  expanded 
nodes,  respectively,  generated  from  the  start  node. 

3.  T-OPEN  and  T-CLOSED  are  lists  of  unexpanded  and  expanded 
nodes,  respectively,  generated  from  the  terminal  node. 

4.  The  cost  associated  with  the  arc  from  node  n  to  node  x  is  de- 
noted c(n,  x). 

5.  For  a  node  x  generated  from  the  start  node,  gs(x)  measures  the 
shortest  path  found  so  far  from  s  to  x. 

6.  For  a  node  x  generated  from  the  terminal  node,  gi(x)  measures 
the  shortest  path  found  so  far  from  x  to  t. 

The  algorithm  is  as  follows: 

1.  Put  5  in  S-CLOSED,  with  gs(s)  =  0.  Expand  node  s,  creating  a 
node  for  each  of  its  successors.  For  each  successor  node  x, 
place  x  on  S-OPEN,  attach  a  pointer  back  to  5,  and  set  gs(x)  to 
c(s,  x).  Correspondingly,  put  t  in  T-CLOSED,  with  gt(t)  =  0. 
Expand  node  t,  creating  a  node  for  each  of  its  predecessors.  For 
each  predecessor  node  x,  place  x  on  T-OPEN,  attach  a  pointer 
forward  to  t,  and  set  gt  (x)  =  c  (x,  t). 

2.  Decide  whether  to  go  forward  or  backward.  If  forward,  go 
to  (3);  if  backward,  to  (4).  (One  way  to  implement  this  step  is 
to  alternate  between  forward  and  backward  moves.  Another 
way,  which  Pohl  found  to  give  better  performance,  is  to  move 
backward  if  T-OPEN  contains  fewer  nodes  than  S-OPEN;  other- 
wise, forward.  It  is  assumed  that  a  solution  path  does  exist,  so 
the  chosen  list  will  be  nonempty.) 

3.  Select  from  S-OPEN  a  node  n  at  which  gs(ri)  is  minimum.  Move 
n  to  S-CLOSED.  If  n  is  also  in  T-CLOSED,  go  to  (5).  Other- 
wise, for  each  successor  x  of  n: 

a.  If  x  is  on  neither  S-OPEN  nor  S-CLOSED,  then  add  it  to 
S-OPEN.  Attach  a  pointer  back  to  n  and  the  path  cost 
gs(x)  =  gs(n)  +  c  (n,  x). 

b.  If  x  was  already  on  S-OPEN,  a  shorter  path  to  x  may  have 
just  been  found.  Compare  the  previous  path  cost,   gs{x),  with 


CI  Blind  State-space  Search  53 

the  new  cost  gs(n)  -\-  c(n,  x).  If  the  latter  is  smaller,  set 
gs(x)  to  the  new  path  cost  and  point  x  back  to  n  instead  of 
its  predecessor  on  the  longer  path. 

c.  If  x  was  already  on  S-CLOSED,  do  nothing;  although  a  new 
path  to  x  has  been  found,  its  cost  must  be  at  least  as  great 
as  the  cost  of  the  path  already  known.  (For  further  con- 
sideration of  this  point,  see  Article  n.C3b.) 

Return  to  (2). 

4.  Select  from  T-OPEN  a  node  n  at  which  gt(n)  is  minimum.  Move 
n  to  T-CLOSED.  If  n  is  also  in  S-CLOSED,  go  to  (5).  Other- 
wise, for  each  predecessor  x  of  n: 

a.  If  x  is  on  neither  T-OPEN  nor  T-CLOSED,  then  add  it  to 
T-OPEN.  Attach  a  pointer  forward  to  n  and  the  path  cost 
gi(x)  =  gt(n)  +  c  (x,  n). 

b.  If  x  was  already  on  T-OPEN  and  a  shorter  path  from  x  to  t 
has  just  been  found,  reduce  the  stored  value  of  gi{x)  and 
point  x  forward  to  n  (instead  of  to  its  successor  on  the 
longer  path). 

c.  If  x  was  already  on  T-CLOSED,  do  nothing. 
Return  to  (2). 

5.  Consider  the  set  of  nodes  that  are  in  both  S-CLOSED  and 
either  T-CLOSED  or  T-OPEN.  Select  from  this  set  a  node  n 
for  which  gs(n)  -\-  gi{n)  is  minimum  and  exit  with  the  solution 
path  obtained  by  tracing  the  path  from  n  back  to  s  and 
forward  to  t. 

References 

See  Nilsson  (1971)  and  Pohl  (1969,  1971). 


C2.     Blind  AND/OR  Graph  Search 

A  problem  to  be  solved  using  AND/OR-graph  search  can  be  defined 
by  specifying  a  start  node  (representing  an  initial  goal  or  problem 
description),  a  set  of  terminal  nodes  (descriptions  of  primitive  problems), 
and  a  set  of  operators  for  reducing  goals  to  subgoals.  The  rules  for 
constructing  an  AND/OR  graph,  together  with  the  use  of  such  graphs 
for  problem-reduction  representation,  were  discussed  in  Article  n.B2.  To 
recapitulate  briefly,  each  possible  application  of  an  operator  at  a  node  n 
(see  Fig.  C2-1)  is  represented  by  a  directed  arc  from  node  n  to  a 
successor  node;  these  successor  nodes  are  called  OR  nodes,  since  only 
one  of  the  operator  applications  will  ever  be  needed  to  solve  the 
problem  that  node  n  represents.  Each  OR  node  successor  of  node  n 
represents  a  set  of  subproblems.  If  the  set  of  subproblems  represented 
by  an  OR  node  m  has  more  than  one  element,  then  there  are  directed 
arcs  from  m  to  nodes  representing  the  individual  elements  of  the  set. 
These  successors  are  called  AND  nodes,  because  all  of  the  elements  of 
the  set  must  be  solved  in  order  to  solve  the  subproblem  set  represented 
by  node  ra.  To  distinguish  AND  nodes  visually  from  OR  nodes,  the  arcs 
in  the  graph  from  ra  to  its  AND  successors  are  joined  by  a  horizontal 
line. 


OR   nodes 


AND  nodes 

Figure  C2-1.    AND/OR  graph  notation. 

Formally,    a   node   or   problem   is   said    to   be    solved  if  one   of  the 
following  conditions  holds: 

1.  The   node  is  in  the  set  of  terminal  nodes  (primitive  problems). 
(In  this  case,  the  node  has  no  successors.) 

2.  The  node  has  AND  nodes  as  successors  and  all  these  successors 
are  solved. 

3.  The    node   has    OR   nodes    as   successors   and    any   one    of   these 
successors  is  solved. 


C2  Blind  AND/OR  Graph  Search  55 

A  solution  to  the  original  problem  is  given  by  a  subgraph  of  the 
AND/OR  graph  sufficient  to  show  that  the  start  node  is  solved.  In 
Figure  C2-2,  for  example,  assuming  that  nodes  5,  6,  8,  9,  10,  and 
11  are  all  terminal,  there  are  three  possible  solution  subgraphs: 
{1,  2,  4,  8,  9},  {1,  3,  5,  6,  7,  10},  and  {1,  3,  5,  6,  7,  11}. 


Figure  C2-2.     An  AND/OR  graph. 

A  node  is  said  to  be  unsolvable  if  one  of  the  following  conditions  is 
true: 

1.  The  node  has  no  successors  and  is  not  in  the  set  of  terminal 
nodes.  That  is,  it  is  a  nonprimitive  problem  to  which  no 
operator  can  be  applied. 

2.  The  node  has  AND  nodes  as  successors  and  one  or  more  of 
these  successors  are  unsolvable. 

3.  The  node  has  OR  nodes  as  successors  and  all  of  these  successors 
are  unsolvable. 

Again  in  Figure  C2-2,  node  1  would  be  unsolvable  if  all  nodes  in  any  of 
the  following  sets  were  unsolvable:  {8, 5},  {8, 6},  {8, 10, 11},  {9, 5}, 
{9,  6},  {9, 10, 11}. 

Two  algorithms  for  the  blind  search  of  an  AND/ OR  tree  (breadth- 
first  and  depth-first)  are  given  at  the  end  of  this  article.  They  have 
several  features  in  common  with  blind  state- space  search  algorithms 
(Article  n.Ci):  The  operation  of  expanding  a  node  is  again  present,  and 
again  the  algorithms  differ  mainly  in  the  order  in  which  nodes  are 
considered  for  expansion.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  expansion  of  a 
node  may  differ  slightly  from  the  case  of  state- space  search.  In 
Figure  C2-2,  for  example,  two  operators  apply  at  node  1:  One  reduces 
it  to  a  single  equivalent  problem  (node  2)  and  the  other  to  a  set 
(node  3)  of  three  subproblems  (nodes  5,  6,  and  7).  In  this  case, 
nodes  2,   3,    5,   6,   and  7   would   all  be   generated   in  expanding  node  1, 


56  Search  II 

and  each  new  node  would  be  given  a  pointer  to  its  immediate  pre- 
decessor, but  only  nodes  2,  5,  6,  and  7  would  be  placed  on  the  list  of 
unexpanded  nodes. 

In  contrast  to  the  state- space  search  algorithms,  most  of  which  use 
forward  reasoning,  the  search  algorithms  below  reason  backward  from 
the  initial  goal.  The  algorithms  described  here  make  two  important 
simplifying  assumptions:  (a)  The  search  space  is  an  AND/OR  tree  and 
not  a  general  graph,  and  (b)  when  a  problem  is  transformed  to  a  set  of 
subproblems,  the  subproblems  may  be  solved  in  any  order.  The  first 
assumption  implies  that  identical  subproblems  may  arise  at  different 
nodes  of  the  search  tree  and  will  need  to  be  solved  anew  whenever  one 
of  them  is  encountered.  Modifications  needed  for  searching  a  general 
AND/ OR  graph  are  discussed  in  Nilsson  (1971).  A  way  of  eliminating 
the  second  assumption,  that  all  subproblems  are  independent,  is  dis- 
cussed in  Article  n.C4. 

Breadth-first  Search  of  an  AND/ OR  Tree 

The  following  algorithm  describes  the  breadth-first  search  of  an 
AND/OR  tree.  If  a  solution  tree  exists,  this  algorithm  finds  a  solution 
tree  of  minimum  depth,  provided  that  intermediate  OR  nodes  are  ig- 
nored in  calculating  the  depth  of  the  tree.  The  start  node  is  assumed 
not  to  be  a  terminal  node. 

1.  Put  the  start  node  on  a  list,  OPEN,  of  unexpanded  nodes. 

2.  Remove  the  first  node,  n,  from  OPEN. 

3.  Expand  node  n — generating  all  its  immediate  successors  and,  for 
each  successor  m,  if  m  represents  a  set  of  more  than  one  sub- 
problem,  generating  successors  of  m  corresponding  to  the  indi- 
vidual subproblems.  Attach,  to  each  newly  generated  node,  a 
pointer  back  to  its  immediate  predecessor.  Place  all  the  new 
nodes  that  do  not  yet  have  descendants  at  the  end  of  OPEN. 

4.  If  no  successors  were  generated  in  (3),  then 

a.  Label  node  n  unsolvable. 

b.  If  the  unsolvability  of  n  makes  any  of  its  ancestors  unsolv- 
able, label  these  ancestors  unsolvable. 

c.  If  the  start  node  is  labeled  unsolvable,  exit  with  failure. 

d.  Remove  from  OPEN  any  nodes  with  an  unsolvable  ancestor. 

5.  Otherwise,  if  any  terminal  nodes  were  generated  in  (3),  then 

a.  Label  these  terminal  nodes  solved. 

b.  If  the   solution   of  these  terminal   nodes  makes   any   of  their 
ancestors  solved,  label  these  ancestors  solved. 


C2  Blind  AND/OR  Graph  Search  57 

c.  If  the  start  node  is  labeled  solved,  exit  with  success. 

d.  Remove   from    OPEN   any   nodes    that   are   labeled    solved    or 
that  have  a  solved  ancestor. 

6.  Go  to  (2). 

Depth- first  Search  of  an  AND/ OR  Tree 

A   bounded    depth-first    search    can    be    obtained    by    changing   only 
step  3  of  the  breadth-first  algorithm.     The  revised  step  3  is  as  follows: 

3'.  //  the  depth  of  n  is  less  than  the  depth  bound,  then: 

Expand  node  n — generating  all  its  immediate  successors  and,  for 
each  successor  m,  if  m  represents  a  set  of  more  than  one  sub- 
problem,  generating  successors  of  m  corresponding  to  the  indi- 
vidual subproblems.  Attach,  to  each  newly  generated  node,  a 
pointer  back  to  its  immediate  predecessor.  Place  all  the  new 
nodes  that  do  not  yet  have  descendants  at  the  beginning  of 
OPEN. 

The  depth-first  search  will  find  a  solution  tree,  provided  one  exists 
within  the  depth  bound.  As  with  breadth-first  search,  the  notion  of 
depth  is  more  meaningful  if  intermediate  OR  nodes  are  not  counted. 
For  this  purpose  one  might  add  the  following  to  the  end  of  step  3': 

For  each  node  x  added  to  OPEN,  set  the  depth  of  x  to  be  the 
depth  of  node  n,  plus  1. 

Given  that  the  start  node  has  depth  0,  the  depth  of  any  node  x  will 
then  be  the  length  of  the  operator  sequence  that  must  be  applied  to 
reach  node  x  from  the  start  node. 

References 

See  Nilsson  (1971). 


C3.     Heuristic  State-space  Search 
C3a.     Basic  Concepts  in  Heuristic  Search 

In  the  blind  search  of  a  state- space  (Article  n.Ci)  or  an  AND/ OR 
graph  (Article  n.C2),  the  number  of  nodes  expanded  before  reaching 
a  solution  is  likely  to  be  prohibitively  large.  Because  the  order  of 
expanding  the  nodes  is  purely  arbitrary  and  does  not  use  any  properties 
of  the  problem  being  solved,  one  usually  runs  out  of  space  or  time  (or 
both)  in  any  but  the  simplest  problems.  This  result  is  a  manifestation 
of  the  combinatorial  explosion. 

Information  about  the  particular  problem  domain  can  often  be 
brought  to  bear  to  help  reduce  the  search.  In  this  section,  it  is 
assumed  that  the  definitions  of  initial  states,  operators,  and  goal  states 
all  are  fixed,  thus  determining  a  search  space;  the  question,  then,  is  how 
to  search  the  given  space  efficiently.  The  techniques  for  doing  so 
usually  require  additional  information  about  the  properties  of  the  specific 
problem  domain  beyond  that  which  is  built  into  the  state  and  operator 
definitions.  Information  of  this  sort  will  be  called  heuristic  information, 
and  a  search  method  using  it  (whether  or  not  the  method  is  foolproof) 
will  be  called  a  heuristic  search  method  (Nilsson,  1971). 

The  Importance  of  Heuristic  Search  Theory 

Heuristic  search  methods  were  employed  by  nearly  all  early  problem- 
solving  programs.  Most  of  these  programs,  though,  were  written  to 
solve  problems  from  a  single  domain,  and  the  domain- specific  infor- 
mation they  used  was  closely  intertwined  with  the  techniques  for  using 
it.  Thus,  the  heuristic  techniques  themselves  were  not  easily  accessible 
for  study  and  adaptation  to  new  problems,  and  there  was  some  like- 
lihood that  substantially  similar  techniques  would  have  to  be  reinvent- 
ed repeatedly.  Consequently,  an  interest  arose  in  developing  generalized 
heuristic  search  algorithms,  whose  properties  could  be  studied  inde- 
pendently of  the  particular  programs  that  might  use  them.  (See  Newell 
and  Ernst,  1965;  Feigenbaum,  1969;  Sandewall,  1971.)  This  task,  in  turn, 
required  a  way  of  describing  problems  that  generalized  across  many 
different  domains.  Such  generalized  problem  formulations  have  been 
discussed  in  Section  n.B,  in  an  approach  generally  following  Nilsson 
(1971).  Given  a  generalized  problem  representation,  the  most  basic 
heuristic- search  techniques  can  be  studied  as  variations  on  blind  search 
methods  for  the  same  type  of  problem  representation. 


C3a  Basic  Concepts  in  Heuristic  Search  59 

The  current  state  of  heuristic  search  theory  has  been  diversely 
judged.  One  of  the  best  known  students  of  the  subject  has  remarked, 
"The  problem  of  efficiently  searching  a  graph  has  essentially  been  solved 
and  thus  no  longer  occupies  AI  researchers"  (Nilsson,  1974,  p.  787). 
Other  work  makes  it  clear,  however,  that  the  theory  is  far  from  com- 
plete (e.g.,  Simon  and  Kadane,  1975;  Gaschnig,  1977).  Its  kinship  with 
complexity  theory  now  tends  to  be  emphasized  (see  Pohl,  1977). 

Ways  of  Using  Heuristic  Information 

The  points  at  which  heuristic  information  can  be  applied  in  a  search 
include — 

1.  deciding  which  node  to  expand  next,  instead  of  doing  the  ex- 
pansions in  a  strictly  breadth-first  or  depth-first  order; 

2.  in  the  course  of  expanding  a  node,  deciding  which  successor  or 
successors  to  generate — instead  of  blindly  generating  all  possible 
successors  at  one  time;  and 

3.  deciding  that  certain  nodes  should  be  discarded,  or  pruned,  from 
the  search  tree. 

A  state- space  search  algorithm  is  presented  below  that  uses  heuristic 
information  only  at  the  first  of  these  points,  deciding  which  node  to 
expand  next,  on  the  assumption  that  nodes  are  to  be  expanded  fully  or 
not  at  all.  The  general  idea  is  always  to  expand  the  node  that  seems 
"most  promising."  A  search  that  implements  this  idea  is  called  an 
ordered  search  or  best-first  search.  Ordered  search  has  been  the  subject 
of  considerable  theoretical  study,  and  several  variations  on  the  basic 
algorithm  below  are  reviewed  in  Articles  n.C3b  through  n.C3d  (on  ordered 
state- space  search)  and  Article  n.C4  (on  ordered  AND/ OR  graph  search). 

The  other  two  uses  of  heuristic  information  can  be  discussed  more 
briefly.  Decisions  of  the  second  kind — determining  which  successors  to 
generate — are  often  decisions  of  operator  selection,  determining  which 
operator  to  apply  next  to  a  given  node.  A  node  to  which  some  but  not 
all  applicable  operators  have  been  applied  is  said  to  have  been  partially 
developed  or  partially  expanded.  The  use  of  heuristic  information  to 
develop  nodes  partially,  reserving  the  possibility  of  fuller  expansion  at  a 
later  point  in  the  search,  has  been  investigated  by  Michie  (1967)  and  by 
Michie  and  Ross  (1970).  Other  applications  of  the  idea  of  limiting  the 
successors  of  a  given  node  occur  in  game-playing  programs  (see  Article 
n.C5c).  Another  important  variant  of  the  idea  is  means-ends  analysis, 
which,  instead  of  deciding  on  an  applicable  operator,  chooses  an  operator 
most  likely  to  advance  the  search  whether  or  not  it  is  immediately 
applicable.  The  problem  of  making  the  operator  applicable,  if  necessary, 
is  addressed  secondarily.    (See  Articles  n.D2  and  n.D5.) 


60  Search  II 

The  third  use  of  heuristic  information,  for  pruning,  amounts  to 
deciding  that  some  nodes  should  never  be  expanded.  In  some  cases,  it 
can  be  definitely  determined  that  a  node  is  not  part  of  a  solution,  and 
the  node  may  then  be  safely  discarded,  or  pruned,  from  the  search  tree. 
In  other  cases,  pruning  may  be  desirable  even  though  the  nodes  pruned 
cannot  be  guaranteed  inessential  to  a  solution.  One  reason,  in  con- 
junction with  a  best-first  search,  is  simply  to  save  the  space  that  would 
be  required  to  retain  a  large  number  of  apparently  unpromising  nodes 
on  a  list  of  candidates  for  possible  future  expansion.  For  examples,  see 
Doran  (1967)  and  Harris's  bandwidth  search  (Article  n.C3c).  Another 
reason  for  pruning  is  as  a  restriction  on  a  search  that  is  otherwise  blind. 
For  example,  a  breadth-first  search  could  be  modified  to  choose  between 
expansion  and  pruning  for  each  node  it  considers.  This  pruning  to 
control  the  search  is  also  very  important  for  problems  in  which  all 
solutions,  rather  than  just  a  single  solution,  must  be  found:  Finding  all 
solutions  implies  an  exhaustive  exploration  of  all  unpruned  parts  of  the 
search  space.  An  example  of  a  search  for  all  solutions  is  the  DENDRAL 
program  (see  Article  VH.C2,  in  Vol.  n). 

Ordered  State-space  Search 

An  ordered  or  best-first  search,  as  mentioned  above,  is  one  that 
always  selects  the  most  promising  node  as  the  next  node  to  expand. 
The  choice  is  ordinarily  assumed  to  be  global,  that  is,  to  operate  on  the 
set  of  all  nodes  generated  but  not  yet  expanded.  A  local  choice  would 
also  be  possible,  however;  for  example,  an  ordered  depth-first  search 
would  be  one  that  always  expands  the  most  promising  successor  of  the 
node  last  expanded. 

The  promise  of  a  node  can  be  defined  in  various  ways.  One  way, 
in  a  state-space  problem,  is  to  estimate  its  distance  from  a  goal  node; 
another  is  to  assume  that  the  solution  path  includes  the  node  being 
evaluated  and  estimate  the  length  or  difficulty  of  the  entire  path.  Along 
a  different  dimension,  the  evaluation  may  consider  only  certain  pre- 
determined features  of  the  node  in  question,  or  it  may  determine  the 
relevant  features  by  comparing  the  given  node  with  the  goal.  In  all 
these  cases,  the  measure  by  which  the  promise  of  a  node  is  estimated  is 
called  an  evaluation  function. 

A  basic  algorithm  for  ordered  state- space  search  is  given  by  Nilsson 
(1971).  The  evaluation  function  is  /*;  it  is  defined  so  that  the  more 
promising  a  node  is,  the  smaller  is  the  value  of  /*.  The  node  selected 
for  expansion  is  one  at  which  /*  is  minimum.  The  state  space  is 
assumed  to  be  a  general  graph. 


C3a  Basic  Concepts  in  Heuristic  Search  61 

The  algorithm  is  as  follows: 

1.  Put  the  start  node  5  on  a  list,  called  OPEN,  of  unexpanded 
nodes.     Calculate  f*(s)  and  associate  its  value  with  node  s. 

2.  If  OPEN  is  empty,  exit  with  failure;  no  solution  exists. 

3.  Select  from  OPEN  a  node  i  at  which  /*  is  minimum.  If  several 
nodes  qualify,  choose  a  goal  node  if  there  is  one,  and  otherwise 
choose  among  them  arbitrarily. 

4.  Remove  node  i  from  OPEN  and  place  it  on  a  list,  called 
CLOSED,  of  expanded  nodes. 

5.  If  i  is  a  goal  node,  exit  with  success;  a  solution  has  been  found. 

6.  Expand  node  i,  creating  nodes  for  all  its  successors.  For  every 
successor  node  j  of  i: 

a.  Calculate  f*(j). 

b.  If  7*  is  neither  in  list  OPEN  nor  in  list  CLOSED,  then  add  it 
to  OPEN,  with  its  /*  value.  Attach  a  pointer  from  j  back 
to  its  predecessor  i  (in  order  to  trace  back  a  solution  path 
once  a  goal  node  is  found). 

c.  If  j  was  already  on  either  OPEN  or  CLOSED,  compare  the  /* 
value  just  calculated  for  j  with  the  value  previously 
associated  with  the  node.     If  the  new  value  is  lower,  then 

i.  Substitute  it  for  the  old  value, 
ii.  Point   j  back   to    i  instead   of   to   its   previously   found 

predecessor, 
hi.  If   node   j  was   on   the    CLOSED   list,    move   it   back   to 

OPEN. 

7.  Go  to  (2). 

Step  6c  is  necessary  for  general  graphs,  in  which  a  node  can  have 
more  than  one  predecessor.  The  predecessor  yielding  the  smaller  value 
°f  f*{j)  is  chosen.  For  trees,  in  which  a  node  has  at  most  one  pre- 
decessor, step  6c  can  be  ignored.  Note  that  even  if  the  search  space  is 
a  general  graph,  the  subgraph  that  is  made  explicit  is  always  a  tree, 
since  node  j  never  records  more  than  one  predecessor  at  a  time. 

Breadth-first,  uniform-cost,  and  depth-first  search  (Article  n.Ci)  are 
all  special  cases  of  the  ordered- search  technique.  For  breadth-first  search, 
we  choose  /*(*)  to  be  the  depth  of  node  i.  For  uniform-cost  search, 
f*(i)  is  the  cost  of  the  path  from  the  start  node  to  node  i.  A  depth- 
first  search  (without  a  depth  bound)  can  be  obtained  by  taking  f*(i)  to 
be  the  negative  of  the  depth  of  the  node. 

The  purpose  of  ordered  search,  of  course,  is  to  reduce  the  number  of 
nodes  expanded  as  compared  to  blind-search  algorithms.    Its  effectiveness 


62  Search  II 

in  doing  this  depends  directly  on  the  choice  of  /*  which  should  dis- 
criminate sharply  between  promising  and  unpromising  nodes.  If  the 
discrimination  is  inaccurate,  however,  the  ordered  search  may  miss  an 
optimal  solution  or  all  solutions.  If  no  exact  measure  of  promise  is 
available,  therefore,  the  choice  of  /*  involves  a  trade-off  between  time 
and  space,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  guarantee  of  an  optimal  solution, 
or  any  solution,  on  the  other. 

Problem  Types  and  the  Choice  of  f* 

The  measure  of  a  node's  promise — and  consequently  the  appro- 
priateness of  a  particular  evaluation  function — depends  on  the  problem 
at  hand.  Several  cases  can  be  distinguished  by  the  type  of  solution 
they  require.  In  one,  it  is  assumed  that  the  state  space  contains  mul- 
tiple solution  paths  with  different  costs;  the  problem  is  to  find  the 
optimal  (i.e.,  minimum  cost)  solution.  This  first  case  is  well  understood; 
see  Article  n.C3b  on  the  A*  algorithm. 

The  second  situation  is  similar  to  the  first  but  with  an  added 
condition:  The  problem  is  hard  enough  that,  if  it  is  treated  as  an 
instance  of  the  first  case,  the  search  will  probably  exceed  bounds  of 
time  and  space  before  finding  a  solution.  The  key  questions  for  the 
second  case  are  (a)  how  to  find  good  (but  not  optimal)  solutions  with 
reasonable  amounts  of  search  effort  and  (b)  how  to  bound  both  the 
search  effort  and  the  extent  to  which  the  solution  produced  is  less  than 
optimal. 

A  third  kind  of  problem  is  one  in  which  there  is  no  concern  for  the 
optimality  of  the  solution;  perhaps  only  one  solution  exists,  or  any 
solution  is  as  good  as  any  other.  The  question  in  this  third  case  is  how 
to  minimize  the  search  effort — instead  of,  as  in  the  second  case,  trying 
to  minimize  some  combination  of  search  effort  and  solution  cost. 

An  example  of  the  third  case  comes  from  theorem  proving,  where 
one  may  well  be  satisfied  with  the  most  easily  found  proof,  however 
inelegant.  A  clear  example  of  the  second  case  is  the  traveling- salesman 
problem,  in  which  finding  some  circuit  through  a  set  of  cities  is  trivial, 
and  the  difficulty,  which  is  very  great,  is  entirely  in  finding  a  shortest 
or  close-to-shortest  path.  Most  treatments,  however,  do  not  clearly  dis- 
tinguish between  the  two  cases.  A  popular  test  problem,  the  8-puzzle, 
can  be  treated  as  being  in  either  class.  For  further  discussion  of  the 
second  and  third  cases,  see  Article  n.C3c. 


C3a  Basic  Concepts  in  Heuristic  Search  63 

References 

See  Doran  (1967),  Feigenbaum  (1969),  Gaschnig  (1977),  Michie 
(1967),  Michie  and  Ross  (1970),  Newell  and  Ernst  (1965),  Newell  and 
Simon  (1972),  Nilsson  (1971,  1974),  Pohl  (1977),  Sandewall  (1971),  and 
Simon  and  Kadane  (1975). 


C3b.     A* — Optimal  Search  for  an  Optimal  Solution 

The  A*  algorithm,  described  by  Hart,  Nilsson,  and  Raphael  (1968), 
addresses  the  problem  of  finding  a  minimal-cost  path  joining  the  start 
node  and  a  goal  node  in  a  state- space  graph.  This  problem  subsumes 
the  problem  of  finding  the  path  between  such  nodes  containing  the 
smallest  number  of  arcs.  In  the  latter  problem,  each  arc  (representing 
the  application  of  an  operator)  has  cost  1;  in  the  minimal-cost-path 
problem,  the  costs  associated  with  arcs  can  be  arbitrary.  Historically, 
the  predecessors  of  A*  include  Dijkstra's  algorithm  (1959)  and  Moore's 
algorithm  (1959).  A  class  of  algorithms  similar  to  A*  is  used  in  oper- 
ations research  under  the  name  of  branch- and-bound  algorithms  (see  Hall, 
1971;  Hillier  and  Lieberman,  1974;  Lawler  and  Wood,  1966;  Reingold, 
Nievergelt,  and  Deo,  1977). 

The  algorithm  used  by  A*  is  an  ordered  state-space  search  (see 
Article  n.C3a).  Its  distinctive  feature  is  its  definition  of  the  evaluation 
function,  f*.  As  in  the  usual  ordered  search,  the  node  chosen  for  ex- 
pansion is  always  one  at  which  /*  is  minimum. 

Since  /*  evaluates  nodes  in  light  of  the  need  to  find  a  minimal-cost 
solution,  it  considers  the  value  of  each  node  n  as  having  two  com- 
ponents: the  cost  of  reaching  n  from  the  start  node  and  the  cost  of 
reaching  a  goal  from  node  n.    Accordingly,  /*  is  defined  by 

f*(n)  =  g*(n)  +  h*{n)  , 

where  g*  estimates  the  minimum  cost  of  a  path  from  the  start  node  to 
node  n,  and  h*  estimates  the  minimum  cost  from  node  n  to  a  goal. 
The  value  f*(n)  thus  estimates  the  minimal  cost  of  a  solution  path 
passing  through  node  n.  The  actual  costs,  which  /*  g*,  and  h*  only 
estimate,  are  denoted  by  /,  g,  and  h,  respectively.  It  is  assumed  that 
all  arc  costs  are  positive. 

The  function  g*,  applied  to  a  node  n  being  considered  for  expansion, 
is  calculated  as  the  actual  cost  from  the  start  node  5  to  n  along  the 
cheapest  path  found  so  far  by  the  algorithm.  If  the  state  space  is  a 
tree,  then  g*  gives  a  perfect  estimate,  since  only  one  path  from  s  to  n 
exists.  In  a  general  state-space  graph,  g*  can  err  only  in  the  direction 
of  overestimating  the  minimal  cost;  its  value  is  adjusted  downward  if  a 
shorter  path  to  n  is  found.  Even  in  a  general  graph,  there  are  certain 
conditions  (mentioned  below)  under  which  g*(n)  can  be  shown  to  be  a 
perfect  estimate  by  the  time  node  n  is  chosen  for  expansion. 

The  function   h*  \%  the  carrier  of  heuristic  information  and  can  be 


C3b  A* — Optimal  Search  for  an  Optimal  Solution  65 

defined  in  any  way  appropriate  to  the  problem  domain.  For  the 
interesting  properties  of  the  A*  algorithm  to  hold,  however,  h*  should 
be  nonnegative,  and  it  should  never  overestimate  the  cost  of  reaching 
a  goal  node  from  the  node  being  evaluated.  That  is,  for  any  such 
node  n,  it  should  always  hold  that  h*(n)  is  less  than  or  equal  to  h(n), 
the  actual  cost  of  an  optimal  path  from  n  to  a  goal  node.  This  last 
condition  is  called  the  admissibility  condition. 

Admissibility  and  Optimality  of  A* 

It  can  be  shown  that  if  h*  satisfies  the  admissibility  condition  and 
if,  in  addition,  all  arc  costs  are  positive  and  can  be  bounded  from  below 
by  a  positive  number,  then  A*  is  guaranteed  to  find  a  solution  path  of 
minimal  cost  if  any  solution  path  exists.  This  property  is  called  the 
property  of  admissibility. 

Although  the  admissibility  condition  requires  h*  to  be  a  lower  bound 
on  h,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  more  nearly  h*  approximates  h,  the 
better  the  algorithm  will  perform.  If  h*  were  identically  equal  to  h,  an 
optimal  solution  path  would  be  found  without  ever  expanding  a  node  off 
the  path  (assuming  only  one  optimal  solution  exists).  If  h*  is  identically 
zero,  A*  reduces  to  the  blind  uniform-cost  algorithm  (Article  n.Ci). 
Two  otherwise  similar  algorithms,  say,  A1  and  A2,  can  be  compared 
with  respect  to  their  choices  of  the  h*  function,  say,  \*  and  h^*. 
Algorithm  Ax  is  said  to  be  more  informed  than  A2  if,  whenever  a 
node  n  (other  than  a  goal  node)  is  evaluated, 

K*{n)  >  VM  • 

On  this  basis  an  optimality  result  for  A*  can  be  stated:  If  A  and  A* 
are  admissible  algorithms  such  that  A*  is  more  informed  than  A,  then 
A*  never  expands  a  node  that  is  not  also  expanded  by  A.  A  proof 
(correcting  the  proof  given  in  Nilsson,  1971)  appears  in  Gelperin  (1977). 

Optimality  and  Heuristic  Power 

The  sense  in  which  A*  yields  an  optimal  search  has  to  do  only  with 
the  number  of  nodes  it  expands  in  the  course  of  finding  a  minimal- cost 
solution.  But  there  are  other  relevant  considerations.  First,  the  difficulty 
of  computing  h*  also  affects  the  total  computational  effort.  Second,  it 
may  be  less  important  to  find  a  solution  whose  cost  is  absolutely  min- 
imum than  to  find  a  solution  of  reasonable  cost  within  a  search  of  mod- 
erate length.  In  such  a  case,  one  might  prefer  an  h*  that  evaluates 
nodes  more  accurately  in  most  cases  but  sometimes  overestimates  the 
distance  to  a  goal,  thus  yielding  an  inadmissible  algorithm.     (See  Article 


66  Search  II 

n.C3c.)  The  choice  of  h*  and  the  resulting  heuristic  power  of  the  algo- 
rithm depend  on  a  compromise  among  these  considerations. 

A  final  question  one  might  consider  is  the  number  of  node  ex- 
pansions, as  opposed  to  the  number  of  distinct  nodes  expanded  by  A*. 
The  two  totals  will  be  the  same  provided  that  whenever  a  node  n  is 
expanded  (moved  to  the  CLOSED  list),  an  optimal  path  to  n  has 
already  been  found.  This  condition  is  always  satisfied  in  a  state-space 
tree,  where  g*(n)  =  g(n)  necessarily.  It  will  also  be  satisfied  in  a 
general  state-space  graph  if  a  condition  called  the  consistency  assumption 
holds  (see  Hart,  Nilsson,  and  Raphael,  1968).  The  general  idea  of  the 
assumption  is  that  a  form  of  the  triangle  inequality  holds  throughout 
the  search  space.  Specifically,  the  assumption  is  that  for  any  nodes  m 
and  n,  the  estimated  distance  h*(m)  from  m  to  a  goal  should  always  be 
less  than  or  equal  to  the  actual  distance  from  m  to  n  plus  the 
estimated  remaining  distance,  h*(n),  from  n  to  a  goal.  For  an  h*  not 
satisfying  the  consistency  assumption  on  a  general  state-space  graph, 
Martelli  (1977)  has  shown  that  A*  is  not  optimal  with  respect  to  the 
number  of  expansions  and  has  given  an  algorithm  that  runs  more 
efficiently  under  these  circumstances. 

References 

See  Dijkstra  (1959),  Gelperin  (1977),  Hall  (1971),  Hart,  Nilsson,  and 
Raphael  (1968,  1972),  Hillier  and  Lieberman  (1974),  Lawler  and  Wood 
(1966),  Martelli  (1977),  Moore  (1959),  and  Reingold,  Nievergelt,  and  Deo 

(1977). 


C3c.     Relaxing  the  Optimality  Requirement 

The  A*  algorithm  (Article  n.C3b)  is  an  ordered  state-space  search 
using  the  evaluation  function  f*  =  g*  +  h*.  If  the  appropriate  con- 
ditions are  met,  including  most  importantly  the  admissibility  condition 
that  the  estimate  h*{n)  is  always  less  than  or  equal  to  h(n),  then  A*  is 
guaranteed  to  find  an  optimal  solution  path  if  one  exists.  Again  under 
suitable  conditions,  the  performance  of  A*  is  optimal  in  comparison  with 
other  similarly  defined  admissible  algorithms.  Still,  several  questions 
remain: 

1.  One  may  be  more  concerned  with  minimizing  search  effort  than 
with  minimizing  solution  cost.  Is  /*  =  g*  -\-  h*  an  appropriate 
evaluation  function  in  this  case? 

2.  Even  if  solution  cost  is  important,  the  combinatorics  of  the 
problem  may  be  such  that  an  admissible  A*  cannot  run  to 
termination.  Can  speed  be  gained  at  the  cost  of  a  bounded 
decrease  in  solution  quality? 

3.  It  may  be  hard  to  find  a  good  heuristic  function  h*  that 
satisfies  the  admissibility  condition;  with  a  poor  but  admissible 
heuristic  function,  A*  deteriorates  into  blind  search.  How  is  the 
search  affected  by  an  inadmissible  heuristic  function? 

Minimizing  Search  Effort 

An  approach  to  the  first  question  can  be  stated  as  follows.  The 
reason  for  including  g*  in  the  evaluation  function  is  to  add  a  breadth- 
first  component  to  the  search;  without  g*,  the  evaluation  function  would 
estimate,  at  any  node  n,  the  remaining  distance  to  a  goal  and  would 
ignore  the  distance  already  covered  in  reaching  n.  If  the  object  is  to 
minimize  search  effort  instead  of  solution  cost,  one  might  conclude  that 
g*  should  be  omitted  from  the  evaluation  function.  An  early  heuristic 
search  algorithm  that  did  just  this  was  Doran  and  Michie's  Graph 
Traverser  (Doran  and  Michie,  1966;  Doran,  1967);  the  evaluation 
function  used  was  of  the  form  /*  =  h*,  and  the  object  was  to  minimize 
total  search  effort  in  finding  solutions  to  the  8-puzzle  and  other  prob- 
lems. A  generalization  covering  the  Graph  Traverser  algorithm,  A*,  and 
others  has  been  defined  by  Pohl  (1969,  1970a,  1970b)  as  the  Heuristic 
Path  Algorithm  (HPA).  This  algorithm  gives  an  ordered  state-space 
search  with  an  evaluation  function  of  the  form 

/*=(!_  w)g*  +  wh*  , 


68  Search  II 

where  w  is  a  constant  in  [0,  1]  giving  the  relative  importance  to  be 
attached  to  g  and  h.  Choosing  w  =  1  gives  the  Graph  Traverser  algo- 
rithm, w  =  0  gives  breadth-first  search,  and  w  =  .5  is  equivalent  to 
the  A*  function  f*  =  g*  +  h*. 

Pohl's  results  concerning  HPA  indicate  that,  at  least  in  special  cases, 
omitting  g*  from  the  evaluation  function  is  a  mistake.  One  case  is  that 
in  which  h*  is  the  most  accurate  heuristic  function  possible:  If  h*(n) 
=  h(ri)  at  every  node  n,  the  evaluation  function  f*  =  h*  still  expands 
no  fewer  nodes  than  /*  =  g*  +  h*-  The  other  case  assumes  a  sim- 
plified state  space,  whose  graph  is  an  infinite  ra-ary  tree,  and  assumes 
that  the  error  in  /i*— which  may  underestimate  or  overestimate  h — is 
bounded  by  a  nonnegative  integer  e.  In  this  situation,  it  is  shown  that 
the  maximum  number  of  nodes  expanded  with  f*  =  h*  is  greater  than 
the  maximum  number  expanded  with  f*  =  g*  +  h*,  and  that  the  dif- 
ference between  the  maxima  is  exponential  in  the  error  bound  e.  This 
analysis  by  Pohl  is  one  of  the  earliest  applications  of  oracle  or  adversary 
analysis  for  discovering  worst-case  algorithmic  efficiency.  As  such,  it  is 
an  important  precursor  to  work  on  NP  (nondeterministic  polynomial- 
time)  complete  problems  and  their  attempted  solution  by  heuristics. 
(For  a  general  introduction  to  NP-completeness,  see  Aho,  Hopcroft,  and 
Ullman,  1974.) 

The  two  functions  f*  =  h*  and  /*  =  g*  +  h*  have  not  been 
analyzed  with  respect  to  their  average- case,  as  opposed  to  worst- case, 
behavior.  Pohl's  empirical  results  suggest  that  ordered  search  may 
typically  expand  the  fewest  nodes,  provided  the  h*  function  is  fairly 
good,  if  g*  is  included  but  given  less  weight  than  h* — that  is,  with  w 
greater  than  .5  but  less  than  1.  These  results  were  obtained  for  the 
15-puzzle,  a  task  exactly  like  the  8-puzzle  except  that  it  uses  15  tiles  in 
a  4  X  4  array. 

For  problems  that  differ  from  the  15-puzzle,  in  that  some  states  lead 
to  dead  ends  rather  than  only  to  longer  solutions,  a  somewhat  different 
approach  has  been  taken  recently  by  Simon  and  Kadane  (1975).  Whereas 
the  evaluation  functions  /*  =  g*  +  h*  and  f*  =  h*  are  based  on  the 
estimated  solution  cost  at  a  given  node,  Simon  and  Kadane  propose  that 
the  function  should  also  take  explicit  account  of  the  probability  that  the 
node  is  in  fact  on  a  solution  path.  With  such  a  function,  an  expected 
long  search  with  high  probability  of  success  could  readily  rate  just  as 
favorably  as  one  that  is  potentially  shorter  but  that  has  a  higher  chance 
of  failing. 


C3c  Relaxing  the  Optimality  Requirement  69 

Solution  Quality  and  Heuristic  Error 

The  second  question,  of  speed  versus  solution  quality,  has  been 
studied  by  Pohl  (1973,  1977)  and  Harris  (1973,  1974).  Harris's  work 
concerns  the  third  question  (inadmissible  heuristic  functions)  as  well,  as 
do  Pohl's  results,  which  were  summarized  above.  Both  Harris  and  Pohl 
consider  the  traveling -salesman  problem,  which  is  NP-complete  (Karp, 
1972). 

Pohl's  approach  is  a  further  generalization  of  the  HPA  evaluation 
function:  Now  f*(ri)  =  g*{n)  +  w(ri)h*(ri).  That  is,  the  relative  weight 
w  to  be  attached  to  g*  and  h*  is  no  longer  constant;  the  function  w(n), 
which  may  be  greater  than  or  equal  to  1,  is  defined  to  vary  with  the 
depth  of  node  n.  This  approach  is  called  dynamic  weighting.  With  a 
definition  of  w  that  weights  h*  less  heavily  as  the  search  goes  deeper, 
and  with  the  assumption  that  /i*  is  a  lower  bound  on  h,  Pohl  shows 
that  HPA  will  find  a  solution  to  the  traveling- salesman  problem  whose 
cost  is  bounded  by  the  ratio 

cost  of  tour  found 
cost  of  optimal  solution 

where  e  is  a  constant  in  [0,  1),  which  appears  in  the  definition  of  w. 

Dynamic  weighting  was  tested  on  an  instance  of  the  traveling- 
salesman  problem,  known  as  the  Croes  problem,  which  involves  20  cities 
and  has  a  known  optimal- solution  cost  of  246.  An  admissible  A* — 
which  produces  an  optimal  solution  if  it  produces  any — had  still  not 
terminated  after  expanding  500  nodes.  With  dynamic  weighting, 
however,  together  with  an  appropriate  choice  of  e  and  the  same  h* 
function,  a  solution  with  cost  260  was  found  by  expanding  only  53 
nodes. 

Harris's  approach,  called  bandwidth  search,  is  somewhat  different 
from  Pohl's.  It  assumes  that  no  good  h*  function  satisfying  the  admis- 
sibility condition  is  available.  In  its  place,  he  introduces  the  bandwidth 
condition,  which  requires  that  for  all  nongoal  nodes  n, 

(1)  h*{n)  <  h{n)  +  e 
and 

(2)  h(n)  -  d  <  h*{n)  . 

It  is   assumed  that   h*  satisfies  the    consistency  assumption  (see  Article 
n.C3b). 


70  Search  II 

With  respect  to  the  first  part  of  the  condition,  it  can  be  shown  that 
if  h*  never  overestimates  the  distance  to  a  goal  by  more  than  e,  the 
cost  of  a  solution  found  by  A*  will  not  exceed  the  cost  of  an  optimal 
solution  by  more  than  e.  With  such  an  h*,  the  algorithm  is  said  to  be 
e- admissible;  and  the  goal  it  finds,  e- optimal. 

Once  the  bandwidth  search  finds  some  solution,  a  further  application 
of  condition  (1)  may  show  that  the  cost  of  the  solution  found  is  in  fact 
closer  than  e  to  an  optimal  solution.  This  is  possible  because  (a)  the 
cost  of  the  solution  found  is  known  and  (b)  a  lower  bound  on  the  cost 
of  every  other  solution  is  the  minimum,  over  all  nodes  n  remaining  on 
the  OPEN  list,  of  f*(n)  -  e.  If  the  difference  between  these  two  quan- 
tities is  too  big,  the  search  can  be  continued  until  it  finds  a  solution 
that  is  acceptably  close  to  the  optimum. 

The  second  part  of  the  bandwidth  condition,  condition  (2),  can  be 
used  to  save  storage  space  by  dropping  nodes  from  the  OPEN  list, 
without  any  risk  of  dropping  a  node  that  is  in  fact  on  an  optimal  path 
to  a  goal.  Let  node  q  be  a  node  that,  having  a  minimum  value  of  /* 
has  been  selected  for  expansion.  Then  any  node  m  may  safely  be 
dropped  from  OPEN  if  f*{m)  is  hopelessly  big  compared  to  f*{q). 
Specifically,  it  can  be  shown  that  all  nodes  m  can  be  dropped  if  there  is 
a  node  q  such  that 

f*(m)  -  (e  +  d)  >  f\q)    . 

Harris  notes  that  it  may  be  difficult  to  find  a  heuristic  function  h* 
that  satisfies  both  parts  of  the  bandwidth  condition.  One  may  instead 
define  two  heuristic  functions,  one  to  order  the  search  and  one  to 
determine  which  nodes  can  be  dropped.  Such  functions,  say,  h±*  and 
Iiq*,  should  then  satisfy 

(1')  h*in)  <  h(n)  +  e 

and 

(2')  h(n)  -  d  <  VM  • 

Using  two  such  heuristic  functions,  Harris  tested  the  bandwidth 
search  on  several  instances  of  the  traveling- salesman  problem,  including 
the  20-city  Croes  problem  mentioned  above.  Harris's  results,  including  a 
comparison  with  A*  using  an  admissible  heuristic  function,  are  sum- 
marized in  Figure  C3-1.     The  OPEN  list  was  limited  to  500  nodes. 


C3c 


Relaxing  the  Optimality  Requirement 


71 


BANDWIDTH 

SEARCH 

ADMISSIBLE  SEARCH 

No.  of 

Qua  1  i  ty 

Nodes 

Qua  1 i ty        Nodes 

cities 

of  solution 

expanded 

of  solution      expanded 

5— opti  ma  I 


opti  ma  I 


14 


opt  i  ma  I 


18 


11 


optima 


14 


none 


500  open  nodes 


20 


4— optima  I 


42 


none 


500  open  nodes 


Figure  C3-1.     Comparison  of  bandwidth  search  and  admissible  search. 


References 

See  Aho,  Hopcroft,  and  Ullman  (1974),  Doran  (1967),  Doran  and 
Michie  (1966),  Harris  (1973,  1974),  Karp  (1972),  Nilsson  (1971),  Pohl 
(1969,  1970a,  1970b,  1973,  1977),  and  Simon  and  Kadane  (1975). 


C3d.    Bidirectional  Search 

Earlier  articles  in  this  chapter  described  (a)  heuristic  state-space 
search  methods  using  forward  reasoning  and  (b)  a  blind  state-space 
search  combining  forward  and  backward  reasoning  into  a  bidirectional 
algorithm.  The  kinds  of  problems  to  which  a  bidirectional  state-space 
method  applies  were  considered  in  Article  n.Ci;  in  general,  it  must  be 
possible  in  these  problems  to  search  either  forward,  from  the  initial  state 
toward  the  goal,  or  backward,  from  the  goal  toward  the  initial  state.  A 
bidirectional  search  pursues  both  lines  of  reasoning  in  parallel,  growing 
two  search  trees  and  terminating  when  they  meet.  The  motivation  is 
that,  in  many  cases,  the  number  of  nodes  in  a  search  tree  grows  ex- 
ponentially with  its  depth;  if  a  solution  can  be  found  by  using  two  trees 
of  half  the  depth,  the  search  effort  should  be  reduced  significantly. 
Blind  bidirectional  search  was  in  fact  found  to  expand  far  fewer  nodes 
than  its  unidirectional  counterpart.  A  natural  next  question  is  whether 
heuristic  bidirectional  search  can  give  still  greater  improvements  in 
efficiency. 

This  question  was  investigated  by  Pohl  (1969,  1971).  Whereas  his 
blind  bidirectional  algorithm  used  forward  and  backward  uniform-cost 
search,  his  heuristic  algorithm  used  forward  and  backward  ordered 
search.  Otherwise,  the  two  algorithms  differed  mainly  in  their  termi- 
nation conditions.  In  both  cases,  the  termination  condition  was  compli- 
cated by  the  fact  that  the  algorithms  were  designed  to  find  an  optimal 
path  between  the  start  and  goal  nodes;  they  could  be  simplified  if  any 
path  would  do. 

As  evalution  functions,  Pohl's  heuristic  bidirectional  algorithm  used 
functions  parallel  to  those  of  A*.  For  a  node  x  in  the  forward  search 
tree: 

gs(x)        measured    the    shortest   path    found    so    far   from    the   start 
node,  s,  to  x; 

hs(x)        estimated  the  minimum  remaining  distance  from   x  to  the 
terminal  node,  t;  and 

fs(x)  =  gs(x)  -\-  hs(x)  was  the  evaluation  function. 
Similarly,  for  a  node  x  generated  in  the  backward  search: 

gi(x)        measured  the  shortest  path  found  so  far  from  x  to  t; 
hi(x)        estimated  the  minimum  distance  from  s  to  x;  and 
fi(x)  =  gi(x)  -\-  hi{x)  was  the  evaluation  function. 


C3d  Bidirectional  Search  73 

Constraints  were  placed  on  the  heuristic  functions  hs  and  ht,  corre- 
sponding to  the  admissibility  condition  and  the  consistency  assumption 
of  A*,  in  order  to  guarantee  the  optimality  of  the  solution. 

Pohl's  results,  in  experiments  using  bidirectional  heuristic  search  on 
the  15-puzzle,  were  disappointing.  It  was  hoped  that  the  search  trees 
rooted  at  the  start  and  goal  nodes  would  meet  near  the  middle  of  the 
solution  path.  In  blind  search,  this  had  happened  necessarily  because 
both  trees  were  expanded  breadth-first.  (Recall  that  uniform- cost  search 
is  a  generalization  of  the  breadth-first  algorithm.)  In  the  heuristic  case, 
however,  the  search  in  each  direction  was  narrowed.  Since  each  prob- 
lem had  many  alternate  solutions,  the  typical  outcome  was  that  both 
search  trees  grew  to  include  nearly  complete,  but  different,  solution 
paths  before  intersecting. 

Several  ideas  have  been  advanced  for  forcing  the  trees  to  meet 
earlier  while  retaining  the  benefit  of  heuristic  information  (Pohl,  1971, 
1977;  Kowalski,  1972;  de  Champeaux  and  Sint,  1977).  One  that  has 
been  tested  is  that  of  de  Champeaux  and  Sint  (1977),  which  redefines 
the  heuristic  functions  hs  and  ht  as  follows: 

Let  T-OPEN  be  the  list  of  unexpanded  nodes  of  the  backward 
search  tree.  For  a  node  x  in  the  forward  search  tree,  hs(x)  esti- 
mates the  minimum  distance  from  x  to  the  goal  t  by  way  of  some 
node  y  in  T-OPEN.  That  is,  hs(x)  is  the  minimum,  over  all 
nodes  y  on  T-OPEN,  of  the  estimated  distance  from  x  to  y  plus 
gt(y),  the  length  of  the  shortest  known  path  from  y  to  the  goal. 

The  function  ht  is  defined  analogously.  The  authors  reported,  for  the 
same  problems  Pohl  had  used,  that  the  algorithm  generally  produced 
shorter  solution  paths,  with  fewer  nodes  expanded,  and  that  the  search 
graphs  now  did  meet  near  the  middle  of  the  search  space.  Unfor- 
tunately, however,  hs  and  ht  were  so  expensive  to  compute — since  for 
each  node  x  to  be  expanded,  its  distance  must  be  estimated  to  every 
node  y  on  the  opposite  OPEN  list — that  the  algorithm  still  ran  much 
more  slowly  than  unidirectional  heuristic  search. 

References 

See  de  Champeaux  and  Sint  (1977),  Kowalski  (1972),  and  Pohl 
(1969,  1971,  1977). 


C4.     Heuristic  Search  of  an  AND/OR  Graph 

This  article  returns  to  the  problem  of  searching  an  AND/ OR  graph, 
as  opposed  to  an  ordinary  state-space  graph.  The  distinction  between 
the  two  is  the  presence  of  AND  nodes,  which  add  conceptual  com- 
plications to  the  search  problem.  Each  node  of  the  AND/ OR  graph 
represents  a  goal  to  be  achieved.  It  will  be  assumed  throughout  that 
reasoning  is  backward,  from  an  initial  goal  (the  root)  toward  an 
equivalent  set  of  subgoals,  all  of  which  have  immediate  solutions.  On 
this  assumption,  an  AND/OR  graph  constitutes  (in  the  terminology  of 
this  chapter)  a  problem-reduction  representation.  This  identification  gives 
another  way  of  stating  the  distinction  between  problem-reduction  and 
state- space  representations:  State- space  operators  always  take  exactly 
one  input  and  produce  exactly  one  output;  a  problem-reduction  operator 
also  takes  a  single  input  but  may  produce  multiple  outputs  (see  Sec. 
n.B). 

To  put  the  matter  further  into  perspective,  one  may  also  conceive  of 
searching  an  AND/ OR  graph  in  the  forward  direction — from  the  prim- 
itive problems,  whose  solutions  are  already  known,  toward  the  problem 
one  actually  wishes  to  solve.  Just  such  a  graph  search  is  the  one 
typically  conducted  by  a  resolution  theorem-prover,  as  it  brings  together 
two  or  more  axioms  or  previous  conclusions  and  applies  to  them  an 
operator  yielding  one  new  deduction  as  its  result.  (See  Chap,  xn,  in 
Vol.  m.)  Forward  reasoning  in  an  AND/OR  graph,  then,  would  be 
distinguished  from  a  state-space  search  by  the  presence  of  multiple- 
input,  single-output  operators.  For  further  discussion,  including  an 
algorithm  for  bidirectional  search  of  an  AND/ OR  graph,  see  Kowalski 
(1972);  see  also  Martelli  and  Montanari  (1973). 

The  search  of  an  AND/ OR  graph  using  backward  reasoning  raises 
numerous  problems.     Previous  articles  (n.B2  and  n.C2)  have  considered — 

1.  what  constitutes  a  solution  subgraph  of  an  AND/OR  graph,  and 

2.  blind-search  algorithms  for  finding  a  solution  subgraph. 

This  article  considers  three  additional  problems: 

3.  What  might  one  mean  by  an  optimal  solution  subgraph? 

4.  How  can   heuristic  information  be  brought  to  bear  on   the  search 
for  an  optimal  solution? 


C4  Heuristic  Search  of  an  AND/OR  Graph  75 

5.  What   limitations    are   there   on   AND/OR   graphs   and    the    asso- 
ciated search  algorithms  as  general  tools  for  problem  solving? 

The  Definition  of  an  Optimal  Solution 

A  solution  of  an  AND/OR  graph  is  a  subgraph  demonstrating  that 
the  start  node  is  solved.  As  in  a  state-space  search,  one  may  ask  for  a 
solution  of  minimal  cost.  The  cost  of  a  solution  tree  can  be  defined  in 
either  of  two  ways  (Nilsson,  1971): 

1.  The  sum  cost  of  a  solution  tree  is  the   sum  of  all  arc  costs  in 
the  tree. 

2.  The   max  cost  of  a   solution   tree  is   the   sum   of  arc   costs  along 
*      the  most  expensive  path  from  the  root  to  a  terminal  node. 

For  example,  if  every  arc  in  the  solution  tree  has  cost  1,  then  the  sum 
cost  is  the  number  of  arcs  in  the  tree  and  the  max  cost  is  the  depth  of 
the  deepest  node. 

If  the  entire  search  space  had  been  explored,  then  an  optimal  solu- 
tion tree  could  be  constructed  and  its  cost  measured  as  follows.  Let 
c(n,  m)  be  the  cost  of  the  arc  from  node  n  to  a  successor  node  m. 
Define  a  function  h(ri)  by: 

1.  If  n  is  a  terminal  node  (a  primitive  problem),  then  h(n)  =  0. 

2.  If  n  has  OR  successors,  then  h(n)  is  the  minimum,  over  all  its 
successors  m,  of  c(n,  m)  -\-  h{m). 

3.  If  n  has  AND  successors  and  sum  costs  are  used,  then   h  (n)  is 
the  summation,  over  all  successors  m,  of  c  (n,  m)  -J-  h  (m). 

4.  If  n  has  AND  successors  and  max  costs  are  used,  then   h(n)  is 
the  maximum,  over  all  successors  m,  of  c  (n,  m)  -\-  h  (m). 

5.  If   n  is   a   nonterminal   node   with    no   successors,    then    h  (n)   is 
infinite. 

According  to  this  definition,  h(ri)  is  finite  if  and  only  if  the  problem 
represented  by  node  n  is  solvable.  For  each  solvable  node  n,  h(n)  gives 
the  cost  of  an  optimal  solution  tree  for  the  problem  represented  by 
node  n.  If  s  is  the  start  node,  then  h(s)  is  the  cost  of  an  optimal 
solution  to  the  initial  problem. 

Consider,  for  example,  the  AND/ OR  tree  of  Figure  C4-1,  with  arc 
costs  as  indicated.  Each  node  without  successors  is  marked  t  or  u 
according  to  whether  it  is  terminal  or  unsolvable. 


76 


Search 


n 


tl       t2         t3 


1       1 


ul 


t4       u2 


Figure  C4-1.    An  AND/OR  tree. 

If  sum  costs  are  used,  the  values  of  h  are  as  shown  in  Figure  C4-2, 
and  the  optimal  solution  is  the  subgraph  comprising  nodes  S,  B,  D,  E, 
%,  and  %.    The  abbreviation  in}  denotes  infinity. 


tl    t2   t3       C 
h=0   h=0   h=0    h=inf 


D 
h=4 


1  1 


ul     t4  u2      E 
h=inf   h=0  h=inf  h=2 


1 


1 


t5     t6 
h=0    h=0 


Figure  C4-2.     Sum  costs. 


C4 


Heuristic  Search  of  an  AND/ OR  Graph 


77 


If  max  costs  are  used,  then  the  values  of  h  are  as  shown  in 
Figure  C4-3,  and  the  optimal  solution  is  the  subgraph  comprising  nodes 
S,  A,  tit  ^2,  and  t%. 


ul  t4      u2  E 

h=inf        h=0     h=inf     h=l 


t5  t6 

h=0  h=0 


Figure  C4-3.     Max  costs. 


Ordered- search  Algorithms  for  an  AND/OR  Graph 

In  an  ordered  state- space  search,  one  may  use  an  evaluation  function 
f*  that,  applied  to  node  n,  returns  the  estimated  minimum  cost  of  a 
solution  path  passing  through  node  n.  The  next  node  expanded  is 
always  one  at  which  f*  is  minimum — that  is,  one  extends  the  most 
promising  potential  solution  path.  The  successors  of  node  n  are  new 
nodes,  but  one  could  just  as  well  think  of  them  as  new  potential 
solution  paths,  each  differing  from  a  parent  (potential  solution  path)  by 
the  inclusion  of  one  more  step. 

In  the  extension  of  heuristic  search  to  AND/OR  graphs,  there  is  no 
longer  a  one-to-one  correspondence  between  the  choice  of  a  node  to 
expand  and  the  choice  of  a  potential  solution  to  be  extended.  Consider, 
for  example,  the  search  graph  of  Figure  C4-4. 


78  Search  II 


Figure  C4-4.    An  AND/OR  graph  containing 
two  potential  solution  trees. 

Since  C  and  D  are  OR  nodes,  an  actual  solution  of  node  S  will  con- 
tain only  one  of  them.  To  expand  node  A  is  thus  to  extend  two 
potential  solution  trees, 


and 


Conversely,  a  decision  to  extend  the  potential  solution  tree  on  the  left 
can  be  carried  out  by  expanding  either  node  A  or  node  C.  One  must 
be  clear,  therefore,  about  what  kind  of  object  the  expansion  process  is 
to  apply  to.  This  decision  will  affect  the  definition  of  the  evaluation 
function. 

Nilsson's  algorithm.  An  approach  taken  by  Nilsson  (1969,  1971) 
selects  individual  nodes  to  expand  by  a  two-step  process:  First,  identify 
the  most  promising  potential  solution  tree;  then,  choose  a  node  within 
that  tree  for  expansion.  To  accomplish  the  first  step,  an  evaluation 
function  h*  is  defined  at  every  node  n  of  the  tree  that  has  not  been 
shown  to  be  unsolvable.  This  function  is  an  estimate  of  h(n);  that  is,  it 
estimates  the  cost  of  an  optimal  solution  to  the  problem  at  node  n.  If  n 
is  known  to  be  a  terminal  node,  then  by  definition  h*(n)  =  h(n)  =  0. 
Otherwise,  if  n  has  not  yet  been  expanded,  then  the  estimate  must  be 
based  on  whatever  heuristic  information  is  available  from  the  problem 
domain.  For  example,  in  the  search  tree  of  Figure  C4-4,  h*  would 
provide  heuristic  estimates  of  the  cost  of  solving  nodes  A,  C,  and  D. 
The  following  rule  then  permits  h*  to  be  computed  for  each  node  whose 
successors  have  already  been  generated  (and  to  be  recomputed  as  the 
search  tree  is  expanded): 


C4  Heuristic  Search  of  an  AND/OR  Graph  79 

1.  If  n  has  OR  successors  m,  then  h*(n)  is  the  minimum,  over  these 
successors,  of  c(n,m)  -f-  h*(m). 

2.  If  n  has  AND  successors  m  and  sum  costs  are  used,  then  h*(n)  is 
the  summation,  over  these  successors,  of  c(n,m)  -f-  h*(m). 

3.  If  n  has  AND  successors  m  and  max  costs  are  used,  then  h*(n) 
is  the  maximum,  over  these  successors,  of  c(n,  m)  -f-  h*(m). 

Finally,  the  most  promising  potential  solution  tree,  T,  is  defined  in 
terms  of  h*: 

1.  The  start  node  s  is  in   T. 

2.  If  the  search  tree  (the  part  of  the  search  space  generated  so  far) 
contains  a  node  n  and  AND  successors  of  n,  then  all  these 
successors  are  in   T. 

3.  If  the  search  tree  contains  a  node  n  and  OR  successors  m  of  n, 
then  one  successor  m  is  in  T  such  that  c(n,  m)  -f-  h*(m)  is  min- 
imal. 

The  estimated  cost  of  T  is  h*(s).  If  all  the  other  potential  solution 
trees  for  the  same  search  tree  were  constructed,  it  would  be  found  that 
T  is  one  for  which  h*(s)  is  minimal.  An  ordered- search  algorithm  for 
an  AND/ OR  tree  can  now  be  stated  as  follows: 

1.  Put  the  start  node,  s,  on  a  list,  OPEN,  of  unexpanded  nodes. 

2.  From  the  search  tree  constructed  so  far  (initially,  just  s),  com- 
pute the  most  promising  potential  solution  tree   T. 

3.  Select  a  node  n  that  is  on  OPEN  and  in  T.  Remove  node  n 
from  OPEN  and  place  it  on  a  list  called  CLOSED. 

4.  If  n  is  a  terminal  node,  then 

a.  Label  node  n  solved. 

b.  If  the  solution  of  n  makes  any  of  its  ancestors  solved,  label 
these  ancestors  solved. 

c.  If  the  start  node  is  solved,  exit  with   T  as  the  solution  tree. 

d.  Remove  from  OPEN  any  nodes  with  a  solved  ancestor. 

5.  Otherwise,  if  node  n  has  no  successors  (i.e.,  if  no  operator  can 
be  applied),  then 

a.  Label  node  n  unsolvable. 

b.  If   the    unsolvability    of    n   makes    any    of   its    ancestors    un- 
solvable, label  all  such  ancestors  unsolvable  as  well. 

c.  If  the  start  node  is  labeled  unsolvable,  exit  with  failure. 

d.  Remove  from  OPEN  any  nodes  with  an  unsolvable  ancestor. 

6.  Otherwise,  expand  node  n,  generating  all  its  immediate  suc- 
cessors and,  for  each  successor  m  representing  a  set  of  more 
than  one  subproblem,  generating  successors  of  m  corresponding 
to  the  individual  subproblems.    Attach,  to  each  newly  generated 


80  Search  II 

node,  a  pointer  back  to  its  immediate  predecessor  and  compute 
h*  for   each   newly   generated   node.     Place   all   the   new   nodes 
that  do  not  yet  have  descendants  on  OPEN.     Finally,  recompute 
h*(ri)  and  h*  at  each  ancestor  of  n. 
7.  Go  to  (2). 

The  ordered- search  algorithm  can  be  shown  to  be  admissible — that 
is,  it  will  find  a  minimum-cost  solution  tree  if  any  solution  exists — 
provided  that:  (a)  h*{n)  is  less  than  or  equal  to  h(n)  for  each  open 
node  n  and  (b)  all  arc  costs  are  greater  than  some  small  positive 
number  d.  The  efficiency  of  the  algorithm,  however,  depends  both  on 
the  accuracy  of  h*  and  on  the  implementation  of  step  3,  in  which, 
having  found  the  most  promising  potential  solution  tree  to  expand,  one 
must  decide  to  expand  a  specific  node  within  that  tree.  If  the  partial 
tree  T  is  in  fact  part  of  an  optimum  solution,  the  choice  is  immaterial. 
If  it  is  not,  however,  then  the  best  node  to  expand  would  be  the  one 
that  will  earliest  reveal  the  error. 

Chang  and  Slagle's  algorithm.  A  different  approach  has  been  taken 
by  Chang  and  Slagle  (1971).  Here  the  objects  expanded  are  potential 
solution  graphs.  A  tip  node  in  such  a  graph  is  any  node  that  does  not 
yet  have  successors.  To  expand  the  potential  solution  graph,  one  ex- 
pands all  its  nonterminal  tip  nodes  at  once  and  then  forms  all  the  new 
potential  solution  graphs  that  result.  Each  graph  is  represented  on  the 
OPEN  list  by  the  conjunction  of  its  tip  nodes,  representing  a  set  of 
subproblems  to  which  the  start  node  can  be  reduced. 

For  example,  suppose  that  expansion  of  the  initial  graph,  consisting 
of  only  the  start  node  S,  shows  that  S  can  be  reduced  to  problems  A 
and  B  or  to  problem  C.  The  OPEN  list  then  becomes  (A&B,  C). 
Assume  that  A&B  is  selected  for  expansion,  that  A  can  be  reduced  to  D 
or  E,  and  that  B  can  be  reduced  to  F  or  G.  There  are  four  new 
potential  solution  trees,  and  the  OPEN  list  is  now  (D&F,  D&G,  E&F, 
E8lG,  C).  The  search  succeeds  when  it  selects  for  expansion  a  potential 
solution  graph  represented  by  a  conjunction  of  nodes  all  of  which  are 
terminal. 

The  Chang  and  Slagle  approach  assimilates  AND/ OR  graph  search  to 
the  problem  of  state-space  search.  Each  distinct  conjunction  of  prob- 
lems to  be  solved  corresponds  to  a  distinct  state  of  a  state-space  graph. 
The  evaluation  function  used,  /*  is  also  parallel  to  the  function  used  in 
A*:  It  is  defined  by  /*  =  g*  +  h*,  where  g*  measures  the  cheapest 
way  found  so  far  to  reduce  the  start  node  to  a  given  conjunction  of 
subproblems  and  h*  estimates  the  minimum  remaining  cost  of  a  graph 
sufficient  to  solve  all  those  subproblems. 


C4  Heuristic  Search  of  an  AND/OR  Graph  81 

The  treatment  of  AND/ OR  graph  search  as  an  instance  of  state- 
space  search  has  several  consequences.  One  is  that  the  search  of  a 
general  AND/ OR  graph,  as  opposed  to  an  AND/ OR  tree,  now  raises  no 
special  problems.  Another  is  that  the  algorithm  can  be  shown  (Chang 
and  Slagle,  1971),  under  appropriate  conditions,  to  be  not  only  admis- 
sible but  also  optimal  with  respect  to  the  number  of  potential  solution 
graphs  expanded.  It  does  not,  however,  appear  to  be  optimal  (in  some 
reasonable  sense  of  that  term)  in  comparison  with  algorithms  that  ex- 
pand only  one  node  at  a  time  (see  Kowalski,  1972). 

Interdependent  Subproblems 

The  discussion  so  far  has  assumed  that  whenever  the  start  node  is 
reduced  to  a  conjunction  of  subproblems,  all  subproblems  can  be  solved 
independently,  so  that  the  solution  to  one  has  no  effect  on  the  solution 
to  any  other.  This  assumption  is  frequently  unjustified,  and  much  of 
Chapter  XVI  (in  Vol.  m)  explores  ways  of  dealing  with  interacting 
subproblems.  Two  kinds  of  examples,  given  by  Levi  and  Sirovich  (1975, 
1976)  with  explicit  reference  to  the  AND/OR  graph  formalism,  are: 
(a)  problems  requiring  consistent  binding  of  variables  and  (b)  problems 
involving  the  expenditure  of  scarce  resources. 

An  illustration  of  the  former  is  the  well-known  problem  of  showing 
that  there  exists  a  fallible  Greek,  given  that  the  entire  search  space  is 
as  follows  (Fig.  C4-5): 

Find  a  fa  I  I i  bl e  Greek 


Find  something  fallible      Find  something  Greek 
Find  something  human        Socrates  is  Greek 

/  \ 

Turing         Socrates 
is  human       is  human 

Figure  C4-5.    An  AND/ OR  graph  requiring  consistent  binding 
of  the  variable  something. 

An  algorithm  like  Nilsson's  fails  here  for  two  reasons.  First,  it  has 
no  mechanism  for  discovering  that  Turing  is  human  and  Socrates  is 
Greek  fail  to  constitute  a  solution.  Second,  even  if  such  a  mechanism 
were  introduced,  the  algorithm  has  no  means  for  undoing  the  solution  to 


82  Search  II 

a  subproblem  once  it  has  been  solved.  If  Turing  is  human  is  the  first 
problem  found  to  be  primitive,  then  Find  something  human  and  Find 
something  fallible  are  marked  solved;  Socrates  is  human  is  removed  from 
the  OPEN  list  as  no  longer  in  need  of  consideration;  and  Find  something 
Greek,  using  the  previous  value  of  something,  then  becomes  unsolvable. 

An  example  of  the  second  type  of  problem  is  the  following:  Show 
that  John  can  seduce  the  actress,  given  that  seducing  the  actress  can  be 
reduced  to  getting  a  car  and  getting  a  yacht — and  that  John  has 
$5,000,  a  car  costs  $5,000,  and  a  yacht  costs  $5,000.  Here,  either  of  the 
algorithms  given  above  would  wrongly  conclude  that  John  can  seduce 
the  actress.  A  variant  of  the  scarce-resource  problem  arises  in  robot 
planning  tasks  (such  as  those  performed  by  STRIPS,  Article  n.D5),  where 
application  of  an  operator  representing  a  robot  action  solving  one  sub- 
problem  may  make  inapplicable  the  operator  needed  to  solve  another 
subproblem. 

To  handle  problems  of  these  kinds,  Levi  and  Sirovich  define  a 
generalized  AND/OR  graph,  which  differs  most  importantly  from  an 
ordinary  AND/ OR  graph  in  that  reduction  operators  are  permitted  to 
take  two  or  more  nodes  as  input.  For  example,  let  R  be  a  resource 
that  can  be  used  only  once.  Then  if,  in  the  standard  formulation,  the 
original  problem  is  to  accomplish  P1  and  P2,  the  problem  is  reformu- 
lated as  Pi  &  P2  &  R.  Suppose  the  following  reduction  operators  are 
available  (where  "— ►"  means  can  be  reduced  to  and  T  denotes  a  trivial 
problem): 


1. 

S  ->  Px  &  P2  &  R 

2. 

Px  &  R  ->   T 

3. 

Pi  ^Ps 

4. 

P2&  R  -+  P3 

5. 

P3-+   T 

6. 

R  ->   T 

Then  there  is  only  one  solution,  which  is  achieved  using  operators  1,  3, 
4,  and  5. 

In  the  ordered  search  of  a  generalized  AND/OR  graph,  the  objects 
placed  on  the  OPEN  list  are  potential  solution  graphs,  not  individual 
nodes.  Expansion  of  a  potential  solution  graph  (PSG)  consists  of  apply- 
ing all  possible  operators  to  obtain  a  new  set  of  PSGs,  each  differing 
from  its  parent  by  virtue  of  one  additional  operator  application.  If  the 
same  subproblem  occurs  more  than  once  within  a  PSG,  each  occurrence 
is  represented  by  a  separate  node.     If  the  same  PSG  is  generated  more 


C4  Heuristic  Search  of  an  AND/OR  Graph  83 

than  once,   later  occurrences  are  simply  discarded.     Since  distinct  PSGs 
are  retained,  alternate  solutions  to  the  same  subproblem  are  available. 

As  in  the  usual  ordered  search,  the  object  chosen  for  expansion  next 
is  always  one  where  the  evaluation  function  is  minimum.  The  eval- 
uation function  is  h*;  for  each  PSG,  it  is  computed  similarly  to  the  h* 
of  Nilsson's  algorithm.  The  value  of  each  potential  solution  graph  is 
then  the  evaluation  of  the  start  node,  h*(s),  as  computed  for  that 
graph.  Both  admissibility  and  optimality — the  latter  with  respect  to  the 
number  of  PSGs  expanded — can  be  shown. 

References 

See  Chang  and  Slagle  (1971),  Kowalski  (1972),  Levi  and  Sirovich 
(1975,  1976),  Martelli  and  Montanari  (1973),  and  Nilsson  (1969,  1971). 


C5.     Game  Tree  Search 


C5a.     Minimax  Procedure 


The  Minimax  Formalism 

The  minimax  procedure  is  a  technique  for  searching  game  trees  (see 
Article  n.B3).  As  a  first  example,  Figure  C5-1  gives  a  simple  game  tree 
to  which  the  procedure  may  be  applied.  Each  node  represents  a  posi- 
tion in  the  game.  Nonterminal  nodes  are  labeled  with  the  name  of  the 
player,  A  or  B,  who  is  to  move  from  that  position.  It  is  A'%  turn,  and 
the  problem  is  to  find  his  best  move  from  position  1.  Exactly  three 
moves  remain  in  the  game.  Terminal  nodes  are  marked  with  their 
value  to  player  A  by  the  words  "win,"   "lose,"  or  "draw." 

l 

A 


3 

B 


10   11    12   13    14   15    16   17 
win  win   lose  win   lose  lose  draw  draw 


18   19   20   21 

win  draw  lose  draw 


Figure  C5-1.    A  game  tree  from  the  standpoint  of 
player  A,  who  is  to  move  next. 


According  to  the  minimax  technique,  player  A  should  move  to 
whichever  one  of  positions  2  or  3  has  the  greater  value  to  him.  Given 
the  values  of  the  terminal  positions,  the  value  of  a  nonterminal  position 
is  computed,  by  backing  up  from  the  terminals,  as  follows: 


C5a 


Minimax  Procedure 


85 


(1) 


The  value  to  player  A  of  a  node  with  OR  successors  (a  node 
from  which  A  chooses  the  next  move)  is  the  maximum  value 
of  any  of  its  successors. 

The  value  to  A  of  a  node  with  AND  successors  (a  node  from 
which  B  chooses  the  next  move)  is  the  minimum  value  of  any 
of  its  successors. 


In  the  example,  node  2  evaluates  to  a  loss  for  A  (since  B  can  then 
force  a  loss  by  moving  to  node  6),  and  node  3  evaluates  to  a  draw 
(since  the  best  B  can  then  do  is  move  to  node  7  or  9).  It  will  be 
noted  that  the  prediction  of  the  opponent's  behavior  assumes  he  is  also 
using  minimax:  In  evaluating  a  node  with  AND  successors,  A  must 
assume  that  B  will  make  his  best  possible  move.  The  technique  ignores 
the  possibility  that  B  might  overlook  his  chance  for  a  sure  win  if  A 
goes  to  node  2.  Similarly,  it  supplies  no  basis  on  which  B  might  choose 
to  move  to  node  9  in  preference  to  node  7. 

Because  of  the  way  in  which  nodes  are  evaluated,  player  A  (whose 
viewpoint  the  tree  represents)  is  often  called  MAX,  and  player  B,  MIN. 
The  names  PLUS  and  MINUS  are  also  sometimes  used.  If  the  tree  of 
Figure  C5-1  were  to  be  evaluated  from  MEN's  standpoint  instead  of 
MAX's,  it  would  appear  as  in  Figure  C5-2.  The  AND  and  OR  nodes 
are  reversed,  and  the  value  of  each  node  to  MIN  is  the  opposite  of  its 
value  to  MAX. 


l 

A 
draw 


4 
A 
ose 


2 

B 

wi  n 


5 
A 
ose 


6 

A 

wi  n 


7 
A 
draw 


3 
B 
draw 


8 
A 
ose 


9 
A 
draw 


10   11    12   13    14   15    16   17    18   19    20   21 
lose  lose   win  lose   win  win   draw  draw   lose  draw   win  draw 

Figure  C5-2.     The  game  tree  of  Figure  C5-1  from  5's  standpoint. 


86 


Search 


n 


The  Negmax  Formalism 

Knuth  and  Moore  (1975)  have  given  a  game-tree  representation  that 
unifies  Figures  C5-1  and  C5-2  and  conveniently  permits  a  single  pro- 
cedure to  return  optimal  moves  for  both  players  A  and  B.  In  this  rep- 
resentation, the  value  given  each  node  is  its  value  to  the  player  whose 
turn  it  would  be  to  move  at  that  node.  If  n  is  a  terminal  node,  its 
value  is  an  integer  denoted  f(n).  (The  value  of  n  to  the  other  player  is 
-f(n).)  The  value  of  every  node  is  then  returned  by  a  function  F 
defined  as  follows: 

F(n)  =  f(n),  if  n  has  no  successors; 

F(n)  =  max  {-F(ni),  . .  .,-F(nk)},  if  n  has  successors  n1? . .  .,  %  . 

The  best  move  for  either  player  is  then  to  a  node  with  maximum  value; 
that  is,  the  player  whose  turn  it  is  at  node  n  should  move  from  node  n 
to  a  node  r^  with  -F(ni)  =  F(n).  This  formulation,  which  is  equivalent 
to  minimax,  is  called  negmax.  The  tree  it  produces  for  the  game  of 
Figures  C5-1  and  C5-2  is  shown  in  Figure  C5-3.  The  numerical  value  of 
a  win  is  assumed  to  be  +1;  of  a  loss,  -1;  and  of  a  draw,  0. 

l 

A 
F=0 


4 
A 
F=+l 


2 

B 

F=+l 


5 
A 
F=+l 


6 
A 
F=-l 


7 

A 
F=0 


3 

B 

F=0 


8 
A 
F=+l 


9 

A 

F=0 


10   11    12   13    14   15    16   17    18   19    20   21 
F=-l  F=-l   F=+l  F=-l   F=+l  F=+l   F=0  F=0  F=-l   F=0  F=+l   F=0 


Figure  C5-3.     The  game  tree  of  Figure  C5-1  in  NEGMAX  notation. 


C5a  Minimax  Procedure  87 

Searching  a  Partial  Game  Tree 

In  the  above  descriptions  of  the  minimax  and  negmax  algorithms,  it 
was  assumed  that  a  complete  game  tree  had  already  been  generated. 
For  most  games,  however,  the  tree  of  possibilities  is  far  too  large  to  be 
generated  fully  and  searched  backward  from  the  terminal  nodes  for  an 
optimal  move.  An  alternative  is  to  generate  a  reasonable  portion  of  the 
tree,  starting  from  the  current  position;  make  a  move  on  the  basis  of 
this  partial  knowledge;  let  the  opponent  reply;  and  then  repeat  the  pro- 
cess beginning  from  the  new  position.  A  "reasonable  portion  of  the 
tree"  might  be  taken  to  mean  all  legal  moves  within  a  fixed  limit  of 
depth,  time,  or  storage,  or  it  might  be  refined  in  various  ways.  For 
discussion  of  the  refinements,  see  Article  n.C5c. 

Once  the  partial  tree  exists,  minimaxing  requires  a  means  for  esti- 
mating the  value  of  its  tip  nodes,  that  is,  the  nodes  of  the  partial  tree 
without  successors.  A  function  assigning  such  a  value  is  called  a  static 
evaluation  function;  it  serves  a  purpose  comparable  to  that  of  the 
heuristic  function  h*  used  in  Nilsson's  ordered  search  of  an  AND/ OR 
tree  (Article  n.C4).  If  the  partial  game  tree  contains  any  nodes  that  are 
terminal  for  the  entire  tree,  the  static  evaluation  function  conventionally 
returns  positive  infinity  for  a  win,  negative  infinity  for  a  loss,  and  zero 
for  a  draw.  At  other  tip  nodes,  the  function  has  a  finite  value  which,  in 
the  minimax  formulation,  is  positive  for  positions  favorable  to  MAX  and 
negative  at  positions  favorable  to  MIN.  The  minimax  procedure  then 
assigns  backed-up  values  to  the  ancestors  of  the  tip  nodes  in  accordance 
with  the  rules  given  in  condition  (1)  in  the  preceding  discussion  of  the 
minimax  formalism.  It  is  assumed  that  the  backed-up  evaluations  give 
a  more  accurate  estimate  of  the  true  value  of  MAX's  possible  moves 
than  would  be  obtained  by  applying  the  static  evaluation  function 
directly  to  those  moves  and  not  looking  ahead  to  their  consequences. 

References 

See  Knuth  and  Moore  (1975),  Nilsson  (1971),  Slagle  (1971),  and 
Winston  (1977). 


C5b.     Alpha-Beta  Pruning 


The  minimax  procedure  described  in  Article  n.C5a  decides  on  a  best 
move  from  node  n,  in  a  full  or  partial  game  tree,  by  evaluating  every 
node  in  the  tree  that  descends  from  node  n.  Frequently,  this  exhaustive 
evaluation  is  a  waste  of  time.  Two  examples  are  shown  in  Figures 
C5-4  and  C5-5.  Each  node  is  marked  with  the  name  of  the  player  who 
is  to  move  from  that  position. 


1 

MAX 
/   \ 

1 
MAX 

/   \ 

/   \ 

2 

MIN 
F(2)=15    I 

3 

MIN 

'   \ 

\ 

5 

MAX 

/ 
2 

MIN 

/    \ 

\ 

3 

MIN 

1 
4 

MAX 

F(4)=10 

/     \ 
4        5 

MAX      MAX 

F(4)=20    /   \ 

\ 

/ 
6 

MIN 

F(6)=25 

\ 
7 

MIN 

Figure  C5-4.    An  alpha  cutoff. 


Figure  C5-5.    A  beta  cutoff. 


In  Figure  C5-4,  nodes  2  and  4  have  been  evaluated  either  by  the 
static  evaluation  function  or  by  backing  up  from  descendants  omitted 
from  the  figure.  If  MAX  moves  to  node  2,  he  achieves  a  position  whose 
estimated  value  is  15.  If  he  moves  to  node  3,  MIN  can  hold  him  to  10. 
Therefore,  the  value  of  node  3  is  at  most  10,  so  MAX  should  decide  to 
move  to  node  2.  The  important  point  is  that  this  decision  can  be  made 
without  evaluating  node  5  or  any  of  its  possible  descendants. 

In  Figure  C5-5,  node  4  has  an  estimated  value  to  MAX  of  20. 
When  node  6  is  evaluated  at  25,  it  becomes  clear  that  MIN  should 
avoid  moving  to  node  5.  Node  2  can  therefore  be  assigned  a  value  of 
20  without  any  need  to  evaluate  node  7  or  any  of  its  descendants. 

The  alpha-beta  technique  for  evaluating  nodes  of  a  game  tree  elim- 
inates these  unnecessary  evaluations.     If,  as  is  usual,   the  generation  of 


C5b  Alpha-Beta  Pruning  89 

nodes  is  interleaved  with  their  evaluation,  then  nodes  such  as  the 
descendants  of  node  5  in  Figure  C5-4  and  of  node  7  in  Figure  C5-5 
need  never  even  be  generated.  The  technique  uses  two  parameters, 
alpha  and  beta.  In  Figure  C5-4,  the  parameter  alpha  carries  the  lower 
bound  of  15  on  MAX's  achievement  from  node  1;  the  elimination  of 
node  5  is  an  alpha  cutoff.  In  Figure  C5-5,  the  parameter  beta  is  set  to 
20  at  node  4,  representing  an  upper  bound  on  the  value  to  MAX  of 
node  2;  the  elimination  of  node  7  is  a  beta  cutoff.  The  procedure  guar- 
antees that  the  root  node  of  the  tree  will  have  the  same  final  value  as 
if  exhaustive  minimaxing  were  employed. 

A  concise  statement  of  the  alpha-beta  procedure  has  been  given  by 
Knuth  and  Moore  (1975).  It  uses  their  negmax  representation  in  which 
both  players  are  treated  as  wishing  to  maximize  (see  Article  n.C5a). 
Figure  C5-6  shows  how  Figures  C5-4  and  C5-5  are  transformed  in  the 
negmax  representation. 


1 

MAX 
/   \ 

1 
MAX 

/   \ 

/    \ 

2 

MIN 
F(2)=-15  J 

3 

MIN 

\ 

/ 
2 

MIM 

/    \ 

\ 

3 
MIN 

1 
4 

MAX 

F(4)=10 

\ 
5 

NAX 

/     \ 
4        5 

MAX       MAX 

F(4)=20    /   \ 

6  ' 
MIM 
F(6)  =  -25 

\ 

7 
MIN 

Figure  C5-6.     The  NEGMAX  representation  of  Figures  C5-4  and  C5-5. 

To  evaluate  node  1  of  either  tree,  the  procedure  is  called  with  the 
parameters  POSITION  =  node  1,  ALPHA  =  negative  infinity,  and  BETA 
=  positive  infinity.  The  static  evaluation  function  is  called  /.  The  pro- 
cedure, here  called  VALUE,  is  as  follows: 


90  Search  II 


integer  procedure  VALUE  (position  p,  integer  alpha,  integer  beta): 
begin 

integer  m,  i,  t,  d; 

determine  the  successor  positions  pj,  p2,  •  •  •>  Pd  of  position  p; 
if  d  =  0  then  VALUE  :=    /(p)     else 
begin  m  :=  a/p/ia; 

for  i '  :=  1  step  1  until  d  do 
begin 

t  :=  -VALUE  (p^  -6e£a,  -m); 
if  t  >  m  then  m  :=  £; 
if  ra  >   6eta  then  go  to  done; 
end; 
done:  VALUE  :=  ra; 
end; 
end; 

For  an  intuitively  developed  LISP  version  of  the  alpha-beta  procedure, 
see  Winston  (1977).  An  excellent  review  of  the  historical  development  of 
the  technique  appears  in  Knuth  and  Moore  (1975). 

Ordering  of  Successors 

The  degree  to  which  the  alpha-beta  procedure  represents  an  im- 
provement in  efficiency  over  straight  minimaxing  varies  with  the  order 
in  which  successor  nodes  are  evaluated.  For  example,  no  cutoff  would 
occur  in  Figure  C5-4  if  node  3  were  considered  before  node  2. 

In  general,  it  is  desirable  that  the  best  successor  of  each  node  be 
the  first  one  evaluated — that  is,  that  the  first  move  MAX  considers  be 
his  best  move,  and  that  the  first  reply  considered  for  MIN  be  the  move 
that  is  best  for  MIN  and  worst  for  MAX.  Several  schemes  for  ordering 
the  successors  of  a  node  have  been  described  to  try  to  achieve  this  state 
of  affairs.  One  possibility,  an  example  of  fixed  ordering,  is  to  apply  the 
static  evaluation  function  to  the  successors,  taking  the  results  of  this 
preliminary  evaluation  as  an  approximation  of  their  expected  backed-up 
values.  A  method  of  this  sort  will  result  in  depth- first  generation  and 
evaluation  of  the  partial  game  tree,  subject  to  the  depth  bound  or  other 
criteria  for  terminating  generation.  For  some  other  possibilities,  see 
Article  n.C5c. 


C5b  Alpha-Beta  Pruning  91 

Efficiency  in  Uniform  Game  Trees 

Since  the  alpha-beta  procedure  is  more  complicated  than  minimax- 
ing,  although  it  yields  the  same  result,  one  may  inquire  how  great  an 
increase  it  produces  in  search  efficiency.  Most  theoretical  results  on  this 
question  deal  with  uniform  game  trees:  A  tree  is  said  to  be  uniform  if 
every  tip  node  has  depth  d  and  every  nontip  node  has  exactly  b  suc- 
cessors.    Here,  b  is  called  the  branching  factor  or  degree  of  the  tree. 

The  results  reviewed  below  come  from  Knuth  and  Moore  (1975)  and, 
for  the  best  case,  Slagle  and  Dixon  (1969).  For  other  related  work,  see 
Fuller,  Gaschnig,  and  Gillogly  (1973),  Newborn  (1977),  and  Baudet 
(1978). 

The  best  case.  A  uniform  game  tree  of  depth  d  and  degree  b  con- 
tains exactly  bd  tip  nodes,  all  of  which  must  be  examined  by  minimax. 
In  the  worst  case,  alpha-beta  also  must  examine  every  tip  node.  In  the 
best  case,  alpha-beta  examines  only  about  twice  the  square  root  of  the 
number  of  tip  nodes.  More  precisely,  assuming  the  value  of  the  root  is 
not  infinite,  the  number  of  tip  nodes  examined  in  the  best  case  is 

tf(d+l)/2]   +   &[d/2]  _  i 

(where  square  brackets  represent  the  greatest  integer  function);  and  the 
nodes  examined  in  the  tree  as  a  whole  are  precisely  the  critical  nodes, 
defined  as  follows: 

Type  1  critical  nodes  are  the  root  node  and  all  first   successors  of 
type  1  nodes. 

Type  2  critical  nodes  are  all  further  successors  (except  the  first)  of 
type  1  nodes  and  all  successors  of  type  3  nodes. 

Type  S  critical  nodes  are  the  first  successors  of  type  2  nodes. 

Figure  C5-7  illustrates  the  distribution  of  critical  nodes  in  a  uniform 
tree  of  degree  3  and  depth  3. 

Knuth  and  Moore  have  shown  that  the  best  case  occurs  for  a 
uniform  tree  if  the  best  move  is  considered  first  at  each  critical  node  of 
types  1  and  2.  Attempts  to  order  the  successors  of  type  3  positions 
contribute  nothing  to  efficiency,  since  these  successors  are  type  2  nodes, 
which  must  all  be  examined  anyway. 


92 


Search 


n 


1223XX3XX 

/l\    /l\    /l\    /l\    /l\    /l\    /l\    /l\    /l\ 

1223XX3XX222XXXXXX222XXXXXX 


Figure  C5-7.    Distribution  of  critical  nodes. 


Random  uniform  game  trees.  Knuth  and  Moore  also  show  that  the 
alpha-beta  technique  is  optimal  in  the  sense  that  no  algorithm  can 
evaluate  any  game  tree  by  examining  fewer  nodes  than  alpha-beta  does 
with  an  appropriate  ordering  of  successors.  Realistically,  of  course,  one 
cannot  expect  to  achieve  the  optimal  successor  ordering,  since  this  would 
imply  full  knowledge  of  the  game  tree  before  it  is  generated.  Assuming, 
therefore,  that  the  tip  nodes  of  the  tree  have  distinct  random  values, 
Knuth  and  Moore  show  that  the  expected  number  of  tip  nodes  ex- 
amined, in  evaluation  of  a  uniform  tree  with  branching  factor  b  and 
depth  d,  has  an  asymptotic  upper  bound  of 

((./(log  6))d 

as  d  goes  to  infinity. 

Totally  dependent,  uniform  game  trees.  One  other  type  of  tree 
considered  by  Knuth  and  Moore,  perhaps  more  realistic  than  the  one  in 
which  tip  nodes  have  random  values,  corresponds  to  games  in  which 
each  move  is  critical:  If  a  poor  move  is  ever  chosen,  there  is  no  way 
to  recoup.  The  model  is  a  uniform  game  tree  that  is  totally  dependent: 
For  any  two  successors  of  node  p,  these  successors  can  be  labeled  q 
and  r,  so  that  every  tip  node  descended  from  node  q  has  greater  value 
than  any  tip  node  descended  from  node  r.  In  this  type  of  tree,  if  the 
degree  is  at  least  3,  the  expected  number  of  tip  positions  examined  is 
bounded    by    a   constant    (depending   on    the   degree)    multiplied    by   the 


C5b  Alpha-Beta  Pruning  93 

number  of  tip   nodes  examined  by  the   alpha-beta  method  in   the  best 
case. 

References 

See  Baudet  (1978),  Fuller,  Gaschnig,  and  Gillogly  (1973),  Knuth  and 
Moore  (1975),  Newborn  (1977),  Nilsson  (1971),  Slagle  (1971),  Slagle  and 
Dixon  (1969),  and  Winston  (1977). 


C5c.     Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search 

In  the  search  of  a  game  tree  (Article  n.B3),  as  in  other  kinds  of 
search,  there  are  various  points  at  which  heuristic  information  may  be 
applied.  The  parallel  is  not  exact,  however.  In  one-person  problem 
solving,  the  main  uses  for  heuristic  information  are  to  decide  which  node 
to  expand  next,  which  operator  to  apply  next,  and,  in  some  algorithms, 
which  nodes  to  prune  from  the  search  tree  (see  Article  n.C3a).  These 
questions  are  also  present  in  game-playing  programs,  but  with  a  shift  in 
emphasis.  In  addition,  some  new  questions  arise:  When  should  the 
search  be  terminated?  How  should  a  move  be  chosen  on  the  basis  of 
the  search  that  has  been  made? 

The  simplest  answers  to  these  questions  were  described  in  Article 
n.C5a:  Expand  every  node  completely,  in  any  convenient  order  and  with 
no  pruning,  until  every  tip  node  represents  a  termination  of  the  game. 
Then,  working  back  from  the  end  of  the  game,  use  the  minimax  pro- 
cedure to  find  a  winning  line  of  play  (if  one  exists)  and  follow  this  line 
of  play  throughout  the  game.  Article  n.C5b  described  an  improvement 
on  this  approach  that  yields  the  same  final  result  with  greater  efficiency. 

A  program  using  only  these  basic  techniques  would  play  a  theo- 
retically perfect  game;  its  task  would  be  like  searching  an  AND/ OR  tree 
for  a  solution  to  a  one-person  problem.  For  a  simple  game  like  tic-tac- 
toe  (see  Article  n.B3),  such  a  program  would  no  doubt  be  feasible.  For 
complex  games,  however,  it  has  been  recognized  from  the  beginning  that 
searching  from  the  start  of  the  game  to  its  end  would  be  impossible. 
In  chess,  for  example,  with  around  30  legal  moves  from  each  position 
and  about  40  moves  for  each  player  in  a  typical  game,  there  are  some 
(302)40  or  10120  different  plays  of  the  game  (Shannon,  1950). 

Because  of  the  magnitude  of  the  search  space  in  chess,  checkers,  and 
other  nontrivial  games,  there  is  a  major  difference  between  programs 
that  play  such  games  and  programs  that  use  the  methods  of  this  chap- 
ter to  solve  nonadversary  problems.  The  latter  either  find  a  solution  or 
fail,  having  run  out  of  time  or  space;  much  of  the  research  assumes 
that  some  solution  can  be  found  and  deals  with  how  to  guarantee  that 
it  is  optimal  or  nearly  optimal  (see  Sec.  n.C3).  The  question  for  a  chess 
program,  in  contrast,  is  how  to  play  a  good  game  even  though  it  has 
not  found  a  solution  to  the  problem  of  winning.  Repeatedly  the  program 
must  become  committed  to  its  next  move  long  before  the  end  of  the 
game  comes  into  view.  Whether  the  move  chosen  is  in  fact  part  of  a 
winning  strategy  is  unknown  until  later  in  the  game. 


C5c  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  95 

For  a  nontrivial  game-playing  program,  then,  the  issues  listed  at  the 
beginning  of  this  article  are  all  aspects  of  a  broader  question:  Can  the 
basic  search  techniques,  designed  for  seeking  a  guaranteed  win,  be 
successfully  adapted  to  the  problem  of  simply  choosing  the  next  move? 
In  addition,  one  might  well  ask  whether  there  are  alternatives  to  search 
as  the  basis  for  move  selection.  Most  of  the  work  exploring  these 
questions  has  been  done  in  the  specific  domain  of  chess.  In  general,  the 
discussion  below  is  limited  to  chess  programs  and  Samuel's  checkers 
program  (1963,  1967). 

Alternatives  to  Search 

An  example  of  choosing  a  move  on  a  basis  other  than  search  is  the 
use  of  "book  moves"  in  the  opening  of  a  chess  game  (see  Frey,  1977, 
pp.  77-79).  More  generally,  there  is  an  emphasis  in  the  recent  computer- 
chess  literature  on  treating  the  problem  of  move  choice  as  a  problem  of 
recognizing  patterns  on  the  board  and  associating  appropriate  playing 
methods  with  each  pattern  (e.g.,  Charness,  1977,  p.  52;  Bratko,  Kopec, 
and  Michie,  1978;  Wilkins,  1979). 

It  is  not  expected,  however,  that  search  can  be  eliminated  entirely 
from  chess  programs;  even  human  players  do  some  searching.  Rather, 
the  choice-of-move  problem  is  seen  as  involving  a  trade-off  between  the 
amount  of  specialized  chess  knowledge  a  program  has  and  the  amount 
of  search  it  needs  to  do.  (See,  e.g.,  Berliner,  1977c;  Michie,  1977.)  And 
there  are  limits  on  the  amount  of  knowledge  a  program  can  be  given: 
The  combinatorics  of  chess  preclude  storing  an  exhaustive  representation 
of  the  game,  and  even  the  knowledge  possessed  by  chess  masters,  which 
greatly  restricts  search  in  human  play,  also  remains  very  far  from  com- 
plete formalization. 

The  last  section  of  this  article  reviews  several  programs  that  attempt 
to  use  human-like  knowledge  to  eliminate  most  searching.  The  sections 
preceding  it  concern  techniques  used  in  programs  in  which  search  rather 
than  knowledge  is  predominant. 

Search-based  Programs 

The  most  successful  game-playing  programs  so  far  have  made  search 
rather  than  knowledge  their  main  ingredient.  These  include,  among  the 
earlier  programs,  Samuel's  checkers  program  (1963,  1967),  which  came 
close  to  expert  play,  and  Greenblatt's  chess  program  (1967),  which  was 
the  first  to  compete  in  tournaments  and  which  earned  a  rating  of 
1400-1450,  making  it  a  Class  C  player.  (Current  classes  of  the  United 
States  Chess  Federation  are  E  through  A,   Expert,   Master,   and   Senior 


96  Search  II 

Master;  see  Hearst,  1977,  p.  171.)  Notable  later  programs  include  the 
Soviet  program  KAISSA  (Adelson-Velskiy,  Arlazarov,  and  Donskoy, 
1975),  which  won  the  first  world  computer- chess  championship  in  1974, 
and  Slate  and  Atkin's  CHESS  4.5  (1977),  whose  current  standing  is  men- 
tioned below  under  "Iterative  deepening."  (For  general  reviews  of 
computer- chess  competition,  see  Newborn,  1975;  Mittman,  1977;  Berliner, 
1978a.) 

All  the  programs  referred  to  above  follow  the  basic  search  paradigm 
formulated  by  Shannon  in  1950.  In  its  simplest  form,  which  was  called 
a  Type  A  program,  Shannon's  paradigm  made  just  two  changes  to  the 
procedure  mentioned  above  that  calls  for  searching  exhaustively  all  the 
way  to  the  end  of  the  game.  First,  the  game  tree  was  to  be  generated 
only  to  a  fixed  depth.  Second,  since  the  nodes  at  the  depth  limit 
would  normally  be  nonterminal,  a  means  of  estimating  the  promise  of 
these  nodes  was  required.  The  estimate  was  to  be  given  by  a  static 
evaluation  function,  whose  values  could  then  be  backed  up  by  mini- 
maxing  to  determine  the  next  move.  After  this  move  was  made  and 
the  opponent  had  replied,  the  search  process  would  be  repeated  begin- 
ning from  the  new  position. 

Shannon  noted  that  a  simple  Type  A  program  would  play  chess 
both  badly  and  slowly.  He  suggested  two  directions  for  improvement  in 
a  Type  A  program,  with  which  the  program  would  become  Type  B. 
The  general  objectives  were,  first,  to  let  the  exploration  of  a  line  of 
play  continue  to  a  reasonable  stopping  point  instead  of  invariably  cut- 
ting it  off  at  an  arbitrary  depth  and,  second,  to  provide  some  selectivity 
about  the  lines  of  play  considered,  so  that  more  time  could  be  spent 
investigating  strong  moves  and  less  on  pointless  ones. 

Even  a  Type  B  program,  Shannon  concluded,  seemed  to  rely  too 
much  on  brute-force  calculation  rather  than  on  knowledgeable  analysis  of 
the  situation  to  choose  a  move.  Nevertheless,  his  proposals  established 
a  framework  that  most  competitive  game-playing  programs  have  adopt- 
ed. The  framework  raises  a  large  number  of  interrelated  issues,  which 
are  discussed  in  the  following  sections. 

Static  Evaluation 

A  static  evaluation  function,  by  definition,  is  one  that  estimates  the 
value  of  a  board  position  without  looking  at  any  of  that  position's  suc- 
cessors. An  ideal  function  would  be  one  that  reports  whether  the 
position  leads  to  a  win,  a  loss,  or  a  draw  (provided  neither  side  makes 
a  mistake).  Even  more  informatively,  the  function  might  report  the 
number  of  moves  required  to  win,  with  an  arbitrarily  large  value  if  no 


C5c  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  97 

win  is  possible.  But  functions  that  can  distinguish  between  winning  and 
losing  positions  are  known  only  for  simple  games;  an  example  of  such  a 
function  for  the  game  Nim  is  given  in  Shannon  (1950). 

Where  perfect  evaluation  functions  are  unavailable,  the  actual  static 
evaluator  must  return  an  estimate.  Unlike  the  evaluation  function  used 
in  an  ordinary  state-space  or  AND/OR  graph  search  (see  Articles  n.C3a 
and  n.C4),  the  static  evaluation  function  of  a  game-playing  program  does 
not  normally  attempt  directly  to  estimate  the  distance  to  a  win  from 
the  position  evaluated.  (For  a  proposal  that  the  function  should  do  just 
this,  see  Harris,  1974.)  Instead,  the  function  is  usually  a  linear  poly- 
nomial whose  terms  represent  various  features  of  the  position,  high 
values  being  given  for  features  favorable  to  the  program  and  low  ones 
for  those  favoring  the  opponent.  In  chess,  the  most  important  feature 
is  material;  the  corresponding  term  of  the  evaluation  function  might  be 
computed  by  assigning  a  numerical  value  to  each  kind  of  piece  and 
finding  the  difference  between  the  total  values  of  the  two  players'  pieces 
on  the  board.  Other  typical  features,  familiar  to  chess  players,  include 
king  safety,  mobility,  center  control,  and  pawn  structure. 

The  most  extended  treatment  of  evaluation  functions  in  the  liter- 
ature is  provided  by  Samuel  (1963,  1967).  For  checkers,  he  concluded 
that  the  optimal  number  of  features  to  be  used  in  the  evaluation  func- 
tion was  between  20  and  30  (1967,  p.  611).  Samuel's  main  interest  was 
in  machine  learning;  one  approach  he  took  was  to  provide  his  checkers 
program  with  a  large  set  of  features  for  possible  use  in  the  evaluation 
function  and  to  let  the  program  determine,  as  it  gained  playing  ex- 
perience, both  which  of  these  features  should  be  included  and  what  their 
relative  weights  should  be.  In  a  later  version  of  the  program,  the 
emphasis  was  shifted  to  taking  the  interactions  among  features  into 
account  in  evaluating  positions.  With  this  change,  the  evaluation 
function  became  nonlinear,  and  considerable  improvement  was  reported 
in  its  quality  as  measured  by  the  correlation  with  moves  chosen  in 
master  play  (Samuel,  1967;  see  also  Griffith,  1974).  For  further  dis- 
cussion of  Samuel's  work,  see  Chapter  XV,  in  Volume  m. 

Reasonably  accurate  static  evaluation,  then,  requires  a  rather  com- 
plex function.  But  there  is  an  important  limit  on  the  complexity  that 
is  feasible,  especially  for  a  program  that  plays  in  tournaments,  under 
time  limitations.  As  the  total  number  of  tip  nodes  in  the  search  tree 
increases,  the  time  available  for  evaluating  any  single  tip  node  goes 
down.  Thus  Gillogly's  chess  program  TECH  (1972),  which  was  intended 
as  an  experiment  in  how  much  could  be  accomplished  on  advanced 
machines  by  simple  brute-force  search,  and  which  generates  up  to 
500,000  tip  nodes  even  with  alpha-beta  pruning,  uses  material  as  the 
only  factor  in  its  static  evaluations. 


98  Search  II 

Backed-up  Evaluation 

The  Shannon  paradigm  assumes  that  the  step  between  static  evalu- 
ation and  the  choice  of  a  move  is  simply  minimaxing:  The  program 
moves  to  any  position  with  the  best  backed-up  minimax  value.  This 
step  is  indeed  very  commonly  used.  But  it  is  worth  noting  that,  since 
the  static  evaluation  function  may  be  wrong,  the  minimax  procedure  no 
longer  serves  its  original  purpose  of  defining  and  identifying  a  move  that 
is  theoretically  correct.  Instead,  minimaxing  has  itself  become  a  heu- 
ristic for  the  choice  of  move.  Several  programs  have  therefore  experi- 
mented with  varying  or  supplementing  the  minimax  procedure.  Slagle 
and  Dixon  (1970),  for  example,  in  experiments  with  the  game  of  Kalah, 
compute  the  backed-up  value  of  a  node  by  taking  into  account  not  only 
the  value  of  its  best  successor  but  also  whether  the  node  has  several 
good  successors  or  just  one.  Gillogly's  TECH  (1972),  having  computed 
minimax  values  on  the  basis  of  an  extremely  simple  static  evaluation, 
breaks  ties  between  moves  with  equal  minimax  values  by  an  analysis  of 
features  not  considered  by  the  evaluation  function.  Newell,  Shaw,  and 
Simon  (1963a)  set  a  value  in  advance  that  the  search  is  expected  to 
achieve;  the  first  move  found  that  meets  this  standard  is  made,  and 
only  if  no  move  is  good  enough  is  the  best  minimax  value  used  to 
determine  the  move  (see  also  Newell  and  Simon,  1972). 

Depth  of  Search 

If  perfect  evaluation  functions  were  available,  a  game-playing  pro- 
gram could  proceed  at  each  turn  by  generating  all  legal  moves,  evalu- 
ating each  of  the  resulting  positions,  and  choosing  the  move  leading  to 
the  best  value.  The  reason  for  looking  farther  ahead  is  to  compensate 
for  errors  in  the  static  evaluation.  The  assumption  is  that,  since  static 
evaluation  has  a  predictive  aspect,  there  will  be  less  room  for  mistaken 
prediction  if  a  deep  tree  is  generated  before  the  evaluation  function  is 
applied. 

The  controlling  fact  about  search  depth  is  the  combinatorial  explo- 
sion. If  the  average  number  of  legal  moves  from  a  position,  the 
branching  factor,  is  b,  the  game  tree  will  have  about  6d  nodes  at 
depth  d.  According  to  Shannon's  estimate  for  chess,  a  complete  tree 
carried  to  depth  6 — three  moves  for  each  player — would  already  have 
about  one  billion  tip  nodes.  At  the  same  time,  Shannon  noted,  a  world 
champion  may  occasionally  look  ahead,  along  a  single  line  of  play,  to  a 
depth  as  great  as  15  or  20.  More  recently,  Hans  Berliner,  a  former 
World  Correspondence  Chess  Champion,  has  said  he  finds  it  necessary  at 
least  once  in  a  game  to  look  ahead  to  a  depth  of  14  or  more  (1974, 


C5c  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  99 

p.  1-8).  The  question,  then,  is  how  to  get  the  needed  depth,  in  the 
right  places,  without  succumbing  to  the  combinatorial  explosion.  An 
alternative  question  would  be  how  to  avoid  the  need  for  so  deep  a 
search.  The  remainder  of  this  article  concerns  attempts  to  solve  or  at 
least  alleviate  these  problems.  First,  however,  experience  with  the  use 
of  depth  bounds  as  such  will  be  reviewed. 

Fixed-depth  search  with  extensions  for  quiescence.  The  simplest  look- 
ahead  procedure,  which  was  called  for  by  Shannon's  Type  A  strategy,  is 
to  set  a  fixed  depth,  or  ply,  to  which  the  game  tree  is  to  be  generated 
and  to  apply  the  static  evaluation  function  only  to  nodes  at  this  depth. 
Thus  a  four-ply  search  would  statically  evaluate  the  positions  reached 
after  exactly  two  turns  for  each  player.  There  are  serious  drawbacks  in 
this  procedure,  as  Shannon  observed,  and  it  was  used  only  in  very  early 
programs  (Kister  et  al.,  1957;  Bernstein  et  al.,  1959).  For  example,  a 
chess  evaluation  function  based  mainly  on  material  cannot  return  a 
realistic  value  if,  at  the  depth  limit,  the  players  happen  to  be  halfway 
through  an  exchange  of  pieces.  The  concept  of  a  quiescent,  or  dead, 
position  was  introduced  to  get  around  such  difficulties  (Shannon,  1950; 
see  also  Turing,  1953):  Search  would  be  extended  beyond  the  normal 
limit,  from  nonquiescent  positions  only,  until  all  tip  nodes  were  rela- 
tively stable  or  perhaps  until  some  absolute  depth-bound  had  been 
reached. 

This  introduction  of  a  quiescence  search  was  one  of  the  two  features 
that  changed  a  program,  in  Shannon's  terminology,  from  Type  A  to 
Type  B.  On  Shannon's  suggested  definition,  a  position  was  considered 
nonquiescent  if  "any  piece  is  attacked  by  a  piece  of  lower  value,  or  by 
more  pieces  than  defences  or  if  any  check  exists  on  a  square  controlled 
by  opponent"  (1950,  p.  271).  Many  programs  have  adopted  a  similar 
definition,  with  the  result  that  the  only  moves  examined  beyond  the 
normal  limit  are  checks  and  immediate  captures  (e.g.,  Gillogly,  1972; 
Adelson-Velskiy  et  al.,  1975;  Slate  and  Atkin,  1977).  If  such  a  quies- 
cence search  is  combined  with  considering  all  legal  moves  down  to  the 
normal  depth  limit,  the  program  is  still  called  Type  A  in  current  ter- 
minology (e.g.,  Berliner,  1978b). 

The  horizon  effect.  Searching  to  an  arbitrarily  limited  depth,  even 
with  extensions  for  checks  and  captures,  creates  a  phenomenon  that 
Berliner  (1973,  1974)  has  called  the  horizon  effect  Berliner's  general 
observation  is  that,  whenever  search  is  terminated  (short  of  the  end  of 
the  game)  and  a  static  evaluation  function  is  applied,  the  program's 
"reality  exists  in  terms  of  the  output  of  the  static  evaluation  function, 
and  anything  that  is  not  detectable  at  evaluation  time  does  not  exist  as 
far  as  the  program  is  concerned"  (1974,  p.  1-1). 


100  Search  II 

Two  kinds  of  errors  ensue.  The  first  is  called  the  negative  horizon 
effect:  The  program  manipulates  the  timing  of  moves  to  force  certain 
positions  to  appear  at  the  search  horizon,  and  it  thus  may  conclude 
that  it  has  avoided  some  undesirable  effect  when  in  fact  the  effect  has 
only  been  delayed  to  a  point  beyond  the  horizon.  A  second  kind  of 
error,  the  positive  horizon  effect,  involves  reaching  for  a  desirable  con- 
sequence: Either  the  program  wrongly  concludes  that  the  consequence  is 
achievable  or  it  fails  to  realize  that  the  same  consequence  could  also  be 
achieved  later  in  the  game  in  a  more  effective  form.  This  last  problem, 
Berliner  believes,  can  be  met  only  by  finding  ways  to  represent  and  use 
more  chess  knowledge  than  traditional  programs  have  included  (1974, 
p.  1-7). 

For  most  of  the  errors  coming  from  the  horizon  effect,  however,  the 
diagnosis  is  that  the  typical  definitions  of  quiescence  are  highly  over- 
simplified. Ideally,  a  position  would  be  considered  quiescent  only  when 
the  static  evaluation  function,  applied  to  that  position,  could  return  a 
realistic  value,  that  is,  when  the  value  of  every  term  included  in  the 
function  had  become  stable.  A  quiescence  search  that  pursues  only  se- 
quences of  captures  and  checking  moves,  however,  seeks  stability  only  in 
the  material  term.  The  material  term  itself,  moreover,  usually  reflects 
only  the  presence  of  the  pieces  on  the  board;  its  value  will  be  un- 
changed by  a  move  that  guarantees  a  capture  later  instead  of  making  a 
capture  now. 

To  get  around  the  problems  arising  from  inadequate  quiescence 
analysis,  a  first  approach  called  secondary  search  was  developed  by 
Greenblatt  (1967):  Whenever  a  move  seemed,  on  the  basis  of  the  reg- 
ular search  (including  quiescence),  to  be  the  best  move  considered  so  far, 
the  predicted  line  of  play  was  extended  by  searching  another  two  ply 
(plus  quiescence)  to  test  the  evaluation.  Berliner  points  out,  however: 
"The  horizon  effect  cannot  be  dealt  with  adequately  by  merely  shifting 
the  horizon"  (1974,  p.  1-4).  One  direction  in  current  work,  therefore,  is 
toward  a  much  fuller  quiescence  analysis  as  a  substitute  for  arbitrary 
depth  bounds.  (See  Harris,  1975,  1977a;  Slate  and  Atkin,  1977,  pp.  115- 
117;  and,  for  an  early  example,  Newell  and  Simon,  1972,  pp.  678-698.) 
Berliner  (1977c,  1978a),  meanwhile,  is  developing  a  general  algorithm, 
not  limited  to  chess,  for  causing  tree  search  to  terminate  with  a  best 
move,  even  though  no  depth  limit  has  been  set  and  no  full  path  to  a 
win  has  been  found. 

Iterative  deepening.  Despite  its  drawbacks,  most  current  programs 
still  use  a  fixed-depth  search,  extended  for  checks  and  capture  sequences. 
A  variation  used  by  CHESS  4.5  (Slate  and  Atkin,  1977)  is  called  iter- 
ative deepening:    A  complete  search,  investigating  all  legal  moves  (sub- 


C5c  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  101 

ject  to  alpha-beta  pruning),  is  done  to  depth  2,  returning  a  move.  The 
search  is  then  redone  to  depth  3,  again  to  depth  4,  and  so  on,  until  a 
preset  time  limit  is  exceeded.  For  efficiency,  information  from  earlier 
iterations  is  saved  for  use  in  later  ones.  Running  on  the  very  fast  CDC 
Cyber  176  computer,  the  program  searches  to  an  average  depth  of  six 
plies  in  tournament  play,  with  search  trees  averaging  500,000  nodes 
(Newborn,  1978).  It  is  the  first  program  to  have  achieved  an  Expert 
rating  in  human  play.  In  the  fall  of  1978  a  new  version,  CHESS  4.7, 
was  reportedly  rated  2160  (Levy,  1979);  Master  ratings  begin  at  2200. 
It  remains  an  open  question  how  much  stronger  the  program  can  be- 
come. 

Ordering  of  Search 

The  Shannon  paradigm  did  not  specify  any  particular  order  in  which 
the  nodes  of  the  search  tree  were  to  be  explored  or  any  order  in  which 
moves  from  a  given  node  were  to  be  considered.  For  efficient  use  of 
space,  the  order  of  node  expansion  is  usually  depth-first;  a  depth-first 
algorithm  needs  to  store  explicitly  only  those  nodes  on  the  path  it  is 
currently  investigating  and  not  the  parts  of  the  tree  in  which  search  has 
been  completed. 

With  the  invention  of  alpha-beta  pruning,  the  order  of  considering 
moves  within  a  depth-first  search  became  highly  significant.  If  the  order 
is  ideal,  then  in  a  tree  with  branching  factor  b,  the  number  of  nodes 
that  must  be  examined  at  depth  d  is  reduced  from  6d  to  only  about 
26d/2  (see  Article  n.C5b).  For  example,  Shannon's  estimated  109  chess 
positions  at  depth  6  would  be  reduced  to  around  50,000.  It  also  follows 
that,  for  a  constant  number  of  tip  nodes  examined,  correct  ordering  of 
the  moves  for  alpha-beta  cutoffs  would  allow  the  search  depth  to  be 
roughly  doubled.  In  general,  the  desired  ordering  is  one  in  which  the 
first  move  considered  at  a  position  is  the  best  move  for  the  player 
whose  turn  it  is.  Usually,  of  course,  there  is  no  method  guaranteed  to 
achieve  this  ordering,  for  if  there  were,  it  would  enable  moves  to  be 
chosen  with  no  search  at  all.  Several  heuristics  have  been  used,  how- 
ever, to  try  to  approximate  optimal  ordering. 

Perhaps  the  simplest  idea  for  move  ordering  is  the  fixed- ordering 
method  mentioned  in  Article  n.C5b:  For  each  move  from  a  node,  gen- 
erate a  new  node  for  the  resulting  position,  apply  the  static  evaluation 
function  to  the  position,  and  order  the  nodes  according  to  this  pre- 
liminary estimate.  For  greater  efficiency,  several  programs  have  used  a 
separate  function  for  move  ordering,  which  applies  to  the  move  itself 
instead    of    to    the    position    that    results    from    it    (Greenblatt,    1967; 


102  Search  II 

Berliner,  1974,  p.  11-16;  Adelson-Velskiy  et  al.,  1975).  In  either  case, 
the  game  tree  is  explored  by  an  ordered  depth- first  search  (Article 
n.C3a). 

A  fuller  basis  for  choosing  which  move  to  consider  first  is  provided 
by  Slate  and  Atkin's  iterative  deepening  technique,  which  makes  re- 
peated depth-first  searches.  Each  iteration  constructs  a  line  of  play, 
down  to  its  depth  limit,  consisting  of  apparently  best  moves.  The 
following  iteration,  going  one  ply  deeper,  thus  has  available  an  estimated 
best  move  from  each  position  along  this  line  of  play.  (See  Slate  and 
Atkin,  1977,  pp.  102-103.) 

A  further  approach  to  move  ordering  makes  explicit  the  idea  of  a 
refutation  move:  For  each  move  that  is  not  a  best  move,  it  should  be 
shown  as  quickly  as  possible  that  the  move  is  bad.  To  do  this,  strong 
replies  should  be  considered  first,  which  may  refute  the  move  proposed. 
Typical  implementations  consider  all  capturing  moves  first  and  then  con- 
sider killer  moves.  The  idea  here,  called  the  killer  heuristic,  is  that  if  a 
move  has  served  as  a  refutation  in  some  previously  examined  position 
that  is  similar  to  the  current  one,  it  is  likely  to  be  a  refutation  in  the 
current  position,  too.  For  more  on  the  killer  heuristic  and  other  refu- 
tation techniques,  see  Gillogly  (1972),  Adelson-Velskiy  et  al.  (1975),  Frey 
(1977,  pp.  54-81),  and  Slate  and  Atkin  (1977). 

Once  the  moves  have  been  ordered  at  a  given  node  and  the  search 
has  moved  downward,  following  the  move  that  seemed  best,  it  may  turn 
out  that  this  move  is  actually  a  very  bad  one  for  reasons  that  were  not 
apparent  earlier.  Since  accurate  move-ordering  is  important  to  maxi- 
mizing alpha-beta  cutoffs,  it  might  be  worthwhile  at  this  point  to  go 
back,  reorder  the  moves,  and  start  again  with  a  different  estimated  best 
move.  Such  a  procedure,  called  dynamic  ordering,  was  investigated  by 
Slagle  and  Dixon  (1969),  using  the  game  of  Kalah.  They  reported  a 
modest  improvement  over  fixed  ordering  for  trees  of  depth  at  least  6. 
On  the  other  hand,  Berliner's  chess  program  experienced  a  serious  in- 
crease in  running  time  when  dynamic  ordering  was  used  (1974, 
p.  IV-14).  A  procedure  somewhat  similar  to  dynamic  ordering  was  also 
used  by  Samuel  (1967). 

If  dynamic  ordering  is  carried  to  its  limit,  so  that  reordering  is 
considered  every  time  a  node  is  expanded  instead  of  only  under  more 
limited  conditions,  the  search  procedure  in  effect  changes  from  depth-first 
to  best-first  That  is,  the  move  considered  next  (or  the  position  to  which 
it  leads)  is  on  some  estimate  the  most  promising  in  the  entire  search 
tree  generated  so  far,  subject  to  whatever  depth  limit  exists.  Nilsson 
(1969,  1971)  implements  this  idea  by  adapting  his  algorithm  for  best-first 


C5c  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  103 

AND/OR-tree  search  (Article  n.C4)  to  game  trees.  Harris  (1975,  1977a) 
suggests  another  adaptation  in  which  the  motivation  of  maximizing 
alpha-beta  pruning  no  longer  plays  a  role  and  instead  the  objective  is 
to  expand  the  most  active  positions  first,  applying  a  thorough  quies- 
cence analysis  rather  than  a  depth  limit  as  the  criterion  for  search  ter- 
mination. 

Width  of  Search 

The  techniques  discussed  so  far  are  consistent  with  the  idea  that  all 
legal  moves  from  a  position  must  be  examined,  at  least  sufficiently  to 
establish  that  they  can  be  safely  pruned  by  the  alpha-beta  method. 
This  consideration  of  all  legal  moves  is  referred  to  as  full-width  search- 
ing. Some  of  the  earliest  programs  used  a  full-width  search  for  sim- 
plicity; in  programs  strong  by  current  standards,  it  is  used  because  of 
the  great  difficulty  in  determining,  without  search,  which  moves  can  be 
safely  ignored  (Turing,  1953;  Kister  et  al.,  1957;  Gillogly,  1972;  Adelson- 
Velskiy  et  al.,  1975;  Slate  and  Atkin,  1977).  The  problem,  of  course,  is 
that  an  excellent  move  may  look  very  poor  at  first  sight. 

Yet  the  average  number  of  legal  moves  from  a  chess  position  is  at 
least  30,  and  even  with  a  maximum  of  alpha-beta  pruning,  the  tree 
grows  exponentially.  Making  the  search  more  selective  was  Shannon's 
second  requirement  to  change  a  program  from  Type  A  to  Type  B.  Many 
people  have  been  convinced  that  such  selectivity  is  essential  to  a  strong 
chess  program,  both  to  increase  search  depth  and  to  permit  more 
sophisticated  evaluation  of  the  nodes  remaining  in  the  search  tree. 
Berliner,  for  example,  has  advocated  reducing  the  total  search  tree  size 
to  at  most  5,000  nodes,  with  a  branching  factor  of  less  than  1.9  (1974, 
p.  1-16).  Although  some  reconsideration  of  these  ideas  has  been 
prompted  by  the  success  of  CHESS  4.7  with  full- width  search,  it  appears 
that  that  program  is  still  weak  at  long  end-game  sequences  (see  Berliner, 
1978b;  Michie  and  Bratko,  1978).  Moreover,  there  are  other  games  for 
which  it  is  even  clearer  that  full-width  search  is  not  the  answer.  For 
the  game  of  Go,  for  example,  the  average  branching  factor  has  been 
estimated  at  perhaps  200  (Thorp  and  Walden,  1970),  and  for  back- 
gammon, where  legal  moves  depend  on  the  throw  of  the  dice  as  well  as 
the  board  position,  the  factor  is  over  800  (Berliner,  1977a). 

Various  devices  have  been  tried  in  the  effort  to  increase  the  selec- 
tivity of  the  search  without  missing  good  moves.  Some  are  conceptually 
simple,  introducing  little  or  no  new  chess-specific  knowledge  into  the 
program.  Others  attempt  to  formulate  and  use  chess  concepts  as  sophis- 
ticated as  those  a  chess  master  might  employ.     The  remainder  of  this 


104  Search  II 

section  reviews  chiefly  the  earlier  search-controlling  devices.  The 
following  section  mentions  work,  some  of  which  moves  outside  the 
Shannon  paradigm,  in  which  the  effort  to  capture  expert  chess 
knowledge  becomes  primary. 

Forward  pruning.  One  way  of  limiting  the  number  of  moves  to  be 
considered  introduces  no  new  complications:  Simply  generate  all  legal 
moves  at  a  position,  use  a  fixed-ordering  scheme  to  sort  them  according 
to  their  apparent  goodness,  or  plausibility,  and  then  discard  all  but  the 
best  few  moves.  Such  a  technique,  called  plausible-move  generation  or 
forward  pruning,  was  used  by  Kotok  (1962)  and  Greenblatt,  Eastlake, 
and  Crocker  (1967);  see  also  Samuel  (1967).  A  further  feature  of  these 
programs,  sometimes  called  tapered  forward  pruning,  was  that  the  num- 
ber of  moves  retained  was  a  function  of  the  depth  at  which  they  were 
generated.  For  example,  Greenblatt 's  program  in  tournament  play  re- 
tained 15  moves  from  a  position  at  either  of  the  top  two  levels  of  the 
tree,  9  moves  at  the  next  two  levels,  and  7  moves  thereafter.  These 
figures  could  be  increased  in  special  cases — for  example,  to  be  sure  that 
moves  of  more  than  a  single  piece  were  considered. 

Another  form  of  forward  pruning,  distinct  from  plausible-move  gen- 
eration, operates  not  at  the  time  when  moves  are  originally  generated 
but  later,  when  one  of  these  moves  (or  the  position  to  which  it  leads)  is 
being  selected  for  further  exploration.  At  this  point,  a  preliminary  esti- 
mate of  the  value  of  the  move  or  position  may  already  have  been  made 
by  the  move-ordering  scheme.  If  this  estimate  is  outside  the  limits 
alpha  and  beta,  the  currently  known  bounds  on  the  outcome  of  the 
entire  search  (see  Article  n.C5b),  the  node  is  pruned  without  further 
investigation.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  the  actual  backed-up  value 
of  the  node  would  have  turned  out  to  be  between  alpha  and  beta.  In 
that  case,  a  good  move  may  have  been  missed.  (See  Samuel,  1967; 
Berliner,  1974,  p.  IV-13.) 

Still  another  basis  for  forward  pruning  has  been  explored  by 
Adelson-Velskiy  et  al.  (1975).  They  observe  that  KAISSA's  search  trees 
include  many  lines  of  play  that  a  human  would  consider  absurd,  not 
necessarily  because  the  moves  are  bad  a  priori  but  because  the  human 
player  has  already  considered  and  rejected  the  same  moves  in  an  anal- 
ogous position.  The  proposal,  then,  is  to  remember  moves  that  have 
been  found  to  be  absurd  (on  some  definition)  and  to  reject  them  in 
other  positions,  too,  unless  there  has  been  an  appropriate  change  of  cir- 
cumstances. In  effect,  this  method  of  analogies  involves  trying  to  estab- 
lish  conditions  under  which  a  refutation   is  guaranteed  to   be  effective. 


C5c  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  105 

Then  the  line  of  play  constituting  the  refutation  would  not  need  to  be 
explored  separately  every  time  it  is  applicable.     (See  Frey,  1977,  p.  68.) 

Goal- directed  move  generation.  Returning  to  the  initial  generation 
of  moves,  there  is  another  kind  of  plausible-move  generator  that  comes 
closer  to  mimicking  the  way  that  humans  might  decide  which  moves  are 
worth  considering.  Instead  of  generating  all  legal  moves  and  discarding 
some,  this  approach  does  not  generate  moves  at  all  unless  they  seem 
relevant  to  some  goal.  The  earliest  step  in  this  direction  was  Bernstein's 
program  (1959),  which  contained  a  sequence  of  board  features  to  be 
tested  for  and  a  procedure  for  generating  moves  in  response  to  each 
feature  that  was  present.  The  first  few  tests  in  the  sequence  were,  first, 
whether  the  king  is  in  check;  second,  whether  material  can  be  gained, 
lost,  or  exchanged;  and,  third,  whether  castling  is  possible.  A  maximum 
of  seven  plausible  moves  was  returned.  Questions  later  in  the  sequence 
were  not  asked  if  earlier  questions  caused  the  maximum  to  be  reached. 
Searching  to  a  fixed  depth  of  four  ply,  the  program  generated  trees  with 
about  2,400  tip  nodes. 

More  explicitly  goal-directed  move-generation  was  included  in  Newell, 
Shaw,  and  Simon's  1958  chess  program  (Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon, 
1963a;  Newell  and  Simon,  1972).  Indeed,  the  entire  program  was  orga- 
nized in  terms  of  goals,  although  only  three— material,  center  control, 
and  piece  development — were  actually  implemented.  At  each  turn,  the 
program  began  by  making  a  preliminary  analysis  to  decide  which  of  the 
goals  were  relevant  to  the  situation;  these  were  entered,  in  order  of 
importance,  on  a  current  goal-list.  It  was  intended,  in  a  more  fully 
developed  program,  that  as  the  game  progressed,  the  goals  of  center 
control  and  development  would  drop  out,  since  they  are  important 
mainly  in  the  opening,  and  would  be  replaced  by  others  more  appro- 
priate to  later  phases  of  the  game. 

Each  active  goal  in  the  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon  program  was  re- 
sponsible for  generating  relevant  moves  at  the  first  level  of  the  tree.  In 
addition,  each  goal  contained  its  own  separate  generator  for  moves  at 
deeper  levels,  its  own  criteria  for  whether  a  position  was  dead,  and  its 
own  static  evaluation  function.  The  search  proceeded,  in  a  highly  selec- 
tive manner,  until  the  tip  nodes  were  dead  with  respect  to  all  active 
goals.  Static  evaluations  with  respect  to  the  various  goals  were  com- 
bined lexicographically,  so  that  the  highest  priority  goal  was  dominant 
and  the  others  served  only  as  tiebreakers.  Newell  and  Simon  (1972, 
p.  694)  report  that  the  program's  average  search  tree  contained  only  13 
nodes — with  no  apparent  loss  in  playing  power  compared  to  other 
programs  up  to  that  time. 


106  Search  II 

Knowledge-based  Programs 

The  Bernstein  program  and  the  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon  program 
were  early  efforts  to  introduce  significant  chess  knowledge,  organized  in 
human  terms,  to  limit  brute-force  search.  The  actual  knowledge  was 
very  sketchy;  apparently  neither  program  ever  won  a  game  (see  Newell 
and  Simon,  1972,  pp.  677,  690). 

An  attempt  at  fuller  use  of  chess  knowledge  was  made  in  Berliner's 
program,  CAPS-II  (1974,  1977b).  Much  of  the  work  involved  developing 
a  representation  suitable  for  use  in  selectively  generating  moves,  making 
preliminary  evaluations  of  the  moves  so  proposed,  and  describing  the 
actual  consequences  discovered  when  a  move  was  tried.  The  moves  gen- 
erated depend  on  the  current  goal  state,  which  may  be  King  in  Check, 
Aggressive,  Preventive  Defense,  Nominal  Defense,  Dynamic  Defense,  or 
Strategy.  In  contrast  to  the  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon  program,  the  goal 
states  are  mutually  exclusive,  and  state  transitions  take  place  dynam- 
ically as  the  tree  is  searched,  in  accordance  with  a  complex  flowchart. 
An  important  feature  of  the  program,  the  Causality  Facility,  relates  to 
both  move  generation  and  move  ordering,  as  well  as  to  pruning  in  some 
cases.  The  problem  it  attacks  is  a  general  one  in  tree  searching:  When 
a  path  has  been  explored  and  found  unsatisfactory,  most  programs  have 
no  way  to  diagnose  what  went  wrong  or  to  use  this  information  in 
deciding  where  to  search  next. 

The  basic  search  algorithm  in  CAPS-n  is  depth-first,  with  mini- 
maxing  and  alpha-beta  pruning.  The  Causality  Facility  operates  as  a 
refinement  on  this  search.  A  first  new  feature  is  that,  whenever  a  value 
is  backed  up  in  the  search  tree  as  a  tentative  minimax  value,  certain 
information  is  accumulated  about  the  consequences  of  the  move  or 
moves  that  produced  the  value.  The  data  structure  in  which  the  in- 
formation is  stored  is  called  a  Refutation  Description.  As  the  basis  for 
making  use  of  the  Refutation  Description,  the  program  uses  a  variable 
representing  the  expected  value  of  the  position  at  the  root  of  the  search 
tree;  this  value,  which  may  be  updated  during  the  search,  lies  some- 
where between  the  bounds  given  by  alpha  and  beta.  Now,  the  tentative 
value  newly  backed  up  to  a  node  can  be  compared  with  the  expected 
value.  If  the  comparison  is  unsatisfactory,  the  Causality  Facility  uses  the 
Refutation  Description  to  decide  whether  the  last  move  tried  from  the 
node  could  have  been  responsible.  It  generates  a  list  of  alternative 
moves  from  the  node,  with  the  aim  of  avoiding  the  unsatisfactory  result. 
These  moves  are  compared  with  the  list  of  moves  from  the  node  that 
had  been  generated  earlier  but  that  have  not  yet  been  tried.  The 
comparison   is  used   to  reorder   moves  already  on  the  untried   list  and, 


C5c  Heuristics  in  Game  Tree  Search  107 

depending  on  the  state  the  program  is  in,  to  add  new  moves  to  the  list 
and  to  prune  old  ones. 

Whereas  Berliner's  program  plays  the  full  game  of  chess,  there  are 
several  other  recent  programs  that,  in  their  emphasis  on  representing 
chess  knowledge,  limit  their  task  to  solving  problems  involving  only- 
selected  aspects  of  the  game.  Two  of  these  are  the  programs  by  Pitrat 
(1977)  and  Wilkins  (1979).  In  each,  the  task  is  to  find  a  line  of  play 
that  wins  material,  beginning  from  a  given  middle-game  position.  The 
approach  in  both  programs  is  to  work  backward  from  the  goal  of 
winning  material  to  a  structure  of  subgoals  that  constitutes  a  plan  (see 
Chap.  XVI,  in  Vol.  m).  Wilkins's  program,  PARADISE,  for  example,  has 
as  a  main  theme  the  expression  of  chess  concepts,  like  making  a  square 
safe  for  a  piece  or  safely  capturing  a  piece,  in  terms  that  can  be  used 
as  subgoals  and  eventually  reduced  to  specific  moves.  Initially,  a  plan  is 
based  not  on  search  but  on  an  extensive  analysis  of  the  originally  given 
position;  it  may  contain  conditional  branches  depending  on  general  cat- 
egories of  moves  with  which  the  opponent  might  reply.  The  general  plan 
is  then  used  to  guide  search,  generating  a  very  small  tree.  Moves  consid- 
ered for  the  program  to  make  are  only  those  relevant  to  the  current 
subgoal;  for  the  simulated  opponent,  all  reasonable  defensive  moves  are 
considered.  If  search  shows  that  the  plan  has  failed,  a  causality  facility 
similar  to  Berliner's  is  used  to  analyze  the  difficulty  and  suggest  a  new 
plan. 

Both  the  Pitrat  and  the  Wilkins  programs  have  succeeded  in  solving 
problems  where  the  winning  line  of  play  goes  to  a  depth  of  around  20 
ply.  Pitrat  reports,  for  a  set  of  11  problems,  that  search- tree  sizes 
ranged  from  about  200  to  22,000  nodes;  computation  time  varied  from 
under  3  seconds  to  about  7.5  minutes.  Wilkins's  PARADISE  generates 
smaller  trees  but  uses  more  time;  for  89  problems  solved,  the  number  of 
nodes  in  the  search  tree  ran  from  a  minimum  of  3  to  a  maximum  of 
215,  and  time  to  find  the  solution  varied  from  19  seconds  to  33  min- 
utes. Wilkins  also  reports  a  good  success  rate  compared  to  previous 
programs  tested  on  the  same  set  of  problems,  including  Berliner's 
program,  Gillogly's  TECH,  and  an  earlier  version  of  CHESS  4.5.  The 
programs  other  than  PARADISE,  however,  were  tested  with  a  time  limit 
of  only  5  minutes  per  problem. 

A  final  example  of  the  use  of  chess  knowledge  to  solve  a  class  of 
problems  is  the  work  of  Donald  Michie  and  his  colleagues  on  chess  end- 
games (e.g.,  Bratko,  Kopec,  and  Michie,  1978;  Michie  and  Bratko,  1978). 
Here  each  combination  of  pieces  with  which  the  end  game  may  be 
played  is  treated  as  posing  a  separate  problem.  One  problem,  denoted 
KNKR,    is    to    defend    with    king    and    knight    against    king    and    rook, 


108  Search  II 

starting  from  any  of  some  3  million  legal  positions  involving  only  those 
pieces.  The  objective  is  to  provide  the  program  with  enough  knowledge 
about  this  specific  class  of  chess  problems  to  achieve  theoretically  correct 
play,  even  in  situations  where  chess  masters  sometimes  err,  and  to  ac- 
complish this  with  only  a  moderate  amount  of  search. 

The  program's  knowledge  is  encoded  in  a  data  structure  called  an 
Advice  Table,  within  which  patterns  occurring  on  the  board  may  be 
described.  Each  pattern  has  an  associated  list  of  goals,  or  "pieces  of 
advice,"  in  the  order  in  which  they  should  be  attempted.  The  object 
then  becomes  to  find  a  solution — in  the  sense  of  a  solution  subtree  of 
an  AND/ OR  tree  (Article  n.C2) — to  the  problem  of  satisfying  one  of  the 
goals.  Unlike  a  standard  AND/OR  tree  search,  however,  the  "advice" 
includes  not  only  a  definition  of  when  tip  nodes  should  be  considered 
terminal  but  also  constraints  that  every  intermediate  node  in  the  solu- 
tion tree  must  satisfy. 

The  amount  of  search  required  to  find  a  solution  using  an  Advice 
Table  depends  on  how  much  knowledge  the  table  contains.  If  the  only 
goal  provided  were  avoidance  of  checkmate,  a  search  to  the  impossible 
depth  of  85  ply  would  be  needed  to  find  the  best  defense  from  some 
positions.  With  the  additional  advice  not  to  lose  the  knight  and  to  keep 
king  and  knight  together,  search  to  about  10  ply  is  sufficient.  With  the 
further  refinements  included  in  the  actual  Advice  Table,  the  program  is 
reported  to  play  the  KNKR  end  game  at  master  level  with  only  a  four- 
ply  search. 

References 

See  Adelson-Velskiy,  Arlazarov,  and  Donskoy  (1975),  Berliner  (1973, 

1974,  1977a,  1977b,  1977c,  1978a,  1978b),  Bernstein  et  al.  (1959),  Bratko, 
Kopec,  and  Michie  (1978),  Charness  (1977),  Frey  (1977),  Gillogly  (1972), 
Greenblatt,   Eastlake,   and   Crocker  (1967),   Griffith  (1974),   Harris   (1974, 

1975,  1977a),  Hearst  (1977),  Kister  et  al.  (1957),  Kotok  (1962),  Levy 
(1979),  Michie  (1977),  Michie  and  Bratko  (1978),  Mittman  (1977), 
Newborn  (1975,  1978),  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon  (1963a),  Newell  and 
Simon  (1972),  Nilsson  (1969,  1971),  Pitrat  (1977),  Samuel  (1963,  1967), 
Shannon  (1950),  Slagle  and  Dixon  (1969,  1970),  Slate  and  Atkin  (1977), 
Thorp  and  Walden  (1970),  Turing  (1953),  and  Wilkins  (1979). 


D.     SAMPLE  SEARCH  PROGRAMS 
Dl.     Logic  Theorist 

The  Logic  Theorist  (LT)  was  a  program  written  by  Allen  Newell, 
J.  C.  Shaw,  and  H.  A.  Simon  in  1956,  as  a  joint  project  of  the  RAND 
Corporation  and  the  Carnegie  Institute  of  Technology.  It  was  one  of 
the  earliest  programs  to  investigate  the  use  of  heuristics  in  problem 
solving.  The  term  heuristics,  as  used  by  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon 
(1963b,  p.  109),  referred  to  "the  complex  processes  .  .  .  that  are  effec- 
tive in  problem-solving."     They  stated, 

We  are  not  interested  in  methods  that  guarantee  solutions,  but 
which  require  vast  amounts  of  computation.  Rather,  we  wish  to 
understand  how  a  mathematician,  for  example,  is  able  to  prove  a 
theorem  even  though  he  does  not  know  when  he  starts  how,  or  if, 
he  is  going  to  succeed,     (p.  109) 

Heuristics  were  thus  identified  with  processes  "that  may  solve  a  given 
problem,  but  offer  no  guarantee  of  doing  so"  (p.  114;  see  also  Article 
n.A). 

In  descriptions  of  the  Logic  Theorist  program,  the  heuristics  dis- 
cussed by  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon  relate  principally  to  limiting  the 
search  space  by  means  of  an  apt  problem  formulation.  Within  the 
defined  space,  the  search  was  blind  except  for  some  minor  selectivity  in 
the  choice  of  operators  (see  Article  n.C3a). 

The  problem  domain  of  the  Logic  Theorist  is  the  proof  of  theorems 
in  the  propositional  calculus  (see  Article  m.Ci).  The  basis  is  Whitehead 
and  Russell's  Principia  Mathematica,  from  which  both  axioms  and  the- 
orems to  be  proved  were  taken.     There  are  five  axioms,  as  follows: 

1-  (p  V  p)  D  P 

2.  p  D  {qW  p) 

3.  (PV?)D((?V  p) 

4.  [p  V  (q  V  r)]   D   [q  V  (p  V  r)] 

5.  (p  D  q)  D  [(f  V  p)  D  (r  V  q)} 

Some  typical  theorems  that  LT  was  given  to  prove  include: 


110  Search  II 

2.01.    (p  D  ->p)  D  --P 

2.45.     -i(p  V  (?)  D  ip 

2.31.     [p  V  (g  V  r)]  D  [(p  V  q)  V  r] 

The  numbering  of  the  theorems  is  taken  from  Whitehead  and  Russell. 
In  some  cases,  the  data  given  the  program  included  not  only  the  axioms 
but  also  previously  proved  theorems  from  that  work.  When  all  earlier 
theorems  were  included  with  the  axioms,  the  program  succeeded  in 
proving  38  of  the  first  52  theorems  in  Chapter  2  of  Principia  Mathe- 
matical, in  the  sequence  given  there. 

The  program  operates  by  reasoning  backward  from  the  theorem  to 
be  established  to  the  axioms  and  given  theorems.  Three  operators  were 
provided  for  reducing  the  theorem  to  be  proved,  let  us  say  X,  to  an 
axiom  or  theorem.     These  operators  were: 

Detachment:  To  show  X,  find  an  axiom  or  theorem  of  the  form 
A  D  X  and  transform  the  problem  to  the  problem  of  show- 
ing A. 

Forward  chaining:  To  show  X  where  X  has  the  form  A  D  C,  find 
an  axiom  or  theorem  of  the  form  A  D  B  and  transform  the 
problem  to  the  problem  of  showing  B  Z)   C. 

Backward  chaining:  To  show  X  where  X  has  the  form  A  Z)  C,  find 
an  axiom  or  theorem  of  the  form  B  D  C  and  transform  the 
problem  to  the  problem  of  showing  A  D  B. 

Since  the  axioms  and  given  theorems  contain  variables,  consideration 
must  be  given  to  the  means  for  deciding  whether  a  problem  has  in  fact 
been  reduced  to  something  known.  The  question  is  whether  a  current 
problem  expression  X  is  an  instance  of  an  axiom  or  known  theorem. 
The  test,  called  the  Substitution  Test,  uses  two  rules  of  inference 
distinct  from  those  reflected  in  the  operators: 

Substitution:  A  variable  in  a  theorem  may  be  replaced,  in  all  its 
occurrences  throughout  the  theorem,  by  an  expression.  For 
example,  substituting  the  expression  p  V  Q  for  the  variable  p 
transforms 

V  D  (q  V  p) 
into 

(P  V  Q)   D    [q  V  (p  V   q)}   . 


Dl  Logic  Theorist  111 


Replacement:     The  connective   "D"   is  interchangeable  with  its  defi- 
nition.    That  is,  if  p  and  q  are  expressions,  then 

V  D  Q 
can  be  replaced  by 

-\p  V  q 
and  vice  versa. 

As  well  as  being  used  to  determine  whether  a  proof  is  complete,  the 
Substitution  Test  is  also  essential  for  determining  what  applications  of 
the  three  operators  are  possible  with  respect  to  a  given  problem  ex- 
pression. 

The  general  algorithm  used  by  the  Logic  Theorist  is  a  blind, 
breadth-first,  state-space  search  using  backward  reasoning.  The  initial 
state  corresponds  to  the  original  theorem  to  be  proved.  To  test 
whether  an  expression  has  been  proved,  the  program  applies  the  Substi- 
tution Test,  pairing  the  problem  expression  with  each  axiom  and  as- 
sumed theorem,  in  turn.  If  substitution  fails,  the  expression  is  placed 
on  a  list  of  open  problems;  problems  are  selected  from  this  list  to 
become  the  current  problem  in  first-in,  first-out  order. 

To  a  problem  selected  from  the  list,  each  of  the  three  operators  is 
applied,  in  fixed  order  and  in  all  possible  ways,  to  generate  new  open 
problems.  The  search  terminates  with  success  as  soon  as  a  single  prob- 
lem is  generated  that  passes  the  substitution  test,  since  this  means  that 
a  path  has  been  completed  between  an  axiom  and  the  original  problem. 
The  search  fails  if  it  exceeds  time  or  space  limits  or  if  it  runs  out  of 
open  problems. 

An  example  of  a  case  in  which  the  latter  occurs  is  the  attempted 
proof  of  the  theorem 

p  or  — i — i — i /?  . 

To  succeed  with  this  proof,  LT  would  have  needed  more  powerful  op- 
erators; this  particular  problem  required  the  ability,  which  LT  lacked,  to 
transform  a  problem  to  a  set  of  subproblems,  or  conjunctive  subgoals, 
that  all  had  to  be  solved  in  order  to  solve  the  original  problem. 

There  are  some  qualifications  to  the  preceding  general  description  of 
LT.  One  concerns  the  statement  that  each  operator  is  applied  to  the 
current  problem  in  every  possible  way,  that  is,  that  the  current  problem 
expression  is  matched  against  every  axiom  and  assumed  theorem  to 
determine  the  applicability  of  any  of  the  operators  to  that  expression- 


112  Search  II 

axiom  pair.  In  fact,  the  program  attempted  a  match  for  the  purpose  of 
discovering  an  appropriate  substitution  only  if  the  pair  had  passed  a 
test  indicating  equality  of  certain  gross  features,  such  as  the  number  of 
distinct  variables  in  each.  This  test  for  similarity  occasionally  rejected  a 
pair  for  which  a  substitution  in  fact  would  have  been  possible,  thus 
excluding  a  proof  the  program  would  otherwise  have  found.  Overall, 
the  utility  of  this  similarity  test  was  considered  rather  marginal. 

Some  other  additions,  apparently  made  in  a  later  version  of  the  pro- 
gram (see  Newell  and  Simon,  1972,  pp.  125-128),  included  (a)  ordering 
the  open  problems,  taking  up  those  involving  simpler  expressions  first 
instead  of  proceeding  in  a  strictly  breadth-first  order,  and  (b)  rejecting 
some  subproblems  entirely  as  too  complicated  or  apparently  unprovable. 
In  the  implementation  of  these  features,  the  latter  appeared  to  be  the 
more  effective  measure  in  reducing  search  effort.  There  was  also  experi- 
mentation, as  mentioned  previously,  with  the  number  of  theorems  that 
could  be  assumed  as  given  in  addition  to  the  basic  axioms.  The 
conclusion  on  this  point  was  that  "a  problem  solver  may  be  encumbered 
by  too  much  information,  just  as  he  may  be  handicapped  by  too  little" 
(p.  127). 

References 

See  Newell,  Shaw,  and  Simon  (1963b),  Newell  and  Simon  (1972),  and 
Whitehead  and  Russell  (1925). 


D2.     General  Problem  Solver 

The  General  Problem  Solver  (GPS)  was  developed  by  Newell,  Shaw, 
and  Simon  beginning  in  1957.  The  research  had  a  dual  intention:  It 
was  aimed  at  getting  machines  to  solve  problems  requiring  intelligence 
and  at  developing  a  theory  of  how  human  beings  solve  such  problems. 
GPS  was  the  successor  of  the  authors'  earlier  Logic  Theorist  program 
(Article  n.Di),  whose  methods  had  only  a  slight  resemblance  to  those 
used  by  humans  working  on  similar  problems.  Development  of  GPS 
continued  through  at  least  10  years  and  numerous  versions  of  the 
program.  The  final  version,  described  in  detail  in  Ernst  and  Newell 
(1969),  was  concerned  with  extending  the  generality  of  the  program,  not 
with  the  psychological  theory. 

The  name  "General  Problem  Solver"  came  from  the  fact  that  GPS 
was  the  first  problem- solving  program  to  separate  its  general  problem- 
solving  methods  from  knowledge  specific  to  the  type  of  task  at  hand. 
That  is,  the  problem- solving  part  of  the  system  gave  no  information 
about  the  kind  of  task  being  worked  on;  task-dependent  knowledge  was 
collected  in  data  structures  forming  a  task  environment  Among  the  data 
structures  were  objects  and  operators  for  transforming  the  objects.  A 
task  was  normally  given  to  GPS  as  an  initial  object  and  a  desired  ob- 
ject, into  which  the  initial  object  was  to  be  transformed.  GPS  objects 
and  operators  were  similar  to  the  states  and  operators  of  a  state- space 
problem  representation  (Article  n.Bi). 

The  general  problem- solving  technique  introduced  by  GPS,  however, 
does  not  fit  neatly  into  either  the  state-space  or  the  problem-reduction 
representation  formalisms.  It  differs  from  a  standard  state-space  search 
(e.g.,  Article  n.Ci)  in  the  way  it  decides  what  path  to  try  next.  This 
technique,  called  means- ends  analysis,  is  a  major  theoretical  contribution 
of  the  program.  It  assumes  that  the  differences  between  a  current 
object  and  a  desired  object  can  be  defined  and  classified  into  types  and 
that  the  operators  can  be  classified  according  to  the  kinds  of  differences 
they  might  reduce.  At  each  stage,  GPS  selects  a  single  relevant  oper- 
ator to  try  to  apply  to  the  current  object.  The  search  for  a  successful 
operator  sequence  proceeds  depth  first  as  long  as  the  chosen  operators 
are  applicable  and  the  path  shows  promise.  Backup  is  possible  if  the 
current  path  becomes  unpromising — for  example,  if  eliminating  one  dif- 
ference has  introduced  a  new  one  that  is  harder  to  get  rid  of. 


114  Search  E 

An  important  feature  of  means-ends  analysis  is  that  the  operator 
selected  as  relevant  to  reducing  a  difference  may  actually  be  inapplicable 
to  the  current  object.  Rather  than  rejecting  the  operator  for  this  rea- 
son, GPS  attempts  to  change  the  current  object  into  an  object  appropri- 
ate as  input  to  the  chosen  operator.  The  result  of  this  strategy  is  a 
recursive,  goal-directed  program  that  records  the  search  history  in  an 
AND/OR  graph  (Article  n.B2)  with  partial  development  of  nodes  (Article 
H.C3a). 

Goals  and  Methods 

The  most  important  data  structure  used  by  GPS  is  the  goal.  The 
goal  is  an  encoding  of  the  current  situation  (an  object  or  list  of  ob- 
jects), the  desired  situation,  and  a  history  of  the  attempts  so  far  to 
change  the  current  situation  into  the  desired  one.  Three  main  types  of 
goals  are  provided: 

1.  Transform  object  A  into  object  B. 

2.  Reduce  a  difference  between  object  A  and  object  B  by  modifying 
object  A. 

3.  Apply  operator  Q  to  object  A. 

Associated  with  the  goal  types  are  methods,  or  procedures,  for  achieving 
them.  These  methods,  shown  in  a  simplified  version  in  Figure  D2-1,  can 
be  understood  as  problem-reduction  operators  that  give  rise  either  to 
AND  nodes,  in  the  case  of  transform  or  apply,  or  to  OR  nodes,  in  the 
case  of  a  reduce  goal. 

The  initial  task  presented  to  GPS  is  represented  as  a  transform  goal, 
in  which  A  is  the  initial  object  and  B  the  desired  object.  The  recursion 
stops  if  the  goal  is  primitive — that  is,  for  a  transform  goal,  if  there  is 
no  difference  between  A  and  B,  and  for  an  apply  goal,  if  the  operator  Q 
is  immediately  applicable.  For  a  reduce  goal,  the  recursion  may  stop, 
with  failure,  when  all  relevant  operators  have  been  tried  and  have 
failed. 


D2 


General  Problem  Solver 


115 


TRANSFORM 
A  TO  B 


REDUCE  DIFFERENCE 
BETWEEN  A  AND  B, 
GIVING  OUTPUT  A; 


TRANSFORM 
A'  TO  B 


REDUCE  DIFFERENCE 
BETWEEN  A  AND  B 


SELECT  A  RELEVANT  OPERATOR  Q 
AND  APPLY  IT  TO  A, 


GIVING  OUTPUT  A 


APPLY  OPERATOR  Q  TO  A 


REDUCE  DIFFERENCE 

BETWEEN  A  AND  THE 

PRECONDITIONS  FOR  Q, 


GIVING  OUTPUT  A 


// 


APPLY  q   TO  A" , 
GIVING  OUTPUT  A 


Figure  D2-1.    The  three  GPS  methods  for  problem  reduction. 


Selection  of  Operators 

In  trying  to  transform  object  A  into  object  B,  the  transform  method 
uses  a  matching  process  to  discover  the  differences  between  the  two  ob- 
jects. The  possible  types  of  differences  are  predefined  and  ordered  by 
estimated  difficulty,  for  each  kind  of  task.  The  most  difficult  difference 
found  is  the  one  chosen  for  reduction.  A  domain-dependent  data  struc- 
ture called  the  Table  of  Connections  lists  the  operators  relevant  to 
reducing  each  difference  type. 

Depth  Bounds 

Several  heuristics  are  provided  to  prevent  GPS  from  following  a  false 
path  indefinitely.  Some  of  the  bases  for  determining  whether  a  current 
goal  should  be  abandoned,  at  least  temporarily,  are  the  following: 

1.  Each  goal  should  be  easier  than  its  parent  goal. 

2.  Of  a  pair  of  AND  nodes  representing  subgoals  generated  by 
transform  or  apply,  the  second  subgoal  attempted  should  be 
easier  than  the  first. 


116  Search  II 

3.  A  newly  generated  object  should  not  be  much  larger  than  the 
objects  occurring  in  the  topmost  goal. 

4.  Once   a  goal  has  been  generated,   the   identical  goal  should  not 
be  generated  again. 

An  Example 

The  first  task  environment  to  which  GPS  was  applied  was  the  do- 
main of  the  Logic  Theorist:  proving  theorems  in  the  propositional  cal- 
culus. The  initial  and  desired  objects  were  expressions,  one  to  be 
transformed  into  the  other  by  means  of  operators  representing  rules  of 
inference.  There  were  12  operators  altogether,  including  the  following 
rules.  (An  arrow  means  that  the  expression  may  be  rewritten  in  the 
direction  of  the  arrow  head.) 

Rule  1.    Ay  B    -^    By  A 
A  A  B    ->    BAA 

Rule  5.    Ay  B  ^    -.(-nA  A  ->£) 
Rule  6.    A  D  B  <->    -A  V  B 

Six  possible  difference  types  were  recognized: 

1.  occurrence  of  a  variable  in  one  expression  but  not  the  other, 

2.  occurrence  of  a  variable  a  different  number  of  times  in  the  two 
expressions, 

3.  difference  in  sign, 

4.  difference  in  binary  connective, 

5.  difference  in  grouping,  and 

6.  difference  in  position  of  components. 

The  list  just  given  is  in  decreasing  order  of  assumed  difficulty.  Every 
difference  between  main  expressions,  however,  was  considered  more  dif- 
ficult than  any  difference  between  subexpressions. 

With  this  background,  a  trace  (slightly  simplified)  of  GPS's  perfor- 
mance on  a  simple  example  can  be  given.  The  problem  is  to  transform 
the  initial  expression 

R  A  ipP  D  Q)  , 

denoted  L1?  into  the  desired  expression 

(Q  y  P)  A  R  , 

denoted  L0.     The  trace  is  shown  below. 


D2  General  Problem  Solver  117 

Goal  1:  Transform  Lj  into  L0. 

Goal  2:  Reduce  positional  difference  between  Lj  and  L0- 
Goal  3:  Apply  Rule  1  to  L±. 

Return  L2:     ( ->P  D   Q)  A  R 

Goal  4:  Transform  L2  into  L0. 

Goal  5:  Reduce  difference  in  connective  between 
left  subexpressions  of  L2  and  L0. 

Goal  6:  Apply  Rule  5  to  left  part  of  L2. 

Goal  7:  Reduce  difference  in  connective 
between  left  part  of  L2  and 
precondition  for  Rule  5. 

Reject  goal  7  as  no  easier  than  goal  5. 

Goal  8:  Apply  Rule  6  to  left  part  of  L2. 

Return  L3:     (P  V  Q)  A  R 

Goal  9:  Transform  L3  into  L0. 

Goal  10:  Reduce  positional  difference 

between  left  parts  of  L3  and  L0. 

Goal  11:  Apply  Rule  1  to  left  part  of  L3. 

Return  L4:     (Q  V  P)  A  # 
Goal  12:  Transform  L4  to  L0. 
No  difference  exists,  so  problem  is  solved. 

The  Problem  of  Generality 

GPS  was  intended  to  model  generality  in  problem  solving  through 
use  of  the  broadly  applicable  techniques  of  heuristic  search,  and  the 
strategy  of  means-ends  analysis  in  particular.  The  implementation  of 
these  techniques  was  dependent  on  the  internal  representation  of  objects 
and  operators.  These  representations,  in  early  versions  of  GPS,  were 
nicely  suited  to  logic  tasks  like  the  example  above.  But  they  were 
inadequate  for  many  other  kinds  of  heuristic  search  problems.  Before 
Ernst's  extensions  to  the  program  (Ernst  and  Newell,  1969),  GPS  had  in 
fact  solved  only  two  problems  outside  the  logic  domain. 

The  object  of  Ernst's  work  was  to  extend  the  number  of  kinds  of 
problems  that  GPS  could  handle  while  holding  its  power  at  a  constant 


118  Search  II 

level.  One  of  his  generalizations  was  in  the  representation  of  objects. 
Earlier,  a  desired  object  had  had  to  be  specified  by  giving  its  exact 
form.  Forms  containing  variables  and  lists  of  forms  could  be  used  if 
necessary.  But  these,  too,  were  inadequate  for  representing  symbolic 
integration  problems,  in  which  the  desired  object  is  any  form  whatever 
that  does  not  contain  an  integral  sign.  Hence,  the  description  of  a  de- 
sired object  by  a  list  of  constraints  was  introduced. 

Another  change  was  in  the  representation  of  operators,  originally 
specified  by  giving  the  form  of  the  input  object  and  the  form  of  the  re- 
sulting output  object.  For  some  kinds  of  problems,  it  was  desirable  to 
have  other  tests  of  applicability  besides  the  form  of  the  input  object 
and  to  be  able  to  describe  the  output  object  as  a  function  of  the  input. 
A  third  change  allowed  GPS  to  deal  with  unordered  sets  of  symbols, 
eliminating  the  need  for  special  operators  to  permute  their  elements. 

The  generalized  program  succeeded  in  solving  problems  of  11  dif- 
ferent kinds,  including  symbolic  integration,  resolution  theorem  proving, 
and  a  variety  of  puzzles.  Each  generalization,  however,  entailed  changes 
in  the  ways  the  problem  representations  could  be  processed,  and  these 
led  in  turn  to  deterioriation  with  respect  to  the  kinds  of  differences  that 
could  be  detected.  The  only  representable  differences  became  "local" 
ones.  An  example  of  a  global  difference,  which  GPS  could  no  longer 
recognize,  was  the  total  number  of  times  a  variable  occurred  in  a  logic 
formula.  Consequently,  theorem  proving  in  the  propositional  calculus 
was  not  among  the  11  tasks  that  the  final  version  of  GPS  could  do. 

In  the  task  domains  in  which  GPS  did  succeed,  it  could  solve  onlv 
simple  problems;  and  those,  less  efficiently  than  special-purpose  problem 
solvers.  If  a  long  search  was  required,  it  ran  out  of  memory  space,  and 
even  easy  problems,  if  they  needed  objects  as  complex  as  a  chess 
position,  quickly  exhausted  memory  on  a  machine  with  65K  words.  But 
GPS  was  not  expected  to  be  a  performance  program.  What  it  yielded, 
in  its  authors'  view,  was  "a  series  of  lessons  that  give  a  more  perfect 
view  of  the  nature  of  problem  solving  and  what  is  required  to  construct 
processes  that  accomplish  it"  (Ernst  and  Newell,  1969,  p.  2).  Although 
additional  generalizations,  such  as  game  playing,  were  considered  feasible, 
the  authors  concluded  that  GPS  needed  no  further  programming  ac- 
cretions and  recommended  that  it  be  laid  to  rest. 

References 

See  Ernst  and  Newell  (1969),  Newell  and  Ernst  (1965),  Newell, 
Shaw,  and  Simon  (1960),  and  Newell  and  Simon  (1963,  1972). 


D3.     Gelernter's  Geometry  Theorem-proving  Machine 

Herbert  Gelernter's  geometry  theorem-proving  machine  was  a  pro- 
gram written  in  1959  at  the  IBM  Research  Center  in  New  York.  The 
program  was  written  in  an  extended  FORTRAN,  the  FORTRAN  List 
Processing  Language,  and  implemented  on  an  IBM  704  computer.  The 
purpose  of  the  program  was  to  solve  problems  taken  from  high-school 
textbooks  and  final  examinations  in  plane  geometry.  As  with  Newell, 
Shaw,  and  Simon's  Logic  Theorist,  which  proved  theorems  in  the  prop- 
ositional  calculus,  the  fact  that  there  were  algorithms  for  solving  prob- 
lems in  these  domains  was  considered  irrelevant,  since  the  object  was  to 
explore  the  use  of  heuristic  methods  in  problem  solving. 

The  formal  system  within  which  the  geometry  program  worked  con- 
tained axioms  on  parallel  lines,  congruence,  and  equality  of  segments 
and  angles.  This  set  of  axioms,  which  was  not  meant  to  be  either  com- 
plete or  nonredundant,  was  along  the  lines  of  an  elementary  textbook. 
The  axioms  played  the  role  of  problem-reduction  operators.  Some  ex- 
amples are: 

1.  In  order  to  show  that  two  line  segments  are  equal,  show  that 
they  are  corresponding  elements  of  congruent  triangles; 

2.  In  order  to  show  that  two  angles  are  equal,  show  that  they  are 
both  right  angles; 

3.  In  order  to  show  that  two  triangles  are  congruent,  show  the 
equality  of  a  side  and  two  angles  in  corresponding  positions  or 
of  an  angle  and  two  sides. 

The  operators  for  establishing  congruence  split  the  problem  into  three 
subproblems,  each  to  be  solved  separately  by  showing  equality  for  one 
pair  of  elements.  Newell  and  Simon  (1972,  p.  138)  indicate  that  the 
geometry  machine  was  the  first  program  that  was  able  to  handle  con- 
junctive subgoals.  The  program  works  backward  from  the  theorem  to  be 
proved,  recording  its  progress  in  what  amounted  to  an  AND/OR  tree 
(Article  n.B2). 

Some  examples  of  problems  solved  by  the  program  were  the  fol- 
lowing: 

1.  Given  that  angle  ABD  equals  angle  DBC,  that  segment  AD  is 
perpendicular  to  segment  AB,  and  that  segment  DC  is  perpendicular  to 
segment  BC,  show  that  AD  equals  CD.     (See  Fig.  D3-1.) 


120  Search  II 


Figure  D3-1.    Diagram  for  problem  1. 

2.  Given  that  ABCD  is  a  quadrilateral,  with  segment  EC  parallel  to 
segment  AD  and  with  BC  equal  to  AD,  show  that  segment  AB  equals 
segment  CD.    (See  Fig.  D3-2.) 


Figure  D3-2.    Diagram  for  problem  2. 

A  problem  was  given  to  the  program  in  the  form  of  a  statement 
describing  the  premises  and  the  goal.  A  proof  was  a  sequence  of  state- 
ments giving  the  reduction  of  the  goal  to  trivial  goals — ordinarily,  goals 
to  establish  an  already  established  formula.  One  feature  used  to  reduce 
the  search  effort  needed  to  find  a  proof  was  the  recognition  of  syntactic 
symmetry.     Some  examples  of  symmetric  pairs  of  goals  are  the  following: 

1.  If  d(x,  y)  is  the  distance  from  point  x  to  point  y,  then 
d{A,B)  =  d(C,D)  is  symmetric  with  d{D,  C)  =  d(A,B). 

2.  If  ABCD  is  a  parallelogram  and  point  E  is  the  intersection  of  its 
diagonals  AC  and  BD,  then  d  (A,  E )  =  d  (E,  C )  is  symmetric 
with  d(B,E)  =  d{E,D). 

The  recognition  of  symmetry  was  used  in  two  ways.  First,  if  a  given 
goal  was  ever  reduced  to  a  subgoal  symmetric  with  it,  the  subgoal  could 
be  rejected  as  representing  circular  reasoning.  Second,  if  parallel  goals 
A  and  B  were  syntactically  symmetric  and  goal  A  had  been  established, 
then  goal  B  could  be  established  by  symmetry — in  effect  by  saying,  for 
the  second  half  of  the  proof,  "Similarly,  B.n 


D3  Gelernter's  Geometry  Theorem-proving  Machine  121 

The  most  notable  feature  of  the  program,  however,  was  an  addi- 
tional part  of  the  problem  statement  used  to  avoid  attempting  proofs  by 
blind  syntactic  manipulation  alone.  This  input  was  a  diagram,  similar 
to  Figures  D3-1  and  D3-2  (although  specified  by  lists  of  coordinates),  of 
the  points  and  line  segments  mentioned  in  the  theorem.  The  particular 
input  figure  was  chosen  to  avoid  spurious  coincidences  and  reflect  the 
greatest  possible  generality.  Whenever  a  subgoal  was  generated,  it  was 
checked  for  consistency  with  the  diagram.  If  false  in  the  diagram,  the 
subgoal  could  not  possibly  be  a  theorem  and  therefore  could  be  pruned 
from  the  search  tree.  A  slight  qualification  is  that  finite  precision  arith- 
metic, applied  to  the  diagram,  occasionally  caused  a  provable  subgoal  to 
be  pruned  erroneously;  but  it  was  reported  that  the  program  had  found 
other  paths  to  the  solution  in  such  cases.  It  was  estimated  that  the  use 
of  a  diagram,  together  with  the  discard  of  subgoals  representing  circular 
reasoning,  eliminated  about  995  out  of  every  1,000  subgoals. 

The  diagram  also  served  a  second  purpose:  It  provided  an  addi- 
tional criterion  by  which  a  problem  could  be  considered  primitive.  For 
example,  a  rigorous  proof  of  the  theorem  in  problem  1  would  require 
showing  that  DB  is  a  line  segment  and  that  BCD  and  BAD  are  triangles. 
The  axioms  needed  would  have  been  (a)  if  X  and  Y  are  distinct  points, 
then  XY  is  a  line  segment,  and  (b)  if  X,  Y,  and  Z  are  three  distinct 
noncollinear  points,  then  XYZ  is  a  triangle.  For  a  limited  class  of  such 
properties,  the  program  did  not  require  formal  proof  but  rather 
considered  them  established  if  they  were  true  in  the  diagram.  It 
recorded  explicitly  the  assumptions  that  had  been  made  based  on  the 
diagram. 

The  central  loop  of  the  program  repeatedly  selected  the  next  goal  to 
try.  Two  heuristics  were  included  for  goal  selection.  One  gave  highest 
priority  to  classes  of  goals,  such  as  identities,  that  could  usually  be 
established  in  one  step.  The  second  assigned  a  "distance"  between  the 
goal  statement  and  the  set  of  premise  statements;  after  the  one-step 
goals  had  been  developed,  the  remaining  goals  were  selected  in  order  of 
increasing  distance  from  the  premise  set. 

Once  a  goal  was  chosen  for  development,  the  action  taken  depended 
on  its  status.  Ordinarily,  it  would  be  reduced  to  subgoals,  and  the 
subgoals,  if  consistent  with  the  diagram  but  not  sufficient  to  establish 
the  current  goal  immediately,  would  be  added  to  the  list  of  goals  to  try. 
If  no  new  acceptable  subgoals  were  generated,  the  program  checked 
whether  a  construction  was  possible — a  construction  being  the  addition 
to  the  premises  of  the  problem  of  a  line  segment  between  two  existing 


122  Search  II 

but  previously  unconnected  points.  The  new  segment  would  be  ex- 
tended to  its  intersections  with  other  segments  in  the  figure.  New 
points  could  be  added  to  the  premises  only  if  generated  by  such  inter- 
sections. 

A  goal  for  which  a  construction  was  found  possible  was  saved — to 
be  tried  again  later  if  all  goals  not  requiring  construction  should  be  ex- 
hausted. If  the  goal  was  later  selected  for  a  second  try,  a  construction 
would  be  made  and  the  problem  started  over  with  an  expanded  premise 
set.  An  example  of  the  use  of  this  technique  occurs  in  problem  2, 
where  in  considering  the  goal  AB  =  CD,  the  program  generated  a 
subgoal  of  showing  that  triangles  ABD  and  CDB  were  congruent.  The 
subgoal  makes  sense  only  if  a  line  segment  BD  exists,  so  the  segment  is 
constructed,  and  the  proof  eventually  succeeds. 

References 

See  Elcock  (1977),  Gelernter  (1959,  1963),  Gelernter,  Hansen,  and 
Gerberich  (1960),  Gelernter,  Hansen,  and  Loveland  (1963),  Gelernter  and 
Rochester  (1958),  and  Gilmore  (1970). 


D4.     Symbolic  Integration  Programs 


Slagle's  SAINT 

James  Slagle's  SAINT  program  (Symbolic  Automatic  INTegrator)  was 
written  as  a  1961  doctoral  dissertation  at  M.I.T.  The  program  solves 
elementary  symbolic  integration  problems — mainly  indefinite  integration — 
at  about  the  level  of  a  good  college  freshman.  SAINT  was  written  in 
LISP  and  run  interpretively  on  the  IBM  7090  computer. 

The  kinds  of  questions  Slagle  intended  his  thesis  to  address  were 
some  of  the  earliest  questions  for  AI.  They  included,  for  example,  "Can 
a  computer  recognize  the  kinds  of  patterns  that  occur  in  symbolic  ex- 
pressions? Just  how  important  is  pattern  recognition?  .  .  .  Can  intelli- 
gent problem  solving  behavior  really  be  manifested  by  a  machine?" 
(Slagle,  1961,  p.  9).  The  domain  of  symbolic  integration  was  chosen  as 
a  source  of  well-defined,  familiar,  but  nontrivial  problems  requiring  the 
manipulation  of  symbolic  rather  than  numerical  expressions. 

The  integration  problems  that  SAINT  could  handle  could  have  only 
elementary  functions  as  integrands.  These  functions  were  defined  recur- 
sively to  comprise  the  following: 

1.  Constant  functions; 

2.  The  identity  function; 

3.  Sum,  product,  and  power  of  elementary  functions; 

4.  Trigonometric,  logarithmic,  and  inverse  trigonometric  functions 
of  elementary  functions. 

Three  kinds  of  operations  on  an  integrand  were  available: 

1.  Recognize  the  integrand  as  an  instance  of  a  standard  form,  thus 
obtaining  the  result  immediately  by  substitution.  Twenty-six 
such  standard  forms  were  used.  A  typical  one  indicated  that  if 
the  integrand  has  the  form  cv  dv,  the  form  of  the  solution  is 
(cv)/(ln  c). 

2.  Apply  an  "algorithm- like  transformation"  to  the  integral — that  is, 
a  transformation  that  is  almost  guaranteed  to  be  helpful  when- 
ever it  can  be  applied.  Eight  such  transformations  were  pro- 
vided, including  (a)  factoring  out  a  constant  and  (b)  decompos- 
ing the  integral  of  a  sum  into  a  sum  of  integrals. 

3.  Apply  a  "heuristic  transformation" — that  is,  a  transformation 
carrying  significant  risk  such  that,  although  applicable,  it  might 
not    be    the    best    next    step.    The    10    heuristic    transformations 


124  Search  II 

included  certain  substitutions  and  the  technique  of  integration 
by  parts.  One  technique  that  was  not  implemented  was  the 
method  of  partial  fractions. 

The  program  starts  with  the  original  problem  as  a  goal,  specified  as 
an  integrand  and  a  variable  of  integration.  For  any  particular  goal,  the 
strategy  is  first  to  try  for  an  immediate  solution  by  substitution  into  a 
standard  form;  failing  that,  to  transform  it  by  any  applicable  algorithm- 
like transformation;  and,  finally,  to  apply  each  applicable  heuristic  trans- 
formation in  turn.  Both  the  algorithm-like  and  the  heuristic  transfor- 
mations, however,  generate  new  goals,  to  which  the  same  strategy  may 
be  applied.  The  result  is  an  AND/OR  graph  of  goals  (Article  n.B2). 

The  order  in  which  goals  are  pursued  by  SAINT  depends  heavily  on 
what  operations  can  be  applied  to  them.  At  the  level  of  heuristic  trans- 
formations, the  algorithm  is  an  ordered  search:  A  list,  called  the  Heu- 
ristic Goal  List,  keeps  track  of  goals  on  which  progress  can  be  made 
only  by  applying  heuristic  transformations — that  is,  integrands  that  are 
not  of  standard  form  nor  amenable  to  any  algorithm-like  transformation. 
To  each  goal  on  this  list  is  attached  an  estimate  of  the  difficulty  of 
achieving  it.  The  measure  of  difficulty  used  is  the  maximum  level  of 
function  composition  in  the  integrand.  Other  characteristics  of  the  goal, 
such  as  whether  it  is  a  rational  function,  an  algebraic  function,  a 
rational  function  of  sines  and  cosines,  and  the  like,  are  also  stored  as  an 
aid  to  determining  which  heuristic  transformations  will  in  fact  apply. 
The  outer  loop  of  the  program  repeatedly  selects  the  goal  that  looks  the 
easiest  from  the  Heuristic  Goal  List,  expands  it  by  applying  all 
applicable  heuristic  transformations,  and  possibly,  as  a  result  of  the 
expansion,  adds  new  elements  to  the  Heuristic  Goal  List.  The  program 
terminates  with  failure  if  it  runs  out  of  heuristic  goals  to  work  on  or  if 
it  exceeds  a  preset  amount  of  working  space. 

An  important  qualification  to  this  process  concerns  the  use  of  stan- 
dard forms  and  algorithm-like  transformations.  As  soon  as  any  new  goal 
is  generated  (or  the  original  goal  read  in),  an  immediate  solution  of  it  is 
attempted.  The  attempt  consists  of,  first,  checking  whether  the  integrand 
is  a  standard  form;  if  it  is  not,  checking  whether  an  algorithm-like 
transformation  applies;  and  if  one  does,  applying  it  and  calling  the 
immediate  solution  procedure  recursively  on  each  goal  resulting  from 
that  transformation.  When  the  recursion  terminates,  either  the  generated 
goal  has  been  achieved  or  there  is  a  set  of  goals — the  generated  goal 
itself  or  some  of  its  subgoals — to  be  added  to  the  Heuristic  Goal  List. 
During  expansion  of  a  node  (one  iteration  of  the  outer  loop),  new 
heuristic    goals    are    accumulated    in    a   temporary    goal    list;    only    after 


D4  Symbolic  Integration  Programs  125 

expansion  is  complete  are  their  characteristics  computed  and  the  addi- 
tions made  to  the  Heuristic  Goal  List. 

Whenever  a  goal  is  achieved,  the  implications  of  its  achievement  are 
immediately  checked.  If  it  is  the  original  goal,  the  program  terminates 
successfully.  Otherwise,  if  it  was  achieved  by  substitution  into  a  stan- 
dard form,  it  may  cause  the  achievement  of  one  or  more  parent  goals  as 
well.  If  it  was  achieved  by  solution  of  a  sufficient  number  of  its  sub- 
problems,  it  not  only  may  cause  its  parent  or  parents  to  be  achieved  in 
turn,  but  also  may  make  others  of  its  subproblems,  which  have  not  yet 
been  solved,  superfluous.  These  checks  are  implemented  in  a  recursive 
process,  referred  to  as  "pruning  the  goal  tree,"  that  is  initiated  as  soon 
as  any  goal  is  achieved.  Thus  a  heuristic  goal  can  be  achieved  without 
having  been  fully  expanded. 

Moses's  SIN 

A  second  important  symbolic  integration  program,  SIN  (Symbolic 
INtegrator),  was  written  by  Joel  Moses  in  1967,  also  as  a  doctoral 
dissertation  at  M.I.T.  Its  motivation  and  its  strategy  as  an  AI  effort 
were  quite  different  from  those  of  SAINT.  Whereas  Slagle  had  compared 
the  behavior  of  SAINT  to  that  of  freshman  calculus  students,  Moses 
aimed  at  behavior  comparable  to  expert  human  performance.  He  viewed 
SAINT  as  emphasizing  generality  in  that  it  examined  mechanisms,  like 
heuristic  search,  that  are  useful  in  many  diverse  problem  domains.  SIN, 
in  contrast,  was  to  emphasize  expertise  in  a  particular,  complex  domain. 
To  do  this,  it  concentrated  on  problem  analysis,  using  more  knowledge 
about  integration  than  SAINT  had  employed,  to  minimize  the  need  for 
search.  In  fact,  Moses  did  not  view  SIN  as  a  heuristic  search  program. 
Hence,  the  program  will  be  described  only  briefly  here,  and  a  sec- 
ond part  of  Moses's  dissertation — a  differential  equation  solver  called 
SOLDIER— will  not  be  described. 

SIN  worked  in  three  stages,  each  stage  capable  of  solving  harder 
problems  than  the  stage  before.  Stage  1  corresponded  roughly  to  Slagle 's 
immediate  solution  procedure  but  was  more  powerful.  It  used  a  table  of 
standard  forms,  two  of  Slagle's  algorithm-like  transformations,  and,  most 
importantly,  a  method  similar  to  one  of  Slagle's  heuristic  transforma- 
tions, referred  to  as  the  derivative-divides  method.  The  idea  behind  this 
grouping  of  methods  was  that  they  alone  would  be  sufficient  to  solve 
the  most  commonly  occurring  problems,  without  invoking  the  compu- 
tationally more  expensive  machinery  of  the  later  stages. 

A  problem  that  stage  1  could  not  solve  was  passed  on  to  stage  2. 
This  stage  consisted  of  a  central  routine,   called  FORM,   and   11  highly 


126  Search  II 

specific  methods  of  integration.  (One  of  these  methods  was  a  program 
for  integrating  rational  functions  that  had  been  written  by  Manove, 
Bloom,  and  Engelman,  of  the  MITRE  Corporation,  in  1964.)  In  general, 
the  task  of  FORM  was  to  form  a  hypothesis,  usually  based  on  local 
clues  in  the  integrand,  about  which  method,  if  any,  was  applicable  to 
the  problem.  Only  rarely  did  more  than  one  method  apply.  The 
routine  chosen  first  tried  to  verify  its  applicability;  if  it  could  not,  it 
returned  to  let  FORM  try  again.  If  the  routine  did  verify  the  hypoth- 
esis, however,  SIN  then  became  committed  to  solving  the  problem  by 
that  method  or  not  at  all.  The  method  chosen  either  solved  the  prob- 
lem using  mechanisms  internal  to  it  or  transformed  the  problem  and 
called  SIN  recursively  to  solve  the  transformed  problem. 

Stage  3  of  SIN  was  invoked,  as  a  last  resort,  only  if  no  stage  2 
method  was  applicable.  Two  general  methods  were  programmed  here. 
One  method  was  integration  by  parts,  which  used  blind  search,  subject 
to  certain  constraints,  to  find  the  appropriate  way  to  factor  the 
integrand.  The  other  was  a  nontraditional  method  based  on  the 
Liouviile  theory  of  integration  and  called  the  EDGE  (EDucated  GuEss) 
heuristic.  This  method  involved  guessing  the  form  of  the  integral.  The 
EDGE  heuristic  was  characterized  as  using  a  technique  similar  to  means- 
ends  analysis,  if  its  guess  did  not  lead  directly  to  a  solution. 

Performance  of  SAINT  and  SIN 

SAINT  was  tested  on  a  total  of  86  problems,  54  of  them  chosen 
from  M.I.T.  final  examinations  in  freshman  calculus.  It  succeeded  in 
solving  all  but  two.  The  most  difficult  problem  it  solved,  in  terms  of 
both  time  and  the  number  of  heuristic  transformations  occurring  in  the 
solution  tree  (four),  was  the  integral  of 

sec2£ 


l  +  (sec2£)  —  3(tani) 


dt 


Slagle  proposed  additional  transformations  that  would  have  handled  the 
two  failures,  which  were  the  integrals  of 

x(l  +  x)1/2  dx       and        cos  (x1/2)  dx  . 

SIN,  in  contrast,  was  intended  to  model  the  behavior  of  an  expert 
human  integrator.  The  results  of  running  SIN  on  all  of  Slagle's  test 
problems  were  that  more  than  half  were  solved  in  stage  1,  and  all  but 
two  of  the  rest  (both  of  which  used  integration  by  parts)  were  solved  in 
stage  2.  After  adjusting  for  the  facts  that  SAINT  and  SIN  ran  on 
different  machines  and  that  one  was  interpreted  and  the  other  compiled, 


D4  Symbolic  Integration  Programs  127 

and  for  other  factors  making  the  programs  difficult  to  compare,  Moses 
estimated  that  SIN  would  run  on  the  average  about  three  times  faster 
than  SAINT.  Taking  into  account  a  test  on  more  difficult  problems  as 
well,  he  expressed  the  opinion  that  SIN  was  "capable  of  solving  inte- 
gration problems  as  difficult  as  ones  found  in  the  largest  tables"  (p.  140) 
and  that  it  was  fast  and  powerful  enough  for  use  in  "a  practical  on-line 
algebraic  manipulation  system"  (p.  6).  For  later  developments  in  this 
direction,  see  Article  vn.Di,  in  Volume  n. 

References 

See  Manove,  Bloom,  and  Engelman  (1968),  Moses  (1967),  and  Slagle 
(1961,  1963). 


D5.     STRIPS 


STRIPS  is  a  problem- solving  program  written  by  Richard  Fikes  and 
Nils  Nilsson  (1971)  at  SRI  International.  Each  problem  for  STRIPS  is  a 
goal  to  be  achieved  by  a  robot  operating  in  a  simple  world  of  rooms, 
doors,  and  boxes.  The  solution  is  a  sequence  of  operators,  called  a  plan, 
for  achieving  the  goal.  (For  a  review  of  the  various  senses  of  the  word 
plan,  see  Chap,  xvi,  in  Vol.  EL)  The  robot's  actual  execution  of  the 
plan  is  carried  out  by  a  separate  program,  distinct  from  STRIPS.  A 
later  (1972)  addition  to  the  basic  STRIPS  system  permits  plans  to  be 
generalized  and  used  again,  giving  the  system  some  capacity  for 
learning. 

The  Basic  STRIPS  System 

The  world  model.  The  world  in  which  the  STRIPS  robot  works 
consists  of  several  rooms  connected  by  doors,  along  with  some  boxes  and 
other  objects  that  the  robot  can  manipulate.  STRIPS  represents  this 
world  by  a  set  of  well-formed  formulas  in  the  first-order  predicate  cal- 
culus (see  Article  m.Ci).  Some  formulas  in  the  world  model  are  static 
facts,  such  as  which  objects  are  pushable  and  which  rooms  are  con- 
nected. Other  facts,  such  as  the  current  location  of  objects,  must  be 
changed  to  reflect  the  actions  of  the  robot. 

Operators.  The  actions  available  to  the  robot  for  affecting  the 
world  are  described,  for  the  purpose  of  finding  a  plan  of  action,  by 
operators.  Typical  operators  describe  actions  of  going  somewhere  and 
pushing  an  object  somewhere,  the  locations  being  given  as  parameters. 
Each  operator  has  preconditions  to  its  applicability;  to  push  a  box,  for 
example,  the  robot  must  first  be  next  to  the  box.  The  application  of 
an  operator  is  realized  by  making  changes  in  the  world  model.  The 
appropriate  changes  are  given  by  a  delete  list  and  an  add  list,  specifying 
the  formulas  to  be  removed  from  and  added  to  the  world  model  as  a 
result  of  the  operation.  Thus,  each  operator  explicitly  describes  what  it 
changes  in  the  world  model. 

A  typical  operator  is  GOTOB,  which  denotes  the  robot's  going  up  to 
an  object  in  the  same  room: 

GOTOB  (bx)   "go  to  object  bx" 

Preconditions:   TYPE  (bx,  OBJECT)  and 
THERE  EXISTS  (rx)  such  that 

[INROON  (bx,  rx)  and  IMROON  (ROBOT,  rx)] 
Delete  list:   AT  (ROBOT,  *,  *) ,  MEXTTO  (ROBOT,  *) 
Add  list:   NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  bx) 


D5  STRIPS  129 

The  precondition  statement  requires  that  bx  be  an  object  and  that  both 
bx  and  the  robot  be  in  the  same  room,  rx.  The  asterisks  in  the  delete 
list  represent  arguments  with  any  values  whatever. 

Method  of  operation.  STRIPS  operates  by  searching  a  space  of 
world  models  to  find  one  in  which  the  given  goal  is  achieved.  It  uses  a 
state-space  representation  in  which  each  state  is  a  pair  (world  model, 
list  of  goals  to  be  achieved).  The  initial  state  is  (M0,  (G0)),  where  M0 
is  the  initial  world  model  and  G0  the  given  goal.  A  terminal  state 
gives  a  world  model  in  which  no  unsatisfied  goals  remain. 

Given  a  goal  G  (stated  as  a  formula  in  the  predicate  calculus), 
STRIPS  first  tries  to  prove  that  G  is  satisfied  by  the  current  world 
model.  To  do  this,  the  program  uses  a  modified  version  of  the 
resolution-based  theorem  prover  QA3  (Garvey  and  Kling,  1969).  Typ- 
ically the  proof  fails,  within  a  prespecified  resource  limit,  because  no 
more  resolvents  can  be  formed  (see  Article  xn.B,  in  Vol.  m).  At  this 
point,  STRIPS  needs  to  find  a  different  world  model  that  the  robot  can 
achieve  and  that  satisfies  the  goal.  Because  this  task  is  complicated  for 
a  simple  theorem  prover,  the  system  switches  to  a  means- ends  analysis 
similar  to  that  of  GPS  (Article  n.D2). 

To  do  the  means-ends  analysis,  the  program  extracts  a  difference 
between  the  goal  and  the  current  model  and  selects  a  relevant  operator 
to  reduce  the  difference.  The  difference  consists  of  any  formulas  from 
the  goal  that  remain  outstanding  when  the  proof  attempt  is  abandoned 
(pruned,  if  this  set  is  large).  A  relevant  operator  is  one  whose  add  list 
contains  formulas  that  would  remove  some  part  of  the  difference,  there- 
by allowing  the  proof  to  continue. 

If  the  operator  is  applicable,  the  program  applies  it  and  tries  to 
achieve  the  goal  in  the  resulting  model;  otherwise,  the  operator's  pre- 
condition becomes  a  new  subgoal  to  be  achieved.  Since  there  may  be 
several  relevant  operators  at  each  step,  this  procedure  generates  a  tree 
of  models  and  subgoals.  STRIPS  uses  a  number  of  heuristics  to  control 
the  search  through  this  tree. 

An  Example  of  the  Basic  System's  Performance 

As  a  simple  example,  suppose  the  robot  is  in  ROOM1  and  the  goal 
is  for  it  to  be  next  to  BOX1,  which  is  in  adjacent  ROOM2.  The  initial 
world  model  M0  contains  such  clauses  as 


130  Search  II 


INR00N  (ROBOT,  ROONl) , 
INROON  (BOXl,  R00N2), 
TYPE  (B0X1,  OBJECT), 
CONNECTS  (D00R12,  ROONl ,  R00N2) 
STATUS  (D00R12,  OPEN),  .  .  . 


and  the  goal  Gq  is 


GO  =  NEXTTO    (ROBOT,    BOXl) 


Gq  is  not  satisfied,  and  the  difference  between  it  and  the  initial  model  is 
-i  NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  BOXl).  STRIPS  determines  that  GOTOB  (6x),  defined 
above,  is  a  relevant  operator,  with  bx  instantiated  as  BOXl.  The  oper- 
ator instance  GOTOB  (BOXl),  denoted  OPlf  is  not  immediately  appli- 
cable (because  the  robot  is  in  the  wrong  room),  so  its  precondition  G1? 

Gl   =  TYPE    (BOXl,    OBJECT)    and 

THERE  EXISTS    (rx)    [INROON   (BOXl,    rx)    and   INROON   (ROBOT,    rx)] 

becomes  a  new  subgoal.  Relevant  operators  for  reducing  the  differ- 
ence between  G1  and  the  initial  model  M0  are:  OP2  =  GOTHRUDOOR 
(dx,  ROOM2)  and  OP3  =  PUSHTHRUDOOR  (BOXl,  dx,  ROOMl)  (i.e.,  move 
the  robot  to  the  room  with  the  box,  or  move  the  box  to  the  room  with 
the  robot).  If  the  former  course  (the  better  one,  obviously)  is  selected, 
the  precondition 

G2  =   STATUS  (dx,  OPEN)   and  NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  dx)   and 

THERE  EXISTS  (rx)  [INROON  (ROBOT,  rx)  and  CONNECTS  (dx,  rx,  R00N2)] 

is  the  new  subgoal.  The  difference  ->  NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  DOOR12)  can 
be  reduced  by  the  operator  OP4  =  GOTODOOR  (DOOR12),  which  is 
applicable  immediately.  Applying  0P4  adds  the  clause  NEXTTO 
(ROBOT,  DOOR12)  to  the  model,  creating  a  new  world  model  Mv  G2  is 
now  satisfied  with  dx  =  DOOR12,  so  OP2  can  be  instantiated  as 
GOTHRUDOOR  (DOOR12,  ROOM2)  and  applied.  This  deletes  the  clause 
INROOM  (ROBOT,  ROOMl)  and  adds  INROOM  (ROBOT,  ROOM2).  Gx  is 
now  satisfied,  so  OPx  is  applied,  deleting  NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  DOOR12) 
and  adding  NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  BOXl),  the  desired  goal.  The  final  plan 
is  thus: 


0P4 
0P2 
0P1 


GOTODOOR  (D00R12) 
GOTHRUDOOR  (D00R12,  R00N2) 
GOTOB  (BOXl) 


D5  STRIPS  131 

The    corresponding    solution    path    through    the    state    space    tree    is    as 
follows: 

(NO,    (GO)) 

(MO,    (Gl,    GO)) 

(NO,    (G2,    Gl,    GO)) 
0P4 
(Ml,    (Gl,    GO)) 
0P2 


(MB,    0) 


Generalization  of  Plans 

In  the  basic  STRIPS  system,  each  new  problem  was  solved  from 
scratch.  Even  if  the  system  had  produced  a  plan  for  solving  a  similar 
problem  previously,  it  was  not  able  to  make  any  use  of  this  fact.  A 
later  version  of  STRIPS  provided  for  generalizing  plans  and  saving  them, 
to  assist  both  in  the  solution  of  subsequent  problems  and  also  in  the 
intelligent  monitoring  of  the  robot's  execution  of  the  particular  plan. 

Triangle  tables.  A  specific  plan  to  be  generalized,  say,  {0PV  0P2, 
. . .,  0Pn),  is  first  stored  in  a  data  structure  called  a  triangle  table. 
This  is  a  lower  triangular  array  representing  the  preconditions  for  and 
effects  of  each  operator  in  the  plan.  Some  of  its  properties  are  the 
following: 

1.  Cell  (i,  0)  contains  clauses  from  the  original  model  that  are  still 
true  when  operator  i  is  to  be  applied  and  that  are  precondi- 
tions for  operator  i,  OPy 

2.  Marked  (starred)  clauses  elsewhere  in  row  i  are  preconditions 
for  operator  i  added  to  the  model  by  previous  operators. 

3.  The  effects  of  applying  operator  i  are  shown  in  row  •  +  1. 
The   operator's   add   list   appears   in   cell   (t  -+-  1,  i).    For   each 


132 


Search 


n 


previous  operator,   say,   operator  j,   clauses  added   by  operator  ; 
and  not  yet  deleted  are  copied  into  cell  (i  +  1>  j)- 

4.  The  add  list  for  a  sequence  of  operators  1  through  i,  taken  as  a 
whole,  is  given  by  the  clauses  in  row  i-f  1  (excluding  col- 
umn 0). 

5.  The  preconditions  for  a  sequence  of  operators  i  through  n,  taken 
as  a  whole,  are  given  by  the  marked  clauses  in  the  rectangular 
subarray  containing  row  i  and  cell  (n  +  1,  0).  This  rectangle 
is  called  the  i-th  kernel  of  the  plan. 

The  triangle  table  for  the  previous  example  is  shown  in  Figure  D5-1. 
Operators  have  been  renumbered  in  the  order  of  their  use. 


♦INR00N(R0B0T, 

ROONl) 

♦CONNECTS (D12, 

ROONl , R00N2) 

OPl 
G0T0D00R(D12) 

♦INR00N(R0B0T, 

ROONl) 

♦CONNECTS (D12, 

ROONl , R00N2) 
♦STATUS  (D12, 

OPEN) 

♦NEXTTO 
(ROBOT, D12) 

0P2 
G0THRUD00R 
(D12,R00N2) 

♦INR00N(B0X1, 

R00N2) 
♦TYPE(B0X1, 

OBJECT) 

NEXTTO 
(ROBOT, D12) 

♦INR00N 
(ROBOT, R00N2) 

0P3 
GOTOB(BOXl) 

INR00N 
(ROBOT ;R00N2) 

NEXTTO 
(ROBOT ,B0X1) 

Figure  D5-1.    A  triangle  table. 


Method  of  generalization.  The  plan  is  generalized  by  replacing  all 
constants  in  each  of  the  clauses  in  column  0  by  distinct  parameters  and 
the  rest  of  the  table  with  clauses  that  assume  that  no  argument  to  an 
operator  has  been  instantiated.  The  result  may  be  too  general,  so  the 
proof  of  the  preconditions  for  each  operator  is  run  again,  noting  any 
substitutions  for  parameters  that  constrain  the  generality  of  the  plan. 
Some    further    corrections    are    made    for    remaining    overgeneralization, 


D5  STRIPS  133 

which  might  make  the  plan  either  inconsistent  or  inefficient  in  use. 
Finally,  the  generalized  plan,  termed  a  MACROP,  is  stored  away  for 
future  use. 

In  the  example  above,  the  generalized  plan  would  be 

G0T0D00R  (dx) 
G0THRUD00R  (dx,  rxl) 
GOTOB  (bx) 


with  preconditions: 


and  add  list: 


INROON  (ROBOT,  rx2) 
CONNECTS  (dx,  rx2,  rxl) 
STATUS  (dx,  OPEN) 
INROON  (bx,  rxl) 
TYPE  (bx,  OBJECT) 


NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  bx) 
INROON  (ROBOT,  rxl) 


That  is,  the  generalized  plan  sends  the  robot  from  any  room  through  a 
connecting  door  to  an  object  in  the  adjacent  room. 

Using  the  MACROP  to  guide  execution.  When  STRIPS  produces  a 
detailed  plan  to  achieve  a  goal,  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the 
robot  should  execute  the  plan  exactly  as  given.  One  possibility  is  that 
some  action  fails  to  achieve  its  expected  effect,  so  that  the  corre- 
sponding step  of  the  plan  needs  to  be  repeated.  Another  is  that  the 
plan  found  is  less  than  optimal  and  would  be  improved  by  omitting 
some  steps  entirely.  The  necessary  flexibility  during  execution  is  pro- 
vided by  using  the  MACROP  rather  than  the  detailed  plan  in  monitor- 
ing the  robot's  actions. 

At  the  beginning  of  execution,  the  parameters  of  the  MACROP  are 
partially  instantiated  to  the  case  at  hand.  The  robot  then  attempts,  at 
each  stage,  to  execute  the  highest  numbered  step  of  the  plan  whose 
preconditions  are  satisfied.  This  procedure  omits  unnecessary  steps  and 
allows  repeated  execution,  possibly  with  changed  parameters,  of  a  step 
that  has  failed.  If  there  is  no  step  whose  preconditions  are  satisfied, 
replanning  occurs.  Determining  which  step  can  be  done  next  is  accom- 
plished by  a  scan  that  exploits  the  design  of  the  triangle  table. 

Using  MACROPs  in  planning.  When  STRIPS  is  given  a  new  prob- 
lem, the  time  it  takes  to  produce  an  answer  can  be  reduced  very 
considerably  if  there  is  a  MACROP  that  can  be  incorporated  into  its 
solution.  The  MACROP  given  above,  for  example,  could  be  used  as  the 
first  part  of  a  plan  to  fetch  a  box  from  an  adjacent  room.     The  part  of 


134  Search  n 

the  MACROP  consisting  of  its  first  two  suboperators,  if  used  alone, 
would  also  give  a  ready-made  solution  to  the  problem  "Go  to  an 
adjacent  room,"  or  it  could  be  used  repeatedly  in  solving  "Go  to  a 
distant  room." 

The  triangle  table  provides  the  means  of  determining  whether  a 
relevant  macro  operator  exists.  To  determine  whether  the  sequence  of 
operators  1  through  i  of  the  MACROP  is  relevant,  STRIPS  checks  the 
add  list  of  this  sequence  as  given  by  the  (i  +  l)st  row  of  the  table. 
Once  a  MACROP  is  selected,  irrelevant  operators  are  edited  out  by  a 
straightforward  algorithm,  leaving  an  economical,  possibly  parameterized 
operator  for  achieving  the  desired  add  list.  The  operator's  preconditions 
are  taken  from  the  appropriate  cells  of  column  0.  Thus,  almost  any 
sub- sequence  of  operators  from  a  MACROP  can  become  a  macro  oper- 
ator in  a  new  plan.  To  keep  new  MACROPs  from  producing  an  over- 
whelming number  of  different  operators  that  must  be  considered  during 
planning,  the  system  contains  provisions  for  preventing  consideration  of 
redundant  parts  of  overlapping  MACROPs  and  for  deleting  MACROPs 
that  have  been  completely  subsumed  by  new  ones. 

In  a  sequence  of  problems  given  to  STRIPS,  the  use  of  MACROPs  in 
some  cases  reduced  planning  time  by  as  much  as  two-thirds.  The 
longest  plan  so  formed,  consisting  of  11  primitive  operations,  took  the 
robot  from  one  room  to  a  second  room,  opened  a  door  leading  to  a 
third  room,  took  the  robot  through  the  third  room  to  a  fourth  room, 
and  then  pushed  two  pairs  of  boxes  together.  One  drawback  noted  by 
the  authors  was  that,  however  long  the  solution  sequence,  STRIPS  at 
each  stage  of  its  search  dealt  with  every  operation  in  complete  detail. 
A  later  program,  Sacerdoti's  ABSTRIPS  (Article  n.D6),  provides  the 
mechanism  for  deferring  the  details  of  the  solution  until  after  its  main 
outline  has  been  completed. 

References 

See  Fikes,  Hart,  and  Nilsson  (1972),  Fikes  and  Nilsson  (1971),  and 
Garvey  and  Kling  (1969). 


D6.     ABSTRIPS 

A  combinatorial  explosion  faces  all  problem  solvers  that  attempt  to 
use  heuristic  search  in  a  sufficiently  complex  problem  domain.  A  tech- 
nique called  hierarchical  search  or  hierarchical  planning,  implemented  in 
Earl  Sacerdoti's  ABSTRIPS  (1974),  is  an  attempt  to  reduce  the  combina- 
torial problem.  The  idea  is  to  use  an  approach  to  problem  solving  that 
can  recognize  the  most  significant  features  of  a  problem,  develop  an 
outline  of  a  solution  in  terms  of  those  features,  and  deal  with  the  less 
important  details  of  the  problem  only  after  the  outline  has  proved 
adequate. 

The  implementation  of  this  approach  involves  using  distinct  levels  of 
problem  representation.  A  simplified  version  of  the  problem,  from  which 
details  have  been  omitted,  occurs  in  a  higher  level  problem  space  or 
abstraction  space;  the  detailed  version,  in  a  ground  space.  By  a  slight 
extension,  providing  for  several  levels  of  detail  instead  of  just  two,  a 
hierarchy  of  problem  spaces  is  obtained.  In  general,  each  space  in  the 
hierarchy  serves  both  as  an  abstraction  space  for  the  more  detailed 
space  just  below  it  and  as  a  ground  space  with  respect  to  the  less 
detailed  space  just  above. 

Background— The  STRIPS  System 

ABSTRIPS  is  a  modification  of  the  STRIPS  system,  described  in 
Article  n.D5.  The  problem  domain  for  both  programs  is  a  world  of  robot 
planning.  In  both,  the  program  is  given  an  initial  state  of  the  world,  or 
world  model,  consisting  of  a  set  of  formulas  that  describe  the  floor  plan 
of  a  group  of  rooms  and  other  facts  such  as  the  location  of  the  robot 
and  other  objects  within  these  rooms.  The  goal  state  to  be  achieved  is 
also  given.  The  elements  of  a  solution  sequence  are  operators  represent- 
ing robot  actions;  examples  are  operators  for  going  up  to  an  object, 
pushing  an  object,  and  going  through  a  door.  The  definition  of  each 
operator  contains  three  kinds  of  formulas:  (a)  its  preconditions, 
representing  statements  that  must  be  true  of  a  world  model  in  order  for 
the  operator  to  be  applicable;  (b)  its  add  list,  a  list  of  formulas  that 
will  become  true  and  should  be  added  to  the  world  model  when  the 
operator  is  applied;  and  (c)  its  delete  list,  a  corresponding  list  of 
formulas  to  be  deleted  from  the  model  upon  application  of  the  operator. 
The  search  for  a  sequence  of  operators  producing  the  desired  world 
model  is  guided  by  a  means- ends  analysis  similar  to  that  of  GPS 
(Article  n.D2). 


136  Search  II 

Abstraction  Spaces 

Given  the  world  models  and  operator  descriptions  of  the  basic 
STRIPS  system,  the  first  question  is  how  to  define  the  "details"  that  are 
to  be  ignored  in  the  first  pass  at  a  solution.  Sacerdoti's  answer  was  to 
treat  as  details  certain  parts  of  the  operator  preconditions.  At  all  levels 
of  abstraction,  the  world  models  and  the  add  and  delete  lists  of 
operators  remain  exactly  the  same.  Such  a  definition  of  "details"  was 
found  to  be  strong  enough  to  produce  real  improvements  in  problem- 
solving  efficiency,  while  keeping  a  desirable  simplicity  in  the  relationship 
between  each  abstraction  space  and  its  adjacent  ground  space. 

The  preconditions  for  an  operator  are  stated  as  a  list  of  predica- 
tions, or  literals,  concerning  the  world  model  to  which  the  operator  is  to 
be  applied.  The  relative  importance  of  literals  is  indicated  by  attaching 
to  each  a  number  called  its  criticality  value.  The  hierarchy  of  problem 
spaces  is  then  defined  in  terms  of  levels  of  criticality:  In  the  space  of 
criticality  n,  all  operator  preconditions  with  criticality  less  than  n  are 
ignored. 

The  assignment  of  criticality  values  is  done  just  once  for  a  given 
definition  of  the  problem  domain.  The  general  ideas  to  be  reflected  in 
the  assignment  are  the  following: 

1.  If  the  truth  value  of  a  literal  cannot  be  changed  by  any  oper- 
ator in  the  problem  domain,  it  should  have  the  highest  criti- 
cality. 

2.  If  the  preconditions  for  an  operator  include  a  literal  L  that  can 
be  readily  achieved  once  other  preconditions  for  the  same  oper- 
ator are  satisfied,  then  L  should  be  less  critical  than  those  other 
preconditions. 

3.  If  the  possibility  of  satisfying  literal  L  depends  on  additional 
preconditions  besides  those  referred  to  in  (2),  then  L  should 
have  high  but  less  than  maximum  criticality. 

The  actual  assignment  of  criticalities  is  done  by  a  combination  of 
manual  and  automatic  means.  First,  the  programmer  supplies  a  partial 
ordering  of  all  predicates  that  can  appear  in  operator  preconditions. 
The  partial  ordering  serves  two  purposes:  It  supplies  a  tentative  criti- 
cality value  for  all  instances  of  each  predicate,  and  it  governs  the  order 
in  which  the  program  will  consider  literals  for  possible  increases  (but  not 
decreases)  in  criticality. 

As  an  example,  consider  an  operator  TURN-ON-LAMP  (x),  with  pre- 
conditions 

TYPE  (x,  LAMP)  and  THERE  EXISTS  (r)  [INROOM  (ROBOT,  r)  and 
INROON  (x,  r)  and  PLUGGED-IN  (x)  and  MEXTTO  (ROBOT,  x)]   . 


D6  ABSTRIPS  137 

The  partial  ordering  of  predicates,  reflecting  an  intuitive  view  of  their 
relative  importance,  might  be  as  follows  (Fig.  D6-1): 

Predicate  Rank 

TYPE  4 

INROOM  3 

PLUGGED-IN  2 

NEXTTO  1 

Figure  D6-1.    Initial  ranking  of  predicates. 

The  assignment  algorithm,  whose  output  is  summarized  in  Figure 
D6-2,  would  first  find  that  the  truth  of  TYPE  (x,  LAMP)  is  beyond  the 
power  of  any  operator  to  change  and  therefore  would  set  its  criticality 
to  the  maximum;  in  this  case,  6.  Then  it  would  find  that  TYPE 
(x,  LAMP)  is  an  insufficient  basis  for  achieving  INROOM  (ROBOT,  r )  or 
INROOM  (x,  r);  so  these  two  literals  would  have  their  criticality  raised  to 
the  next  highest  value,  5.  Next,  PLUGGED-IN  (x)  is  considered,  and  a 
plan  to  achieve  PLUGGED-IN  (x)  is  found  using  only  the  literals  already 
processed  as  a  starting  point.  Hence,  the  PLUGGED-IN  literal  retains  its 
tentative  criticality  of  2,  and,  similarly,  NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  x)  is  given 
criticality  1.  The  result,  after  similar  processing  of  the  preconditions  of 
the  other  operators  in  the  domain,  is  a  hierarchy  of  at  least  four,  and 
possibly  six,  distinct  problem  spaces. 

Literal  Criticality  Value 

TYPE  (x,  LAMP)  6 

INROOM  (ROBOT,  r)              5 

INROOM  (x,  r)  5 

PLUGGED-IN  (x)  2 

NEXTTO  (ROBOT,  x)              1 

Figure  D6-2.     Final  criticality  of  literals. 


Control  Structure 

A  problem  statement  for  ABSTRIPS,  as  for  STRIPS,  consists  of  a 
description  of  the  state  of  the  world  to  be  achieved.  A  solution  is  a 
plan,  or  sequence  of  operators,  for  achieving  it.  ABSTRIPS  proceeds  by 
forming  a  crude  plan  at  the  highest  level  of  abstraction  and  successively 
refining  it.  The  executive  is  a  recursive  program  taking  two  parameters: 
the  current  level  of  criticality,   defining  the  abstraction  space  in  which 


138  Search  II 

planning  is  to  take  place,  and  a  list  of  nodes  representing  the  plan  to 
be  refined.  Before  the  initial  call,  criticality  is  set  to  the  maximum, 
and  the  skeleton  plan  is  initialized  to  a  single  operator — a  dummy — 
whose  preconditions  are  precisely  the  goal  to  be  achieved.  ABS TRIPS 
computes  the  difference  between  the  preconditions  and  the  current  world 
model,  finds  operators  relevant  to  reducing  the  difference,  and,  if  nec- 
essary, pursues  subgoals  of  satisfying  the  preconditions  of  the  selected 
operators.  During  this  process,  any  preconditions  of  less  than  the  cur- 
rent criticality  are  ignored.  A  search  tree  is  built  from  which,  if  the 
process  succeeds,  a  fuller  operator  sequence  leading  from  the  initial 
world  model  to  the  goal  can  be  reconstructed.  This  new  skeleton  plan, 
together  with  the  next  lower  criticality  level,  are  passed  recursively  to 
the  executive  for  the  next  round  of  planning. 

The  search  strategy  used  by  ABSTRIPS  can  be  called  length-first,  in 
that  the  executive  forms  a  complete  plan  for  reaching  the  goal  in  each 
abstraction  space  before  considering  plans  in  any  lower  level  space. 
This  approach  has  the  advantage  that  it  permits  early  recognition  of 
dead  ends,  thus  reducing  the  work  wasted  in  extending  the  search  tree 
along  fruitless  paths  involving  detailed  preconditions.  If  a  subproblem  in 
any  particular  space  cannot  be  solved,  control  is  returned  to  its  ab- 
straction space,  and  the  search  tree  is  restored  to  its  previous  state  in 
that  space.  The  node  that  caused  the  failure  in  the  lower  level  space  is 
eliminated  from  consideration  and  the  search  is  continued  in  the  higher 
level  space.  This  mechanism,  an  example  of  backtracking,  suffers  from 
the  problem  that  no  information  is  available  at  the  higher  level  on  what 
caused  the  plan  to  fail. 

Because  backtracking  can  be  inefficient  and  also  because  each  oper- 
ator in  an  abstraction  space  may  be  expanded  to  several  operators  in 
the  ground  space,  it  is  important  for  ABSTRIPS  to  produce  good  plans 
at  the  highest  level.  Two  modifications  to  STRIPS  were  made  to  try  to 
ensure  that  it  would  do  so. 

First,  whereas  a  STRIPS  search  tended  to  be  depth- first  and  there- 
fore sometimes  found  nonoptimal  solutions,  ABSTRIPS  makes  the  order 
of  expanding  nodes  in  the  search  tree  dependent  on  the  level  of  abstrac- 
tion. At  the  highest  level  it  uses  an  evaluation  function  that  may 
increase  the  search  effort  but  that  ensures  that  the  shortest  possible 
solution  sequence  will  be  found.     (See  Article  n.C3b  on  A*.) 

The  second  change  relates  to  the  instantiation  of  operator  param- 
eters, in  cases  where  two  or  more  choices  seem  equally  good.  While 
STRIPS  made  a  choice  arbitrarily,  ABSTRIPS  defers  the  choice  until  a 
greater  level  of  detail  indicates  one  to  be  preferable.  Backtracking  can 
still  take  place  should  the  choice  be  mistaken. 


D6  ABSTRIPS  139 

Performance 

ABSTRIPS  and  STRIPS  were  compared  on  a  sequence  of  problems. 
One  of  the  longest,  needing  11  operators  for  its  solution,  required  the 
robot  to  open  a  door,  go  through  the  adjacent  room  to  another  room, 
push  two  boxes  together,  and  then  go  through  two  more  doors  to  reach 
the  room  where  it  was  to  stop.  The  basic  STRIPS  system  required  over 
30  minutes  of  computer  time  to  find  the  solution;  ABSTRIPS  used  5:28 
minutes  and  generated  only  half  the  number  of  search-tree  nodes.  It 
was  noted  that  by  the  time  ABSTRIPS  reached  the  most  detailed  level, 
it  had  in  effect  replaced  the  original  large  problem  by  a  sequence  of 
seven  easy  subproblems. 

References 

See  Sacerdoti  (1974). 


Chapter  m 
Representation  of  Knowledge 


CHAPTER  EI:    REPRESENTATION  OF  KNOWLEDGE 


A.  Overview  /  US 

B.  Survey  of  Representation  Techniques  /  158 

C.  Representation  Schemes  /  160 

1.  Logic  /  160 

2.  Procedural  Representations  /  172 
S.  Semantic  Networks  /  180 

4-  Production  Systems  /  190 

5.  Direct  (Analogical)  Representations  /  200 

6.  Semantic  Primitives  /  207 

7.  Frames  and  Scripts  /  216 


A.     OVERVIEW 

Artificial  Intelligence  research  involves  building  computer  systems 
capable  of  performing  tasks  like  talking,  planning,  playing  chess,  and 
analyzing  molecular  structure.  When  we  talk  about  people  who  do 
these  things,  we  always  talk  about  what  they  have  to  know  in  order  to 
do  them.  In  other  words,  we  describe  someone's  ability  to  behave  with 
intelligence  in  terms  of  his  or  her  knowledge.  Similarly,  we  say  that  a 
computer  program  knows  how  to  play  cards,  or  understand  spoken 
English,  or  manipulate  a  robot.  We  ascribe  knowledge  to  programs  in 
the  same  manner  as  we  ascribe  it  to  each  other — based  on  observing 
certain  behavior;  we  say  that  a  program  knows  about  objects  in  its 
domain,  about  events  that  have  taken  place,  or  about  how  to  perform 
specific  tasks. 

The  nature  of  knowledge  and  intelligence  has  been  pondered  by 
psychologists,  philosophers,  linguists,  educators,  and  sociologists  for 
hundreds  of  years.  Since  AI  research  methodology  involves  the  design  of 
programs  that  exhibit  intelligent  behavior,  AI  researchers  have  often 
taken  a  rather  pragmatic  approach  to  the  subject  of  knowledge,  focusing 
on  improving  the  behavior  of  their  programs.  In  AI,  a  representation 
of  knowledge  is  a  combination  of  data  structures  and  interpretive 
procedures  that,  if  used  in  the  right  way  in  a  program,  will  lead  to 
"knowledgeable"  behavior.  Work  on  knowledge  representation  in  AI  has 
involved  the  design  of  several  classes  of  data  structures  for  storing 
information  in  computer  programs,  as  well  as  the  development  of 
procedures  that  allow  "intelligent"  manipulation  of  these  data  structures 
to  make  inferences. 

Keep  in  mind  that  a  data  structure  is  not  knowledge,  any  more 
than  an  encyclopedia  is  knowledge.  We  can  say,  metaphorically,  that  a 
book  is  a  source  of  knowledge,  but  without  a  reader,  the  book  is  just 
ink  on  paper.  Similarly,  we  often  talk  of  the  list-and-pointer  data 
structures  in  an  AI  database  as  knowledge  per  se,  when  we  really  mean 
that  they  represent  facts  or  rules  when  used  by  a  certain  program  to 
behave  in  a  knowledgeable  way.  (This  point  is  expanded  in  Article 
m.C5.) 

Techniques  and  theories  about  knowledge  representation  have  under- 
gone rapid  change  and  development  in  the  last  five  years.  The  articles 
in  this  chapter  try  to  give  a  general  review  of  the  different  repre- 
sentation schemes  that  researchers  have  thought  up — what  they  can  do 


144  Knowledge  Representation  m 

well  and  what  they  cannot  do.  Our  understanding  of  these  matters  is 
still  incomplete;  knowledge  representation  is  the  most  active  area  of  AI 
research  at  the  present  time. 

This  introductory  article  should  help  guide  the  reader's  under- 
standing of  the  various  formalisms  described  in  the  articles  that  follow. 
After  briefly  discussing  the  kinds  of  knowledge  that  need  to  be  rep- 
resented in  AI  systems,  we  introduce  some  issues  that  will  serve  as  a 
vocabulary  for  talking  about  and  comparing  different  representation 
methods — terms  like  scope,  understandability,  and  modularity.  The  sec- 
ond article  in  the  chapter  is  a  brief  survey  of  the  most  important 
representation  formalisms,  intended  to  give  an  overview  of  the  kinds  of 
systems  we  are  talking  about.  The  remaining  articles  describe,  in  more 
detail,  the  mechanics  of  the  various  representation  schemes,  their 
historical  development,  and  some  of  the  current  research  problems. 

Knowledge 

What  kinds  of  knowledge  are  needed  to  behave  knowledgeably? 
What  things  do  we  know  "about"?  To  approach  these  questions, 
consider  the  following  list  of  types  of  knowledge  that  might  need  to  be 
represented  in  AI  systems: 

Objects:  Typically,  we  think  of  knowledge  in  terms  of  facts  about 
objects  in  the  world  around  us.  Birds  have  wings.  Robins  are 
birds.  Snow  is  white.  So,  of  course,  there  should  be  some  way 
to  represent  objects,  classes  or  categories  of  objects,  and  de- 
scriptions of  objects. 

Events:  We  also  know  about  actions  and  events  in  the  world.  Bob 
kissed  Mary  behind  the  barn.  The  sky  will  fall  tomorrow.  In 
addition  to  encoding  the  events  themselves,  a  representation 
formalism  may  need  to  indicate  the  time  course  of  a  sequence 
of  events  and  their  cause- an d-effect  relations. 

Performance:  A  behavior  like  riding  a  bicycle  involves  knowledge 
beyond  that  of  objects  and  events — knowledge  about  how  to  do 
things,  the  performance  of  skills.  Like  bike  riding,  most  cogni- 
tive behaviors — for  example,  composing  sentences  and  proving 
theorems — involve  performance  knowledge,  and  it  is  often  hard 
to  draw  the  line  between  performance  knowledge  and  object 
knowledge.  (Beware:  Pushing  too  hard  on  this  point  leads 
right  back  to  the  fundamental  philosophical  issue  of  what 
knowledge  is!) 

Meta- knowledge:  We  also  use  knowledge  about  what  we  know,  called 
meta-knowledge.  For  example,  we  often  know  about  the  extent 
and  origin  of  our  knowledge  of  a  particular  subject,   about  the 


A  Overview  145 

reliability  of  certain  information,  or  about  the  relative  impor- 
tance of  specific  facts  about  the  world.  Meta-knowledge  also 
includes  what  we  know  about  our  own  performance  as  cognitive 
processors:  our  strengths,  weaknesses,  confusability,  levels  of 
expertise  in  different  domains,  and  feelings  of  progress  during 
problem  solving.  For  example,  Bobrow  (1975)  describes  a  robot 
who  is  planning  a  trip;  its  knowledge  that  it  can  read  the 
street  signs  to  find  out  where  it  is  along  the  way  illustrates 
meta-knowledge. 

The  questions  of  whether  these  kinds  of  knowledge  are  distin- 
guishable and  whether  there  are  also  other  varieties  of  knowledge  are 
interesting  psychological  issues.  For  now,  however,  we  will  ignore  the 
psychological  aspects  of  the  problem  of  knowledge.  In  this  article  we 
discuss  some  of  the  features  of  the  AI  knowledge  representation  schemes 
that  make  it  possible,  sometimes,  for  computer  programs  to  exhibit 
behaviors  indicating  these  four  different  types  of  knowledge. 

Using  Knowledge 

The  most  important  consideration  in  examining  and  comparing 
knowledge  representation  schemes  is  the  eventual  use  of  the  knowledge. 
The  goals  of  AI  systems  can  be  described  in  terms  of  cognitive  tasks 
like  recognizing  objects,  answering  questions,  and  manipulating  robotic 
devices.  But  the  actual  use  of  the  knowledge  in  these  programs  in- 
volves three  stages:  (a)  acquiring  more  knowledge,  (b)  retrieving  facts 
from  the  knowledge  base  relevant  to  the  problem  at  hand,  and  (c) 
reasoning  about  these  facts  in  search  of  a  solution. 

Acquisition.  We  usually  think  of  learning  as  the  accumulation  of 
knowledge,  but  it  involves  more  than  the  addition  of  new  facts  to  our 
brains.  Indeed,  knowledge  acquisition  involves  relating  something  new  to 
what  we  already  know  in  a  psychologically  complex  way;  see,  for 
example,  Piaget's  theory  of  human  adaptation  by  assimilation  and 
accommodation  (Flavell,  1977,  pp.  6-11).  AI  systems  often  classify  a 
new  data  structure  before  it  is  added  to  the  database,  so  that  it  can  be 
retrieved  later  when  it  is  relevant.  Also,  in  many  kinds  of  systems,  new 
structures  can  interact  with  old,  sometimes  resulting  in  interference  with 
tasks  that  had  previously  been  performed  properly.  Finally,  some 
representation  schemes  are  concerned  with  acquiring  knowledge  in  a  form 
that  is  natural  to  humans,  who  serve  as  the  source  of  new  knowledge 
(see  Article  vn.B,  in  Vol.  n).  If  these  integrative  processes  did  not  take 
place  during  acquisition,  the  system  would  accumulate  new  facts  or  data 
structures  without  really  improving  its  knowledgeable  behavior. 


146  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

Retrieval.  Determining  what  knowledge  is  relevant  to  a  given 
problem  becomes  crucial  when  the  system  "knows"  many  different 
things.  Humans  are  incredibly  proficient  at  this  task,  and  many 
representation  schemes  that  have  been  directly  concerned  with  this  issue 
have  been  based  on  ideas  about  human  memory  (see  Articles  m.C3  and 
m.C7,  and  Chap.  XI,  in  Vol.  m,  on  the  use  of  AI  methods  in  building 
psychological  models).  The  fundamental  ideas  about  retrieval  that  have 
been  developed  in  AI  systems  might  be  termed  linking  and  lumping:  If 
it  is  known  that  one  data  structure  is  going  to  entail  another  in  an 
expected  reasoning  task,  an  explicit  link  is  put  in  between  the  two;  if 
several  data  structures  are  typically  going  to  be  used  together,  they  are 
grouped  into  a  larger  structure. 

Reasoning.  When  the  system  is  required  to  do  something  that  it 
has  not  been  explicitly  told  how  to  do,  it  must  reason — it  must  figure 
out  what  it  needs  to  know  from  what  it  already  knows.  For  instance, 
suppose  an  information  retrieval  program  "knows"  only  that  Robins  are 
birds  and  that  All  birds  have  wings.  Keep  in  mind  that  for  a  system  to 
know  these  facts  means  only  that  it  contains  data  structures  and 
procedures  that  would  allow  it  to  answer  the  questions: 

Are  Robins  birds?  Yes 

Do  a  I  I  birds  have  wings?       Yes 

If  we  then  ask  it,  Do  robins  have  wings?  the  program  must  reason  to 
answer  the  query.  In  problems  of  any  complexity,  the  ability  to  do  this 
becomes  increasingly  important.  The  system  must  be  able  to  deduce 
and  verify  a  multitude  of  new  facts  beyond  those  it  has  been  told  ex- 
plicitly. 

For  a  given  knowledge  representation  scheme,  we  must  ask,  "What 
kind  of  reasoning  is  possible,  easy,  natural,  and  so  on,  in  this  formal- 
ism?"    There  are  many  different  kinds  of  reasoning  one  might  imagine: 

Formal  reasoning  involves  the  syntactic  manipulation  of  data 
structures  to  deduce  new  ones  following  prespecified  rules  of 
inference.  Mathematical  logic  is  the  archetypical  formal  repre- 
sentation (see  Article  m\Cl). 

Procedural  reasoning  uses  simulation  to  answer  questions  and  solve 
problems.  When  we  use  a  program  to  answer  What  is  the  sum 
of  S  and  4?  &  uses,  or  "runs,"  a  procedural  model  of  arithmetic 
(Article  m.C2). 

Reasoning  by  analogy  seems  to  be  a  very  natural  mode  of  thought 
for  humans  but,  so  far,  difficult  to  accomplish  in  AI  programs. 
The  idea  is  that  when  you  ask  the  question  Can  robins  fly?  the 
system  might  reason  that  "robins  are  like  sparrows,  and  I  know 
that  sparrows  can  fly,  so  robins  probably  can  fly." 


A  Overview  147 

Generalization  and  abstraction  are  also  natural  reasoning  processes  for 
humans  that  are  difficult  to  pin  down  well  enough  to  imple- 
ment in  a  program.  If  one  knows  that  Robins  have  wings,  that 
Sparrows  have  wings,  and  that  Blue  jays  have  wings,  eventually  one 
will  believe  that  All  birds  have  wings.  This  capability  may  be  at 
the  core  of  most  human  learning,  but  it  has  not  yet  become  a 
useful  technique  in  AI  (however,  see  Chaps.  XI  and  XV,  in 
Vol.  m,  for  current  research). 

Meta-level  reasoning  is  demonstrated  by  the  way  one  answers  the 
question  What  is  Paul  Newman's  telephone  number?  You  might 
reason  that  "if  I  knew  Paul  Newman's  number,  I  would  know 
that  I  knew  it,  because  it  is  a  notable  fact."  This  involves 
using  "knowledge  about  what  you  know,"  in  particular,  about 
the  extent  of  your  knowledge  and  about  the  importance  of 
certain  facts.  Recent  research  in  psychology  and  AI  indicates 
that  meta-level  reasoning  may  play  a  central  role  in  human 
cognitive  processing  (Gentner  and  Collins,  in  press;  Flavell, 
1979);  some  work  on  implementing  this  kind  of  inference 
mechanism  in  AI  systems  has  begun  (Davis,  in  press;  Bobrow 
and  Winograd,  1977b;  Brachman,  1978). 

Two  things  need  to  be  said  about  the  uses  of  knowledge  described 
here.  First,  they  are  interrelated:  When  acquiring  new  knowledge,  the 
system  must  be  concerned  with  how  that  knowledge  will  be  retrieved 
and  used  later  in  reasoning.  Second,  for  most  AI  research,  efficacy  is 
the  primary  consideration  in  designing  knowledge-based  AI  systems. 
Although  there  is  serious  concern  among  AI  researchers  about  the 
psychological  validity  of  the  various  representation  schemes,  it  is  not  yet 
possible  to  prove  that  one  scheme  captures  some  aspect  of  human 
memory  better  than  another.  There  is  no  theory  of  knowledge  rep- 
resentation. We  don't  yet  know  why  some  schemes  are  good  for  certain 
tasks  and  others  not.  But  each  scheme  has  been  successfully  used  in  a 
variety  of  programs  that  do  exhibit  intelligent  behavior. 

We  will  now  discuss  some  of  the  characteristics  of  representation 
schemes  that  have  been  used  to  describe  and  compare  different  for- 
malisms. 

Scope  and  Grain  Size 

What  portion  of  the  external  world  can  be  represented  in  a  system? 
In  what  detail  are  objects  and  events  represented?  And  how  much  of 
this  detail  is  actually  needed  by  the  reasoning  mechanisms?  Questions 
like  these,  concerning  the  scope  and  grain  size  of  a  representation 
scheme,  can  help  determine  the  suitability  of  a  given  formalism  for  the 
solution  of  a  particular  problem,  but  they  are  not  easy  to  answer. 


148  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

For  one  thing,  of  course,  the  answers  depend  totally  on  the  partic- 
ular application  intended.  A  knowledge  representation  based  on  logic,  for 
instance,  might  be  an  extremely  fine-grain  representation  in  a  mathe- 
matical reasoning  program  but  might  result  in  a  coarse  simplification  for 
a  vision  program.  Exactly  how  much  detail  is  needed  depends  on  the 
performance  desired  (see  McCarthy  and  Hayes,  1969).  In  general, 
uniformity  of  detail  across  the  objects  and  events  seems  desirable  for  a 
given  reasoning  task  (Bobrow,  1975). 

If  one  asks,  "Can  everything  that  the  system  must  know  be 
represented  in  the  formalism?"  the  answer  is  almost  always,  "Yes,  but 
some  things  are  more  easily  represented  than  others."  Getting  a  feeling 
for  what  it  means  to  be  "represented  more  easily" — which  involves  the 
representation,  the  domain,  and  the  reasoning  strategies — is,  at  present, 
part  of  the  art  of  doing  AI  research;  there  is  no  formal  metric  for  the 
appropriateness  of  a  representation  scheme.  Bobrow  refers  to  the  pro- 
cess of  mapping  the  objects  and  events  in  the  world  into  some  internal 
encoding;  then  one  can  ask  if  the  mapping  in  a  given  situation  is  easy, 
natural,  psychologically  valid,  and  the  like. 

Indeterminacy  and  Semantic  Primitives 

In  any  representation  formalism — logic,  semantic  nets,  procedures, 
and  so  forth — the  choice  of  the  primitive  attributes  of  the  domain  that 
are  used  to  build  up  facts  in  the  database  strongly  affects  the  expressive 
power  of  the  knowledge  representation  scheme.  One  particular  problem 
affected  by  the  choice  of  semantic  primitives  is  the  multiplicity  of  ways 
in  which  a  particular  fact  or  event  might  be  encoded.  For  instance,  the 
fact  that  robins  have  wings  could  be  represented  in  either  of  the  sample 
semantic  nets  below  (see  Article  m.C3): 


BIRD  WIMGS 


subset 


has— part 


partr-of 


WINGS 
ROBINS  ROBINS 

The  first  is  interpreted  as  All  robins  are  birds,  and  all  birds  have  wings, 
while  the  second  states  directly  that  Wings  are  a  part  of  all  robins. 
Although  this  inherent  indeterminacy  might  be  used  to  great  advantage, 
allowing  redundant  storage  of  information  with  an  eye  to  future  rele- 
vance,   for   example,    it   generally   gives   rise   to   confusion    and   expense, 


A  Overview  149 

since  the  system  doesn't  know  exactly  what  structures  to  look  for  when 
it  comes  time  to  retrieve  a  given  fact. 

One  particular  task  in  which  the  problem  of  nonspecificity  of 
representation  was  critical  was  the  paraphrase  task  popular  in  natural 
language  understanding  research  (see  Chap.  rv).  Problems  encountered 
in  trying  to  build  programs  that  could  rephrase  an  input  sentence,  check 
whether  two  sentences  have  the  same  meaning,  or  translate  a  sentence 
from  one  language  into  another  led  researchers  like  Norman  and 
Rumelhart  (1975),  Schank  and  Abelson  (1977),  and  Wilks  (1977b)  to  try 
using  canonical  internal  representations  based  on  semantic  primitives. 
Thus,  in  Schank's  MARGIE  system  and  Wilks's  machine  translation  sys- 
tem, all  representation  structures  are  built  from  a  set  of  primitives  in 
such  a  way  that  two  structures  that  mean  the  same  thing  reduce  to  the 
same  network  of  primitive  nodes  (see  Articles  IV.F2  and  IV.F5).  The 
selection  of  primitive  elements  for  the  expression  of  knowledge  in  a 
given  domain  is  a  basic  problem  in  all  representation  schemes,  whether 
the  primitives  are  represented  as  nodes  in  a  semantic  net,  predicates  in 
logic  formulas,  or  slots  in  a  frame.  (The  status  of  semantic  primitives 
in  knowledge  representation  research  is  discussed  in  Article  m.C6.) 

Modularity  and  Under standability 

If  one  thinks  of  the  data  structures  in  a  program  as  pieces  of 
knowledge,  then  adding  new  data  structures  is  like  adding  knowledge  to 
the  system.  One  characteristic  that  is  often  used  to  compare  represen- 
tation schemes  is  modularity,  which  refers  to  the  ability  to  add,  modify, 
or  delete  individual  data  structures  more  or  less  independently  of  the 
remainder  of  the  database,  that  is,  with  clearly  circumscribed  effects  on 
what  the  system  "knows." 

In  general,  humans  find  modular  or  decomposable  systems  easier  to 
understand  and  work  with  (Simon,  1969).  To  illustrate  the  difficulty 
encountered  in  nonmodular  systems,  consider  the  complicated  inter- 
dependence of  procedures  in  a  large  computer  program  such  as  an 
operating  system.  The  following  situation  will  be  familiar  to  readers 
who  have  helped  write  and  maintain  large  programs:  A  large  system  is 
composed  of  many  procedures  that  call  each  other  in  a  complex  way 
that  becomes  increasingly  hard  to  follow  as  the  system  grows.  Often 
modification  of  procedure  X,  so  that  it  will  work  properly  when  called 
by  procedure  A,  interferes  with  the  proper  functioning  of  X  when  it  is 
called  by  procedure  B.  In  other  words,  in  order  to  modify  a  large 
system  successfully,  the  programmer  must  understand  the  interactions  of 
all  of  its  pieces,  which  can  become  an  impossibly  difficult  task. 


150  Knowledge  Representation  EI 

In  general  terms,  the  problem  with  nonmodular  systems  is  that  the 
meaning  of  data  structures  in  the  knowledge  base  depends  on  the  con- 
text in  which  the  knowledge  is  being  used.  (Computer  programs  them- 
selves illustrate  a  notoriously  nonmodular  representation  scheme  called 
procedural  representation — see  Article  m.C2.)  Context  dependence,  in 
turn,  dramatically  affects  the  modifiability  of  the  knowledge  base;  modi- 
fication is  much  easier  if  the  meaning  of  a  fact  can  be  specified  when 
the  fact  is  entered  or  removed,  independent  of  the  rest  of  the  system. 

On  the  other  hand,  some  human  knowledge  seems  inherently  non- 
modular  and  is  very  difficult  for  people  to  express  as  independent  rules 
or  facts.  Winograd  (1974)  made  the  generalization  that  in  modular 
systems  the  facts  are  easy  to  recognize  but  the  reasoning  process  may 
be  quite  opaque,  and  the  opposite  is  often  true  in  procedural  repre- 
sentations. The  degree  to  which  the  system  is  understandable  by  humans 
is  important  in  several  phases  of  its  development  and  performance: 
design  and  implementation,  acquisition  of  knowledge  from  human  ex- 
perts, performance  of  the  task,  and  interaction  with  and  explanations  for 
the  eventual  user. 

In  some  representation  schemes  the  data  structures  (e.g.,  production 
rules,  logic  formulas)  seem  less  inherently  intertwined,  but  the  control  of 
the  interaction  of  the  various  database  entries  is  a  very  important  char- 
acteristic of  all  representation  schemes.  Winograd  (1975)  suggests  that 
no  system  is  completely  modular — in  all  systems  there  is  some  degree  of 
interaction  between  the  data  structures  that  form  the  knowledge  base — 
but  some  formalisms  are  more  inherently  modular  than  others. 

Explicit  Knowledge  and  Flexibility 

Another  issue  to  keep  in  mind  when  examining  various  repre- 
sentation schemes  is  what  part  of  the  system's  knowledge  is  explicit.  By 
this  we  mean,  to  what  knowledge  do  the  programmer  and  the  system 
have  direct,  manipulatory  access,  and  what  knowledge  is  built-in?  For 
example,  an  operating  system  has  an  explicit  representation  of  its 
priority  queues,  but  its  full  knowledge  about  scheduling  jobs  (deciding 
which  of  several  users  to  serve  first)  is  typically  hidden  deep  in 
voluminous  code.  The  knowledge  is  there,  of  course,  since  the  system 
behaves  in  a  knowledgeable  way,  but  it  is  implicit  in  the  system's 
program  (Winograd,  1980b,  p.  228). 

One  particular  advantage  of  explicit  representation  schemes  is  that, 
because  the  facts  are  in  a  form  that  allows  a  global  interpretation,  the 
same  fact  can  be  used  for  multiple  purposes.  In  some  large  systems 
this  feature  has  been  a  significant  advantage.     For  example,  in  MYCIN 


A  Overview  151 

(see  Article  vm.Bi,  in  Vol.  n),  the  production  rules  that  form  the 
system's  knowledge  about  how  to  diagnose  the  possible  causes  of 
infectious  diseases  are  used  not  only  by  the  diagnosis  module  itself,  but 
also  by  the  routines  that  explain  the  diagnosis  module's  reasoning  to  the 
consulting  physician  and  that  acquire  new  rules  from  expert  physicians 
(Davis  and  Buchanan,  1977). 

Declarative  versus  Procedural  Representations 

On  a  closely  related  subject,  the  dispute  about  the  relative  merits  of 
declarative  versus  procedural  knowledge  representations  is  a  historically 
important  battle  from  which  much  of  current  representation  theory  was 
painfully  developed  (Winograd,  1975).  Many  of  the  issues  discussed  in 
this  article  were  identified  during  the  declarative-procedural  debate.  The 
declarative  systems  were  typified  by  resolution-based  theorem  provers 
(see  Article  m.Ci  on  logic  and  Chap,  xn,  in  Vol.  m)  and  the  procedural 
systems  by  Winograd's  PLANNER-based  SHRDLU  (Article  IV.F4).  The 
Declarativists  talked  about  the  flexibility  and  economy  of  their  repre- 
sentation schemes,  about  their  completeness  and  the  certainty  of  the  de- 
ductions, and  about  the  modifiability  of  the  systems.  The  Proceduralists 
stressed  the  directness  of  the  line  of  inference  (using  domain- specific 
heuristics  to  avoid  irrelevant  or  unnatural  lines  of  reasoning)  and  the 
ease  of  coding  and  under standability  of  the  reasoning  process  itself. 

Although  in  retrospect  these  positions  seem  somewhat  arbitrarily 
chosen  over  the  space  of  possible  features  of  representation  schemes,  the 
declarative-procedural  battle  was  an  important  one  in  AI.  It  dissolved, 
rather  than  being  resolved,  and  the  result  was  a  much  greater  respect 
for  the  importance  of  knowledge  representation  in  current  AI  work. 

Final  Remarks 

This  article  has  not  been  about  representation  formalisms  per  se,  but 
rather  about  the  pragmatics  of  epistemology,  the  study  of  the  nature  of 
knowledge.  The  intention  has  been  to  lay  the  groundwork  for  an  appre- 
ciation of  the  problems  inherent  in  representing  knowledge  in  AI 
programs.  The  discussion  may  also  guide  a  critical  comparison  of  the 
representation  methods  described  in  the  articles  to  follow. 

There  are  many  open  questions,  indeed  serious  problems,  in  knowl- 
edge representation  research.  For  example,  quantification,  the  ability  to 
specify  properties  of  arbitrarily  defined  sets,  is  an  area  of  active 
theoretical  research.  Other  current  problems  include  how  to  represent 
people's  beliefs  (which  may  or  may  not  be  true),  degrees  of  certainty, 
mass  nouns,  time  and  tense  information,  and  processes  that  consist  of 
sequenced  actions  taking  place  over  time. 


152  Knowledge  Representation  EI 

The  following  article  is  a  quick  summary  of  the  knowledge 
representation  schemes  used  in  AI.  The  articles  in  Section  m.C  go  into 
substantial  detail  about  individual  representation  schemes,  discussing 
their  development,  their  technical  features,  their  use  in  AI  systems,  and 
their  shortcomings. 

References 

The  best  recent  review  of  knowledge  representation  research  in  AI  is 
Winograd  (in  press).  Earlier  excellent  discussions  include  the  papers  in 
Bobrow  and  Collins  (1975),  especially  Bobrow  (1975)  and  Winograd 
(1975).  Other  recent  general  discussions  of  knowledge  representation  are 
found  in  Boden  (1977)  and  Findler  (1979).  Brachman  and  Smith  (1980) 
report  on  a  survey  of  knowledge  representation  researchers,  showing  the 
wide  diversity  of  goals  and  approaches  among  workers  in  the  field. 


B.     SURVEY  OF  REPRESENTATION  TECHNIQUES 

As  stated  in  the  preceding  article,  AI  research  deals  in  experimental 
epistemology;  to  create  programs  that  exhibit  intelligent  behavior, 
researchers  in  AI  develop  schemes  for  incorporating  knowledge  about  the 
world  into  their  programs.  These  knowledge  representation  techniques 
involve  routines  for  manipulating  specialized  data  structures  to  make 
intelligent  inferences.  Although  some  aspects  of  each  knowledge  rep- 
resentation technique  are  incidental  and  will  seem  unmotivated,  in  its 
way  each  scheme  touches  on  concerns  central  to  the  study  of  cognition 
and  intelligence. 

This  survey  article  presents  sketches  of  the  representation  schemes 
that  have  been  used  in  AI  programs  that  play  chess,  converse  in 
English,  operate  robots,  and  so  forth.  Seeing  simple  examples  of  the 
major  techniques  will  perhaps  help  the  reader  get  a  clearer  idea  of  what 
a  knowledge  representation  is.  Most  of  this  research  assumes  that  what 
needs  to  be  represented  is  known,  a  priori;  the  AI  researcher's  job  is 
just  figuring  out  how  to  encode  the  information  in  the  system's  data 
structures  and  procedures. 

State- space  Search 

Perhaps  the  earliest  representation  formalism  used  extensively  in  AI 
programs  was  the  state-space  representation,  developed  for  problem- 
solving  and  game-playing  programs.  The  search  space  is  not  a  rep- 
resentation of  knowledge,  per  se:  What  it  represents  is  the  structure  of 
a  problem  in  terms  of  the  alternatives  available  at  each  possible  state  of 
the  problem,  for  example,  the  alternative  moves  available  on  each  turn 
of  a  game.  The  basic  idea  is  that  from  a  given  state  in  a  problem,  all 
possible  next  states  can  be  determined  with  a  small  set  of  rules,  called 
transition  operators  (or  legal-move  generators  in  game-playing  programs). 
For  example,  in  a  chess  game,  the  original  state  is  the  board  position  at 
the  beginning  of  the  game.  The  legal-move  generators  correspond  to  the 
rules  for  moving  each  piece.  So  all  of  the  next  states  of  the  game  (i.e., 
the  board  configurations  after  each  of  White's  possible  first  moves)  can 
be  generated  by  applying  the  move  generators  to  the  original  positions 
of  the  pieces.  Similarly,  all  of  the  possible  states  after  Black's  first 
response  can  be  generated. 

One  rather  straightforward  way  to  find  the  winning  move  is  to  try 
all  of  the  alternative  moves,  then  try  all  of  the  opponent's  responses  to 


154  Knowledge  Representation  Et 

these  moves,  and  then  try  all  of  the  possible  responses  to  those,  until 
all  of  the  possible  continuations  of  the  game  have  been  exhausted  and  it 
is  clear  which  was  optimal.  The  problem  with  this  solution  is  that,  for 
interesting  problems  like  chess,  there  are  far  too  many  possible 
combinations  of  moves  to  try  in  a  reasonable  amount  of  time  on  a 
machine  of  conceivable  computational  power.  This  problem,  called  the 
combinatorial  explosion,  is  an  important  general  difficulty  for  AI  systems 
in  all  applications  (see  Chap.  n). 

The  solution  adopted  in  AI  research  is  to  limit  the  number  of 
alternatives  searched  at  each  stage  of  the  look-ahead  process  to  the  best 
possibilities.  And  in  order  to  determine  which  alternatives  are  best, 
programs  must  reason  from  large  amounts  knowledge  about  the  world, 
encoded  within  the  program  in  some  knowledge  representation.  What- 
ever domain  the  systems  deal  with,  chess  or  organic  chemistry  or  pizza 
parlor  scenarios,  the  goal  of  research  in  knowledge  representation  is  to 
allow  AI  programs  to  behave  as  if  they  knew  something  about  the 
problems  they  solve. 

Logic 

The  classical  approach  to  representing  the  knowledge  about  the 
world  contained  in  sentences  like 

All  birds  have  wings. 

is  formal  logic,  developed  by  philosophers  and  mathematicians  as  a 
calculus  of  the  process  of  making  inferences  from  facts.  The  example 
about  birds'  wings  would  be  translated  into  the  mathematical  formula 

V  x.  Bird  (x)  — ►  HasWings  (x)  , 

which  reads,  For  any  object  x  in  the  world,  if  x  is  a  bird,  then  x  has 
wings.  The  advantage  of  formal  representation  is  that  there  is  a  set  of 
rules,  called  the  rules  of  inference  in  logic,  by  which  facts  that  are 
known  to  be  true  can  be  used  to  derive  other  facts  that  must  also  be 
true.  Furthermore,  the  truth  of  any  new  statement  can  be  checked,  in 
a  well- specified  manner,  against  the  facts  that  are  already  known  to  be 
true. 

For  example,  suppose  we  add  another  fact  to  our  database, 

V  x.  Robin  (x)  — ►  Bird  (x)  , 

which  reads,  For  any  object  x  in  the  world,  if  x  is  a  Robin,  then  x  is  a 
Bird.  Then  from  these  two  facts,  we  can  conclude,  using  the  rules  of 
inference,  that  the  following  fact  must  be  true: 

V  x.  Robin  (x)  — ►  HasWings  (x)  ; 


B  Survey  of  Representation  Techniques  155 

that  is,  that  All  robins  have  wings.  Note  that  there  is  a  specific  rule  of 
inference  that  allows  this  deduction  based  on  the  superficial  structure,  or 
syntax,  of  the  first  two  formulas,  independent  of  whether  they  dealt 
with  birds  or  battleships,  and  that  new  facts  derived  through  application 
of  the  rules  of  inference  are  always  true  so  long  as  the  original  facts 
were  true. 

The  most  important  feature  of  logic  and  related  formal  systems  is 
that  deductions  are  guaranteed  correct  to  an  extent  that  other  rep- 
resentation schemes  have  not  yet  reached.  The  semantic  entailment  of  a 
set  of  logic  statements  (i.e.,  the  set  of  inferences  or  conclusions  that  can 
be  drawn  from  those  statements)  is  completely  specified  by  the  rules  of 
inference.  Theoretically,  the  database  can  be  kept  logically  consistent 
and  all  conclusions  can  be  guaranteed  correct.  Other  representation 
schemes  are  still  striving  for  such  a  definition  and  guarantee  of  logical 
consistency. 

One  reason  that  logic-based  representations  have  been  so  popular  in 
AI  research  is  that  the  derivation  of  new  facts  from  old  can  be  mech- 
anized. Using  automated  versions  of  theorem  proving  techniques, 
programs  have  been  written  to  determine  automatically  the  validity  of  a 
new  statement  in  a  logic  database  by  attempting  to  prove  it  from  the 
existing  statements  (see  Chap,  xn,  in  Vol.  m).  Although  mechanistic 
theorem  provers  of  this  sort  have  been  used  with  some  success  in 
programs  with  relatively  small  databases  (Green,  1969),  when  the 
number  of  facts  becomes  large,  there  is  a  combinatorial  explosion  in  the 
possibilities  of  which  rules  to  apply  to  which  facts  at  each  step  of  the 
proof.  More  knowledge  about  what  facts  are  relevant  to  what  situations 
is  needed,  and,  again,  incorporating  additional  knowledge  is  the  goal  of 
continuing  work  in  representation  theory. 

Procedural  Representation 

The  idea  of  procedural  representation  of  knowledge  first  appeared 
as  an  attempt  to  encode  some  explicit  control  of  the  theorem-proving 
process  within  a  logic-based  system.  (This  refers  to  research  on  the 
PLANNER  programming  language;  see  Article  VI.C2,  in  Vol.  n.)  In  a 
procedural  representation,  knowledge  about  the  world  is  contained  in 
procedures — small  programs  that  know  how  to  do  specific  things,  how  to 
proceed  in  well-specified  situations.  For  instance,  in  a  parser  for  a 
natural  language  understanding  system,  the  knowledge  that  a  noun 
phrase  may  contain  articles,  adjectives,  and  nouns  is  represented  in  the 
program  by  calls  (within  the  NP  procedure)  to  routines  that  know  how 
to  process  articles,  nouns,  and  adjectives. 


156  Knowledge  Representation  m 

The  underlying  knowledge,  the  permissible  grammar  for  a  noun 
phrase  in  our  example,  is  not  stated  explicitly  and  thus  is  not  typically 
extractable  in  a  form  that  humans  can  easily  understand.  The  conse- 
quent difficulty  that  humans  have  in  verifying  and  changing  procedural 
representations  is  the  major  flaw  of  these  systems.  Nevertheless,  all  AI 
systems  use  a  procedural  representation  at  some  level  of  their  opera- 
tion, and  general  consensus  gives  a  legitimate  role  for  procedural 
representation  in  AI  programs  (Winograd,  1975).  The  advantages  and 
disadvantages  of  procedural  knowledge  representation  are  discussed  fully 
in  Article  m.C2.  Recent  work  has  emphasized  procedural  attachment  in 
frame-based  systems  (Article  m.C7). 

Semantic  Nets 

The  semantic  net,  developed  by  Quillian  (1968)  and  others,  was 
invented  as  an  explicitly  psychological  model  of  human  associative  mem- 
ory. A  net  consists  of  nodes,  representing  objects,  concepts,  and  events, 
and  links  between  the  nodes,  representing  their  interrelations.  Consider, 
for  example,  the  simple  net: 

BIRD 

has— part 
WINGS 

where  BIRD  and  WINGS  are  nodes  representing  sets  or  concepts  and 
HAS-PART  is  the  name  of  the  link  specifying  their  relationship.  Among 
the  many  possible  interpretations  of  this  net  fragment  is  the  statement 

All  birds  have  wings. 

As  illustrated  earlier,  statements  of  this  sort  also  have  a  natural 
representation  in  logic-based  representation  systems.  One  key  feature  of 
the  semantic  net  representation  is  that  important  associations  can  be 
made  explicitly  and  succinctly:  Relevant  facts  about  an  object  or  con- 
cept can  be  inferred  from  the  nodes  to  which  they  are  directly  linked, 
without  a  search  through  a  large  database. 

The  ability  to  point  directly  to  relevant  facts  is  particularly  salient 
with  respect  to  ISA  and  SUBSET  links,  which  establish  a  property  in- 
heritance hierarchy  in  the  net.     For  example,  the  net  segment 


B  Survey  of  Representation  Techniques  157 


BIRD 

has— part 
WINGS 


subset 
ROBIN! 


might  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  since  robins  are  birds,  and  birds 
have  wings,  then  robins  have  wings.  The  interpretation  (semantics)  of 
net  structures,  however,  depends  solely  on  the  program  that  manipulates 
them;  there  are  no  conventions  about  their  meaning.  Therefore,  in- 
ferences drawn  by  manipulation  of  the  net  are  not  assuredly  valid,  in 
the  sense  that  they  are  assured  to  be  valid  in  a  logic-based  represen- 
tation scheme. 

Production  Systems 

Production  systems,  developed  by  Newell  and  Simon  (1972)  for  their 
models  of  human  cognition  (see  Chap.  XI,  in  Vol.  m),  are  a  modular 
knowledge  representation  scheme  that  is  finding  increasing  popularity  in 
large  AI  programs.  The  basic  idea  of  these  systems  is  that  the  data- 
base consists  of  rules,  called  productions,  in  the  form  of  condition-action 
pairs:     "If  this  condition  occurs,  then  do  this  action."     For  example, 

IF  stoplight  is  red  AND  you  have  stopped  THEN  right  turn  OK. 

The  utility  of  the  formalism  comes  from  the  fact  that  the  conditions  in 
which  each  rule  is  applicable  are  made  explicit  and,  in  theory  at  least, 
the  interactions  between  rules  are  minimized  (one  rule  doesn't  "call" 
another). 

Production  systems  have  been  found  useful  as  a  mechanism  for 
controlling  the  interaction  between  statements  of  declarative  and  pro- 
cedural knowledge.  Because  they  facilitate  human  understanding  and 
modification  of  systems  with  large  amounts  of  knowledge,  productions 
have  been  used  in  several  recent  large  applications  systems  like 
DENDRAL,  MYCIN,  PROSPECTOR,  and  AM  (see  Chap,  vn,  in  Vol.  n). 
Current  work  on  production  systems  has  emphasized  the  control  aspects 
of  the  formalism  and  the  ability  to  develop  self-modifying  (learning) 
systems. 


158  Knowledge  Representation  m 

Special-purpose  Representation  Techniques 

Some  of  the  domains  that  AI  researchers  work  in  seem  to  suggest 
natural  representations  for  the  knowledge  required  to  solve  problems. 
For  example,  a  visual  scene  from  a  robot's  camera  is  often  encoded  as 
an  array  representing  a  grid  over  the  scene:  The  values  of  the  elements 
of  the  array  represent  the  average  brightness  over  the  corresponding 
area  of  the  scene  (see  Chap,  xm,  in  Vol.  m).  This  direct  representation 
is  useful  for  some  tasks,  like  finding  the  boundaries  of  the  objects  in  the 
scene,  but  is  clumsy  for  other  tasks,  like  counting  the  number  of  ob- 
jects. In  the  latter  case,  a  list — each  element  of  which  represents  one 
object  indicating  its  location,  orientation,  and  size — might  be  a  more 
useful  representation.     (See  the  discussion  in  Bobrow,  1975.) 

This  example  illustrates  a  very  important  principle  to  realize  when 
comparing  representation  techniques.  In  some  sense,  these  two  (and  all 
other)  knowledge  representation  methods  are  interchangeable:  If  we  know 
one  representation  in  enough  detail,  we  could  for  the  most  part 
construct  the  other  one.  It  is  the  intended  use  of  the  knowledge  about 
the  scene  that  recommends  one  representation  scheme  over  another.  In 
a  big  AI  system,  like  the  speech  understanding  programs,  multiple  rep- 
resentations of  the  same  information  may  be  used  simultaneously  for 
different  purposes. 

Other  special-purpose  representation  schemes  of  particular  interest 
are  those  used  in  the  early  natural  language  understanding  programs, 
like  SAD-SAM  and  SIR  (see  Article  IV.Fi),  and  the  discrimination  net 
used  in  the  EPAM  program  (Article  XI.D,  in  Vol.  m). 

Frames 

The  most  recently  developed  AI  knowledge-representation  scheme  is 
the  frame,  still  in  its  early  development  stage.  Researchers  have  dif- 
ferent ideas  about  exactly  what  a  frame  is,  but  basically,  a  frame  is  a 
data  structure  that  includes  declarative  and  procedural  information  in 
predefined  internal  relations.  Thus,  a  generic  frame  for  a  dog  might 
have  knowledge  hooks,  or  slots,  for  facts  that  are  typically  known  about 
dogs,  like  the  BREED,  OWNER,  NAME,  and  an  "attached  procedure"  for 
finding  out  who  the  owner  is  if  that  is  not  known.  In  the  frame-like 
language  KRL  (Bobrow  and  Winograd,  1977b),  a  dog-frame  might  look 
like  this: 


B  Survey  of  Representation  Techniques  159 


Generi  c 

DOG  Fi 

■ame 

Se  1  f : 

an  AMIMAL 

Breed 

Owner 

a  PERSON 

a  PET 


(If-Needed :  find  a  PERSON  with  pet=myself) 
Name:   a  PROPER  NAME  (DEFAULT=Rover) 

DOG-NEXT-DOOR  Frame 

Self:  a  DOG 

Breed:  mutt 

Owner:  Jimmy 

Name:  Fido 

The  semantics  of  this  example,  as  well  as  the  ideas  being  developed  in 
frame-based  formalisms,  is  discussed  in  Article  m.C7. 

An  interesting,  much  discussed  feature  of  frame-based  processing  is 
the  ability  of  a  frame  to  determine  whether  it  is  applicable  in  a  given 
situation.  The  idea  is  that  a  likely  frame  is  selected  to  aid  in  the  pro- 
cess of  understanding  the  current  situation  (dialogue,  scene,  problem) 
and  this  frame  in  turn  tries  to  match  itself  to  the  data  it  discovers.  If 
it  finds  that  it  is  not  applicable,  it  could  transfer  control  to  a  more 
appropriate  frame  (Minsky,  1975).  Although  many  issues  about  the 
possible  implementations  of  frame-based  systems  are  unresolved,  and 
others  may  not  have  surfaced  yet,  the  basic  idea  of  frame-like  struc- 
turing of  knowledge  appears  promising. 

Conclusion 

This  brief  summary  of  knowledge  representation  indicates  the  variety 
of  techniques  being  used  in  AI  projects.  The  remaining  articles  in  this 
chapter  go  into  most  of  these  schemes  in  greater  detail.  Many  re- 
searchers feel  that  the  representation  of  knowledge  is  the  key  issue  at 
this  point  in  the  development  of  AI.  Knowledge  representation  is  also 
one  area  in  which  AI  and  cognitive  psychology  share  fundamental 
concerns,  for  the  brain's  operation  is  sometimes  best  described  by  one 
representation  formalism,  sometimes  by  another,  and  sometimes  not  very 
well  by  any  we  have  thought  up.  The  interested  reader  should  peruse 
Chapter  XI,  in  Volume  m. 

References 

The  best  current  survey  of  knowledge  representation  in  AI  is  in 
Winograd  (in  press).  References  on  each  of  the  schemes  are  given  after 
the  corresponding  article  in  the  following. 


C.    REPRESENTATION  SCHEMES 
CI.    Logic 

Philosophers  have  been  grappling  with  the  nature  of  reasoning  and 
knowledge  since  the  time  of  the  ancient  Greeks.  This  tradition,  for- 
malized in  the  last  half  of  the  19th  century  with  the  work  of  Boole, 
Frege,  and  Russell  and  expanded  and  amplified  in  the  current  century 
by  philosophers  like  Quine,  Carnap,  and  Tarski,  is  an  important  part  of 
Western  intellectual  history  and  has  developed  into  the  philosophical  and 
mathematical  study  of  logic. 

This  article  is  about  logic — about  how  the  formal  treatment  of 
knowledge  and  thought,  as  developed  in  philosophy,  has  been  applied  to 
the  development  of  computer  programs  that  can  reason.  The  first  two 
sections  of  the  article,  dealing  with  the  propositional  and  predicate 
calculi,  are  an  introduction  to  formal  logic.  This  particular  introduction 
has  been  written  with  the  AI  applications  of  logic  in  mind.  It  is  fol- 
lowed by  an  illustration  of  the  way  that  a  simple  problem,  the  famous 
Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle,  might  be  formalized  in  the  predicate  calculus. 
Then,  after  a  survey  of  some  of  the  important  AI  systems  that  have 
used  logic  for  a  representation,  we  discuss  the  advantages  and  problems 
of  this  representational  formalism  in  AI. 

The  Propositional  Calculus 

Logic,  which  was  one  of  the  first  representation  schemes  used  in  AI, 
has  two  important  and  interlocking  branches.  The  first  is  consideration 
of  what  can  be  said — what  relations  and  implications  one  can  formalize, 
the  axioms  of  a  system.  The  second  is  the  deductive  structure — the 
rules  of  inference  that  determine  what  can  be  inferred  if  certain  axioms 
are  taken  to  be  true.  Logic  is  quite  literally  a  formal  endeavor:  It  is 
concerned  with  the  form,  or  syntax,  of  statements  and  with  the  deter- 
mination of  truth  by  syntactic  manipulation  of  formulas.  The  expressive 
power  of  a  logic-based  representational  system  results  from  building.  One 
starts  with  a  simple  notion  (like  that  of  truth  and  falsehood)  and,  by 
inclusion  of  additional  notions  (like  conjunction  and  predication), 
develops  a  more  expressive  logic — one  in  which  more  subtle  ideas  can  be 
represented. 


CI  Logic  161 

The  most  fundamental  notion  in  logic  is  that  of  truth.  A  properly 
formed  statement,  or  proposition,  has  one  of  two  different  possible  truth 
values,  TRUE  or  FALSE.  Typical  propositions  are  Bob's  car  is  blue, 
Seven  plus  six  equals  twelve,  and  John  is  Mary's  uncle.  Note  that  each 
of  the  sentences  is  a  proposition,  not  to  be  broken  down  into  its 
constituent  parts.  Thus,  we  could  assign  the  truth  value  TRUE  to  the 
proposition  John  is  Mary's  uncle,  with  no  regard  for  the  meaning  of 
John  is  Mary's  uncle,  that  is,  that  John  is  the  brother  of  one  of  Mary's 
parents.  Propositions  are  those  things  that  we  can  call  true  or  false. 
Terms  such  as  Mary's  uncle  and  seven  plus  four  would  not  be  propo- 
sitions, as  we  cannot  assign  a  truth  value  to  them. 

Pure,  disjoint  propositions  aren't  very  interesting.  Many  more  of  the 
things  we  say  and  think  about  can  be  represented  in  propositions  that 
use  sentential  connectives  to  combine  simple  propositions.  There  are  five 
commonly  employed  connectives: 

& 


D 


The  use  of  the  sentential  connectives  in  the  syntax  of  propositions 
brings  us  to  the  simplest  logic,  the  propositional  calculus,  in  which  we 
can  express  statements  like  The  book  is  on  the  table  or  it  is  on  the 
chair  and  If  Socrates  is  a  man,  then  he  is  mortal.  In  fact,  the  meanings 
of  the  sentential  connectives  are  intended  to  keep  their  natural  inter- 
pretations, so  that  if  X  and  Y  are  any  two  propositions, 

X  A  Y  is  TRUE  if  X  is  TRUE  and  Y  is  TRUE;  otherwise  X  A  Y 
is  FALSE. 

X  V   Y     is  TRUE  if  either  X  is  TRUE  or  Y  is  TRUE  or  both. 

-iX       is  TRUE  if  X  is  FALSE,  and  FALSE  if  X  is  TRUE. 

X  — ►  Y  is  meant  to  be  the  propositional  calculus  rendition  of  the 
notion  If  we  assume  that  X  is  true,  then  Y  must  be  so;  that 
is,  the  truth  of  X  implies  that  Y  is  true.  We  use  this 
concept  in  everyday  speech  with  statements  like  If  Jenny 
is  nine  months  old,  then  she  can't  do  calculus.  The  truth 
value  of  X  — ►  Y  is  defined  to  be  TRUE  if  Y  is  TRUE  or 
X  is  FALSE. 

X  =  Y  is  TRUE  if  both  X  and  Y  are  TRUE,  or  both  X  and  Y 
are  FALSE;  X  =  Y  is  FALSE  if  X  and  Y  have  different 
truth  values. 


And 

A 

or 

Or 

V 

Mot 

— i 

Impl i es 

-> 

or 

Equ  i  va 1  en 

t 

= 

162  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

The  following  table,  a  compressed  truth  table,  summarizes  these  defini- 
tions. 


X 

Y 

XAY 

XVY 

X— >Y 

-iX 

X=Y 

T 

T 

T 

T 

T 

F 

T 

T 

F 

F 

T 

F 

F 

F 

F 

T 

F 

T 

T 

T 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 

T 

T 

T 

From  syntactic  combinations  of  variables  and  connectives,  we  can 
build  sentences  of  propositional  logic,  just  like  the  expressions  of  mathe- 
matics. Parentheses  are  used  here  just  as  in  ordinary  algebra.  Typical 
sentences  are: 

(1)  (X  -  (Y  A  Z))    =    ((X  -  Y)  A  (X  -  Z)) 

(2)  -.(XV  Y)     =     -1(1  y  A  -JT) 

(3)  (XAY)    V    (i'yA  Z) 

Sentence  1  is  a  tautology;  it  states,  "Saying  X  implies  Y  and  Z  is  the 
same  as  saying  that  X  implies  Y  and  X  implies  Z."  This  is  a  tautology 
because  it  is  true  no  matter  what  propositions  are  substituted  for  the 
sentential  constants  X,  Y,  and  Z.  Sentence  2  is  a  fallacy  or  contra- 
diction. No  matter  what  assignment  of  values  is  used,  the  sentence  is 
always  false.  (It  states,  "Saying  X  or  Y  is  false  is  the  same  as  saying 
that  'X  is  false  and  Y  is  false'  is  false.")  Sentence  3  is  neither  a 
tautology  nor  a  fallacy.  Its  truth  value  depends  on  what  propositions 
are  substituted  for  X,   Y,  and  Z. 

In  the  propositional  calculus,  we  also  encounter  the  first  rules  of 
inference.  An  inference  rule  allows  the  deduction  of  a  new  sentence 
from  previously  given  sentences.  The  power  of  logic  lies  in  the  fact 
that  the  new  sentence  is  assured  to  be  true  if  the  original  sentences 
were  true.  The  best  known  inference  rule  is  modus  ponens.  It  states 
that  if  we  know  that  two  sentences  of  the  form  X  and  X  — ►  Y  are 
true,  then  we  can  infer  that  the  sentence  Y  is  true.  For  example,  if  we 
know  that  the  sentence  John  is  an  uncle  is  true  and  we  also  know  that 
If  John  is  an  uncle,  then  John  is  male  is  true,  then  we  can  conclude 
that  John  is  male  is  true.  More  formally,  the  modus  ponens  rule  would 
be  expressed  as: 

(x  a  (x  -  y))  -  y . 


CI  Logic  163 

Note  that  if  we  think  of  X  and  X  — ►  Y  as  two  entries  in  a  database, 
the  modus  ponens  rule  allows  us  to  replace  them  with  the  single 
statement,  Y,  thus  eliminating  one  occurrence  of  the  connective  "— ►."  In 
what  are  called  natural  deduction  systems  of  logic,  there  are  typically 
two  rules  of  inference  for  each  connective,  one  that  introduces  it  into 
expressions  and  one  that  eliminates  it.  Modus  ponens  is  therefore  called 
the  "— ►"-  elimination  rule. 

The  Predicate  Calculus 

For  the  purposes  of  AI,  propositional  logic  is  not  very  useful.  In 
order  to  capture  adequately  in  a  formalism  our  knowledge  of  the  world, 
we  need  not  only  to  be  able  to  express  true  or  false  propositions,  but 
also  to  be  able  to  speak  of  objects,  to  postulate  relationships  between 
these  objects,  and  to  generalize  these  relationships  over  classes  of  ob- 
jects.   We  turn  to  the  predicate  calculus  to  accomplish  these  objectives. 

The  predicate  calculus  is  an  extension  of  the  notions  of  the  prop- 
ositional calculus.  The  meanings  of  the  connectives  (A,  V,  — ►,  ~>,  and 
=)  are  retained,  but  the  focus  of  the  logic  is  changed.  Instead  of 
looking  at  sentences  that  are  of  interest  merely  for  their  truth  value, 
predicate  calculus  is  used  to  represent  statements  about  specific  objects, 
or  individuals.  Examples  of  individuals  are  you,  this  sheet  of  paper,  the 
number  1,  the  queen  of  hearts,  Socrates,  and  that  coke  can. 

Predicates.  Statements  about  individuals,  both  by  themselves  and  in 
relation  to  other  individuals,  are  called  predicates.  A  predicate  is  applied 
to  a  specific  number  of  arguments  and  has  a  value  of  either  TRUE  or 
FALSE  when  individuals  are  used  as  the  arguments.  An  example  of  a 
predicate  of  one  argument  is  the  predicate  is-red.  Of  the  individuals 
mentioned  in  the  previous  paragraph,  the  predicate  is-red  has  the  value 
TRUE  when  applied  to  the  individuals  the  queen  of  hearts  and  that  coke 
can  and  FALSE  when  the  individual  this  paper  is  used  as  the  argument. 
Other  examples  of  predicates  are  less-than-zero,  Greek,  mortal,  and 
made- of -paper. 

Predicates  can  have  more  than  one  argument.  An  example  of  a 
two-place  predicate  from  mathematics  is  is- greater- than,  for  example,  is- 
greater-than  (7,  4).  Physical  objects  could  be  compared  by  the  two-place 
predicate  is-lighter-than.  A  three-place  predicate  from  geometry  might 
be  Pythagorean,  which  takes  three  line- segments  as  arguments  and  is 
TRUE  whenever  two  are  the  sides  of  a  right  triangle  with  the  third  as 
its  hypotenuse.    One  very  important  two-place  predicate  is  equals. 

Each  one-place  predicate  defines  what  is  called  a  set  or  sort.  That 
is,  for  any  one-place  predicate  P,  all  individuals  X  can  be   sorted  into 


164  Knowledge  Representation  Et 

two  disjoint  groups,  with  those  objects  that  satisfy  P  (for  which  P(X) 
is  TRUE)  forming  one  group  and  those  that  don't  satisfy  P  in  the 
other.  Some  sorts  include  other  sorts;  for  example,  all  men  are  animals, 
and  all  knaves  are  playing-cards. 

Quantifiers.  We  shall  often  have  occasion  to  refer  to  facts  that  we 
know  to  be  true  of  all  or  some  of  the  members  of  a  sort.  For  this,  we 
introduce  two  new  notions,  those  of  variable  and  quantifier.  A  variable 
is  a  place  holder,  one  that  is  to  be  filled  in  by  some  constant,  as  X  has 
been  used  in  this  article.  There  are  two  quantifiers,  V,  meaning  for 
all  .  .  .,  and  3,  meaning  there  exists  . . .  The  English-language  sen- 
tence All  men  are  mortal  is  thus  expressed  in  predicate  calculus,  using 
the  variable  X;  as 

VX  Man  (X)  ->  Mortal  (X)  , 

which  is  loosely  rendered,  "For  all  individuals  X,  if  X  is  a  man  (i.e., 
Man  (X)  is  true),  then  X  is  mortal."  The  English  sentence  There  is  a 
playing  card  that  is  red  and  is  a  knave  becomes  the  predicate  calculus 
statement 

3  X  Playing-card  (X)  A  Knave  (X)  A  Is-red  (X)  . 

More  complicated  expressions,  or  well- formed  formulas  (WFFs),  are  cre- 
ated with  syntactically  allowed  combinations  of  the  connectives,  predi- 
cates, constants,  variables,  and  quantifiers. 

Inference  rules  for  quantifiers.  In  a  typical  natural  deduction  sys- 
tem, use  of  the  quantifiers  implies  the  introduction  of  four  more  infer- 
ence rules,  one  for  the  introduction  and  elimination  of  each  of  the  two 
quantifiers.  For  example,  the  V-elimination,  or  universal  specialization, 
rule  states  that,  for  any  well-formed  expression  #  that  mentions  a  vari- 
able X,  if  we  have 

V  X  <£(X)  , 
we  can  conclude 

for  any  individual  A.    In  other  words,  if  we  know,  for  example, 

V  X  Man  (X)  ->  Mortal  (X)  , 

we  can  apply  this  to  the  individual  Socrates,  using  the  V-elimination 
rule,  to  get: 


CI  Logic  165 

Man  (Socrates)  — ►  Mortal  (Socrates). 

The  rules  of  the  propositional  calculus,  extended  by  predicates,  quanti- 
fication, and  the  inference  rules  for  quantifiers,  result  in  the  predicate 
calculus. 

First-order  logic.  Predicate  calculus,  as  we've  described  it,  is  very 
general,  and  often  quite  clumsy.  Two  other  additions  to  the  logic  will 
make  some  things  easier  to  say,  without  really  extending  the  range  of 
what  can  be  expressed.  The  first  of  these  is  the  the  notion  of  oper- 
ators, or  functions.  Functions,  like  predicates,  have  a  fixed  number  of 
arguments;  but  functions  are  different  from  predicates  in  that  they  do 
not  just  have  the  values  TRUE  or  FALSE,  but  they  "return"  objects 
related  to  their  arguments.  For  example,  the  function  uncle- of  when 
applied  to  the  individual  Mary  would  return  the  value  John.  Other 
examples  of  functions  are  absolute-value,  plus,  and  left-arm-of  Each  of 
the  arguments  of  a  function  can  be  a  variable,  a  constant,  or  a  function 
(with  its  arguments).  Functions  can,  of  course,  be  combined;  we  can 
speak  of  the  father-of  (father-of  (John)),  who  would,  of  course,  be  John's 
paternal  grandfather. 

The  second  important  addition  is  that  of  the  predicate  equals.  Two 
individuals  X  and  Y  are  equal  if  and  only  if  they  are  indistinguishable 
under  all  predicates  and  functions.  More  formally,  X  =  Y  if  and  only 
if,  for  all  predicates  P,  P(X)  =  P{Y),  and  also  for  all  functions  F, 
F(X)  =  F(Y).  What  we  arrive  at  with  these  additions  is  no  longer 
pure  predicate  calculus;  it  is  a  variety  of  first-order  logic.  (A  logic  is  of 
first  order  if  it  permits  quantification  over  individuals  but  not  over  pred- 
icates and  functions.  For  example,  a  statement  like  All  predicates  have 
only  one  argument  cannot  be  expressed  in  a  first-order  theory.)  First- 
order  logic  is  both  sound  (it  is  impossible  to  prove  a  false  statement) 
and  complete  (any  true  statement  has  a  proof).  The  utility  of  these 
properties  in  AI  systems  will  be  discussed  after  we  present  the 
axiomatization  of  a  sample  problem,  that  is,  its  formal  expression  in 
sentences  of  first-order  logic. 

A  Sample  Axiomatic  System 

So  far,  we  have  sketched  the  language  of  logic,  its  parts  of  speech, 
and  its  grammar.  We  have  not  talked  about  how  to  express  a  problem 
to  be  solved  in  this  language.  Deciding  how  to  express  the  notions  he 
or  she  needs  is  up  to  the  user  of  logic,  just  as  a  programmer  must 
construct  programs  from  the  elements  presented  in  the  programming 
language  manual.  However,  a  good  programming  manual  ought  to  pre- 
sent sample  programs;  we  present  a  sample  axiomatization  of  the  famous 


166 


Knowledge  Representation 


m 


Tower  of  Hanoi  problem  (see  Article  n.B2).  One  common  version  of  this 
puzzle  involves  three  pegs — 1,  2,  and  3 — and  three  disks  of  graduated 
sizes — A,  B,  and  C.  Initially  the  disks  are  stacked  on  peg  1,  with  A, 
the  smallest,  on  top  and  C,  the  largest,  at  the  bottom.  The  problem  is 
to  transfer  the  stack  to  peg  3,  as  in  Figure  Cl-1,  given  that  (a)  only 
one  disk  can  be  moved  at  a  time,  and  it  must  be  free,  that  is,  have  no 
other  disks  on  top  of  it,  and  (b)  no  disk  may  ever  be  placed  on  top  of 
a  smaller  disk. 


Initial  State 


Goa I  State 


A  - 
B  — 
C  


peg  1   peg  2   peg  3 


-  A 

-  B 

C 


peg  1   peg  2   peg  3 


Figure  Cl-1.     The  Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle. 

The  expression  and  solution  of  problems  in  logic  have  several  parts. 
We  must  first  specify  the  vocabulary  of  our  domain — what  the  variables, 
constants,  predicates,  and  functions  are.  Second,  we  define  axioms — 
expressions  that  we  assert  state  the  necessary  relationships  between  the 
objects  needed  to  model  our  domain. 

Obvious  objects  (constants)  for  this  axiomatization  are  the  disks,  A, 
B,  and  C,  and  the  pegs,  1,  2,  and  3;  obvious  predicates  are  the  sorts, 
DISK  and  PEG.  DISK  (A)  is  TRUE,  since  A  is  a  disk;  PEG(C)  is 
FALSE. 

We  need  also  to  be  able  to  compare  disk  size;  for  that,  we  have  a 
binary  predicate,  SMALLER.  We  define  SMALLER  (A,  B)  to  be  TRUE  if 
and  only  if  disk  A  is  smaller  than  disk  B.  If  we  have  variables  X,  Y, 
and  Z  denoting  disks,  we  can  have  our  first  axiom  express  the  tran- 
sitivity of  SMALLER: 

VI7Z.  (SMALLER  (X,  Y)  A  SMALLER  ( Y,  Z ))  ->  SMALLER  (X,  Z ) . 

In  other  words,  //  disk  X  is  smaller  than  Y,  and  Y  is  smaller  than  Z, 
then  X  is  smaller  than  Z.  The  given  size  relationships  between  the 
disks  are  stated  by  the  premise 

SMALLER  {A,B)  A  SMALLER  (B,  C)  . 

Note  that  by  using  the  preceding  two  expressions,  we  can  establish,  or 
prove,  SMALLER  (A,  C). 

We  need  to  be  able  to  talk  about  the  status  of  our  problem  solving 


CI  Logic  167 

as  we  work  through  a  solution  and  to  be  able  to  compare  the  status 
after  a  series  of  moves.  A  common  strategy  to  deal  with  this  difficulty 
is  that  of  introducing  a  situational  constant.  A  situation  is  a  "snap- 
shot" of  where  things  are  at  any  given  point.  Thus,  in  the  Tower  of 
Hanoi  problem,  we  might  have  disk  C  under  disk  A  at  some  point 
called,  say,  situation  SIT12. 

The  vertical  relationships  of  the  disks  and  the  pegs  are,  after  all, 
the  primary  predicate  of  this  problem.  Hence,  we  need  a  three-place 
predicate  ON  (X,  Y,  S ),  which  asserts  that  disk  X  is  on  disk  (or  peg)  Y 
in  situation  S.  The  axiomatization  of  the  fact  that  a  disk  is  free  (i.e., 
has  no  other  disk  on  it)  in  a  situation  S  becomes: 

V  X  S.  FREE  (X,  S)  =  -3  Y.  (ON  (Y,  X,  S))  , 

which  is  read,  "For  all  disks  X  and  situations  S,  X  is  free  in  situa- 
tion S  if  and  only  if  there  does  not  exist  a  disk  Y  such  that  Y  is  ON 
X  in  situation  S."  Notice  how  specific  and  concise  the  formal  statement 
of  these  relations  can  be. 

To  describe  the  idea  that  moving  a  disk,  X,  onto  Y  is  "legal"  in  a 
given  situation  only  if  both  X  and  Y  are  free  and  Y  is  bigger,  we  cre- 
ate the  predicate  LEGAL: 

V  X  Y  S.  LEGAL  (X,  Y,  S) 

=  (FREE  (X,S)  A  FREE  (Y,  S)  A  DISK  (X)  A  SMALLER  (X;  Y))  . 

Now  all  we  lack  is  a  way  of  generating  new  situations.  The  function 
MOVE,  defined  on  two  objects  and  a  situation,  produces  a  new  situation 
in  which  the  first  object  is  on  top  of  the  second.  And  what  does  this 
new  situation,  S',  look  like?  Well,  X  is  on  Y,  and  nothing  else  has 
changed: 

V  S  S'  X  Y 

S'  =  MOVE  (X,  Y,  S)  -*  (ON  (X,  Y,S') 

A  V  Z  Zv  ((-.Z  =  IA^1=   Y) 

-  (ON  (Z,ZVS)  =  ON(Z,ZvS'))) 
A  V  Z  (ON(X,  Z,  S)  ->  FREE(Z,  S'))  . 

S'  will  be  a  SITUATION  if  that  MOVE  is  LEGAL: 

V  X  Y  S.  LEGAL  (X;  Y,  S)  =  SITUATION  (MOVE  (X,  Y,  S))  . 

This  example  gives  an  idea  of  how  to  express  in  first-order  logic  the 
notions  involved  in  the  Tower  of  Hanoi  problem.  The  solution  of  the 
problem  involves  proving  that  the  goal  state  can  be  reached  from  the 
original  state.  More  precisely,  one  proves  a  theorem  that  states  that, 
given  the  problem's  premises  expressed  like  the  ones  above,  such  a  goal 


168  Knowledge  Representation  IE 

state  exists.  There  are  very  general  methods  for  automated  theorem 
proving  in  first-order  logic,  involving  programs  that  manipulate  internally 
stored  logical  expressions  using  rules  of  inference  supplied  as  procedures. 
The  details  of  this  process  are  discussed  in  Chapter  xn,  in  Volume  m. 
The  AI  systems  described  in  the  next  section  all  use  some  kind  of  the- 
orem prover  to  make  deductions  based  on  facts  expressed  as  logic  for- 
mulas. 

Applications  of  Logic  to  Artificial  Intelligence 

In  this  section  we  shall  survey  various  AI  systems  that  use  logic  to 
represent  knowledge.  We  shall  also  mention  the  different  processes  they 
use  to  make  deductions,  since  this  is  an  equally  important  aspect  of  the 
system,  but  we  will  not  describe  the  various  alternatives  in  detail. 

QA3  (Green,  1969)  was  a  general-purpose,  question- answering  system 
that  solved  simple  problems  in  a  number  of  domains.  Deductions  were 
performed  by  the  resolution  method  of  inference,  with  simple  general 
heuristics  for  control.  The  system  could  solve  problems  in  chemistry, 
robot  movement,  puzzles  (like  the  Tower  of  Hanoi),  and  automatic  pro- 
gramming. For  example,  given  the  following  chemical  facts  (among 
others)  about  ferrous  sulfide  (FeS) 

FeS  is  a  sulfide,  it  is  a  dark-gray  compound,  and  it  is  brittle. 

represented  as  the  first-order  logic  formula 

sulfide  (FeS)  A  compound  (FeS)  A  darkgray  (FeS)  A  brittle  (FeS)  , 

QA3  could  then  answer  questions  like  "Is  it  true  that  no  dark-gray  thing 
is  a  sulfide?" — that  is, 

-i  3  X.  darkgray  (X)  A  sulfide  (X)  ? 

Despite  its  generality  and  its  success  on  simple  problems,  QA3  could 
not  handle  really  difficult  problems.  The  fault  lay  in  the  method  of 
deduction,  resolution  theorem  proving,  which  became  impossibly  slow  as 
the  number  of  facts  it  knew  about  a  particular  domain  increased  beyond 
just  a  few.  In  AI  terminology,  as  the  number  of  facts  in  the  database 
increases,  there  is  a  combinatorial  explosion  in  the  number  of  ways  to 
combine  facts  to  make  inferences  (see  Article  n.A),  and  the  resolution 
method  of  proving  theorems  was  too  indiscriminate  in  which  com- 
binations it  tried.  Although  unrestricted  resolution  is  complete,  in  the 
sense  that  it  will  always  return  an  answer  if  one  exists,  it  is  too 
indirect  for  nontrivial  problems.  Even  the  use  of  heuristic  rules  to 
suggest  which  alternatives  might  be  most  profitably  followed  at  various 
points   of  the   proof  did   not   constrain   the   search   sufficiently   to   make 


CI  Logic  169 

QA3's  approach  feasible  for  large  databases  (see,  however,  Chap,  xn,  in 
Vol.  in,  for  current  research  on  more  sophisticated  theorem  provers). 

STRIPS,  the  Stanford  Research  Institute  Problem  Solver,  was 
designed  to  solve  the  planning  problems  faced  by  a  robot  in  rearranging 
objects  and  navigating  in  a  cluttered  environment  (Fikes,  Hart,  and 
Nilsson,  1972).  Since  the  representation  of  the  world  must  include  a 
large  number  of  facts  dealing  with  the  position  of  the  robot,  objects, 
open  spaces,  and  the  like,  simpler  methods  often  used  for  puzzles  or 
games  would  not  suffice.  The  representation  scheme  chosen  for  STRIPS 
was  again  the  first-order  predicate  calculus. 

A  simple  problem  was: 

Given  a  robot  at  point  A  and  boxes  at  points  B,   C,  and  D,  gather 
the  boxes  together. 

The  current  situation  is  described  as 

ATR  (A) 
AT  (BOX1,  B) 
AT  (BOX2,   C) 
AT  (BOX3,  D) 

and  the  goal  as 

31.  AT(BOXl,X)  A  AT(BOX2,  X)  A  AT  (BOX3,  X)  , 

that  is,  Get  all  the  boxes  together  at  some  place,  X.  Problem  solving  in 
a  robot  domain  such  as  this  involves  two  types  of  processes:  (a) 
deduction  in  a  particular  world  model,  to  find  out  whether  a  certain 
fact  is  true,  and  (b)  searching  through  a  space  of  world  models,  to  find 
one  in  which  the  given  condition  is  satisfied  (e.g.,  How  can  we  get  the 
three  blocks  together?). 

The  former  process  is  usually  called  question  answering;  the  latter, 
planning.  STRIPS  applied  different  methods  to  solve  these  two  kinds  of 
problems.  Question  answering  was  done  with  resolution  theorem  prov- 
ing, as  in  Green's  QA3  system;  planning  was  performed  with  means- ends 
analysis,  as  in  the  GPS  system  of  Newell  and  Simon  (1972).  This  dual 
approach  allowed  world  models  that  were  more  complex  and  general 
than  in  GPS  and  provided  more  powerful  search  heuristics  than  those 
found  in  theorem-proving  programs.  GPS,  STRIPS,  and  its  successor 
ABS TRIPS  are  described  in  detail  in  Chapter  n. 

FOL  (Filman  and  Weyhrauch,  1976)  is,  among  other  things,  a  very 
flexible  proof  checker  for  proofs  stated  in  first-order  logic.  Deduction  is 
done  with  the  natural  deduction  system  of  Prawitz  (1965),  which  in- 
cludes   the    introduction    and    elimination    rules    of    inference    discussed 


170  Knowledge  Representation  IE 

above.  FOL  can  more  properly  be  viewed  as  a  sophisticated,  interactive 
environment  for  using  logic  to  study  epistemological  questions  (see 
Weyhrauch,  1978). 

Logic  and  Representation 

First-order  logic,  as  we  have  described  it,  demands  a  clean  syntax, 
clear  semantics,  and,  above  all,  the  notions  of  truth  and  inference. 
Clarity  about  what  is  being  expressed  and  about  the  consequences  of,  or 
possible  inferences  from,  a  set  of  facts  is  perhaps  the  most  important 
quality  of  this  formalism. 

In  a  classic  paper,  McCarthy  and  Hayes  (1969)  differentiate  two 
parts  of  the  AI  problem.  The  epistemological  part  was  defined  as 
determining  "what  kinds  of  facts  about  the  world  are  available  to  an 
observer  with  given  opportunities  to  observe,  how  these  facts  can  be 
represented  in  the  memory  of  a  computer,  and  what  rules  permit 
legitimate  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  these  facts"  (McCarthy,  1977). 
The  issue  of  processing,  of  using  the  knowledge  once  it  is  represented 
(what  McCarthy  and  Hayes  called  the  heuristic  part  of  the  AI  problem), 
was  separated  from  the  representation  issue.  Given  this  distinction, 
there  are  several  reasons  that  logic  can  be  a  useful  means  for  exploring 
the  epistemological  problems. 

1.  Logic  often  seems  a  natural  way  to  express  certain  notions.  As 
McCarthy  (1977)  and  Filman  (1979)  pointed  out,  the  expression 
of  a  problem  in  logic  often  corresponds  to  our  intuitive  under- 
standing of  the  domain.  Green  (1969)  also  indicated  that  a 
logical  representation  was  easier  to  reformulate;  thus,  experi- 
mentation is  made  easier. 

2.  Logic  is  precise.  There  are  standard  methods  of  determining  the 
meaning  of  an  expression  in  a  logical  formalism.  Hayes  (1977a) 
presents  a  complete  discussion  on  this  issue  and  argues  for  the 
advantages  of  logic  over  other  representation  systems  on  these 
grounds. 

3.  Logic  is  flexible.  Since  logic  makes  no  commitment  to  the  kinds 
of  processes  that  will  actually  make  deductions,  a  particular  fact 
can  be  represented  in  a  single  way,  without  having  to  consider 
its  possible  use. 

4.  Logic  is  modular.  Logical  assertions  can  be  entered  in  a  data- 
base independently  of  each  other;  knowledge  can  grow  incremen- 
tally, as  new  facts  are  discovered  and  added.  In  other  repre- 
sentational systems,  the  addition  of  a  new  fact  might  sometimes 
adversely  affect  the  kinds  of  deductions  that  can  be  made. 


CI  Logic  171 

The  major  disadvantage  of  logic  stems  also  from  the  separation  of 
representation  and  processing.  The  difficulty  with  most  current  AI 
systems  lies  in  the  heuristic  part  of  the  system,  that  is,  in  determining 
how  to  use  the  facts  stored  in  the  system's  data  structures,  not  in 
deciding  how  to  store  them  (e.g.,  QA3's  failure  with  large  databases). 
Thus,  separating  the  two  aspects  and  concentrating  on  epistemological 
questions  merely  postpone  addressing  the  problem.  Work  on  procedural 
representation  schemes,  such  as  PLANNER  (Article  m.C2),  and  on  frame- 
based  schemes  (Article  m.C7)  are  attempts  to  incorporate  the  heuristic 
aspect  into  the  epistemological;  systems  like  GOLUX  (Hayes,  1977b)  and 
FOL  (Weyhrauch,  1978)  are  attempts  to  formalize  control  of  processing 
while  retaining  the  logical  precision. 

References 

Nilsson  (1971)  gives  a  brief,  elementary  introduction  to  the  use  of 
logic  in  AI  in  Chapters  6  and  7,  including  an  introduction  to  automated 
theorem  proving  techniques.  More  thorough  discussions  can  be  found  in 
any  of  the  introductory  logic  texts,  like  Manna  (1973)  and  Suppes 
(1957). 


C2.     Procedural  Representations 

The  distinction  between  declarative  and  procedural  representations  of 
knowledge  has  had  a  key  role  in  the  historical  development  of  AI  ideas. 
Declarative  representations  stress  the  static  aspects  of  knowledge — facts 
about  objects,  events,  and  their  relations  and  about  states  of  the  world. 
The  proponents  of  procedural  representations  pointed  out  that  AI 
systems  had  to  know  how  to  use  their  knowledge — how  to  find  relevant 
facts,  make  inferences,  and  so  on — and  that  this  aspect  of  knowledgeable 
behavior  was  best  captured  in  procedures.  (Hayes,  1977a,  discusses  the 
different  kinds  of  knowledge  amenable  to  different  kinds  of  represen- 
tation schemes.) 

As  a  simple  example  of  what  it  means  to  represent  knowledge  pro- 
cedurally, consider  what  a  typical  alphabetization  program  could  be  said 
to  know  about  its  task.  The  knowledge  that  "A  comes  before  B  in  the 
alphabet"  is  represented  implicitly  in  the  body  of  the  alphabetization 
procedure,  which  really  does  an  integer  comparison  of  the  computer 
codes  for  A  and  B.  All  computer  programs  incorporate  procedural 
knowledge  of  this  sort.  What  the  proceduralists  pointed  out  was  that, 
while  the  knowledge  about  alphabetical  order  was  implicit  in  such 
a  system,  the  knowledge  about  how  to  alphabetize  was  represented 
explicitly  in  the  alphabetization  procedure.  On  the  other  hand,  in  a 
declarative  system,  where  knowledge  about  alphabetical  order  might  be 
explicitly  represented  as  facts  like  A  comes  before  B,  B  comes  before  C, 
and  so  on,  the  knowledge  about  how  to  alphabetize  is  implicit  in  the 
programs  that  manipulate  those  facts  (theorem  prover,  production  system 
interpreter,  etc.). 

Before  the  advent  of  proceduralism,  workers  in  AI  focused  on 
determining  what  kinds  of  knowledge  could  be  represented  adequately  in 
formalisms  like  logic  and  semantic  nets.  Questions  about  how  the  data 
structures  involved  could  be  manipulated  effectively  as  the  databases 
grew  larger  were  considered  a  secondary  concern.  The  proceduralists 
took  exception  to  this  view.  They  argued  that  the  useful  knowledge  of 
a  domain  is  intrinsically  bound  up  with  the  specialized  knowledge  about 
how  it  is  to  be  used  (Hewitt,  1975).  Through  an  evolving  series  of  new 
systems  and  AI  programming  languages,  the  proponents  of  procedural 
knowledge  representation  brought  concerns  about  the  relevance  and 
utility  of  knowledge  into  the  center  of  knowledge-representation  research. 


C2  Procedural  Representations  173 

Early  Procedural  Systems 

The  first  AI  systems  that  might  be  called  procedural  were  not  ex- 
treme in  their  stance:  Their  factual  knowledge  was  stored  in  a  database 
similar  to  those  used  by  the  then-popular  theorem-proving  programs,  but 
their  reasoning  was  structured  in  a  new  way.  (See  Winograd,  1972,  for 
a  discussion  of  the  development  of  proceduralist  ideas.) 

Such  an  approach  was  used  in  Raphael's  (1968)  early  question 
answering  system,  SIR  (see  Article  iV.Fi).  SIR  could  answer  questions 
about  simple  logical  relationships,  such  as  Is  a  finger  part  of  a  person? 
Its  knowledge  was  stored  in  two  forms:  Facts  about  the  parts  of  things 
were  represented  as  properties  linked  to  the  nodes  representing  the 
objects,  and  the  inference-making  mechanism  was  represented  as  special- 
ized procedures.  Thus,  to  answer  the  question  about  a  finger,  SIR 
would  use  two  stored  facts,  that  a  finger  is  part  of  a  hand  and  that  a 
hand  is  part  of  a  person,  and  one  procedure,  a  specialized  induction 
procedure  that  traced  PART-OF  links  between  nodes.  The  inference 
routines  were  specialized  in  that  they  had  to  be  custom-built  for  each 
new  type  of  inference  and  link  in  the  database. 

However,  the  most  characteristically  procedural  quality  of  the  SIR 
system  was  that  the  meaning  of  an  input  sentence  or  question,  the  final 
result  of  SIR's  parsing  stage,  was  a  procedure.  When  executed,  this 
routine  performed  the  desired  action — either  adding  to  the  database  or 
printing  information  found  therein.  In  other  words,  when  the  sentence 
A  finger  is  part  of  a  hand  was  entered  into  the  system,  SIR  produced 
and  immediately  executed  a  procedure  that  added  a  PART-OF  link  to 
the  database  between  the  FINGER  node  and  the  HAND  node. 

Woods  (1968)  implemented  the  most  sophisticated  of  the  early 
procedural  systems.  His  program  handled  questions  about  airline  flight 
schedules-  The  questions  were  translated  into  functions  that,  when  run 
over  the  system's  database,  produced  the  correct  response.  For  example, 
the  question  What  American  Airlines  flights  go  from  Boston  to  Chicago? 
would  be  translated  into  the  query  language  as: 

(FOR-EVERY  Xl/FLIGHT; 

EQUAL  (OWNER(Xl),  ANERICAN-AIRLINES) 

AND  CONNECT  (XI,  BOSTON,  CHICAGO); 
LIST(Xl)) 

This  expression  of  the  question  is  a  function  (in  the  LISP  pro- 
gramming language)  built  from  other  specialized-knowledge  procedures 
like  FOR-EVERY  and  CONNECT.     When  evaluated,  this  function  would 


174  Knowledge  Representation  IH 

retrieve  a  list  of  all  of  the  flights  in  the  database,  then  find  out  which 
of  those  were  owned  by  American  Airlines  and  went  from  Boston  to 
Chicago,  and  finally  print  the  resulting  list. 

Representing  How  to  Use  Knowledge 

The  great  advantage  of  the  early  procedural  systems  was  that  they 
were  directed  in  their  problem- solving  activity  in  the  sense  that  they  did 
not  use  irrelevant  knowledge  or  follow  unnatural  lines  of  reasoning. 
These  inefficient  behaviors,  characteristic  of  the  early  declarative  systems 
that  blindly  tried  to  apply  anything  they  knew  to  the  problem  at  hand 
until  something  worked,  were  eliminated  by  the  specialized  inference 
procedures.  But  this  solution  created  problems  of  its  own.  In  general, 
as  procedural  systems  become  very  complex,  they  become  very  hard  for 
people  to  understand  and  modify. 

Thus,  in  the  late  1960s  there  was  an  attempt  to  merge  the  two 
types  of  representation,  seeking  the  ease  of  modification  of  the  de- 
clarative systems  (especially  logic)  and  the  directedness  of  the  earlier 
procedural  systems.  The  essence  of  this  approach  was  to  represent 
declarative  knowledge  of  the  kind  typically  encoded  in  logic  expressions 
along  with  instructions  for  its  use.  The  thrust  of  the  later  work  in 
procedural  representations  was  to  try  to  find  better  ways  of  expressing 
this  control  information. 

Information  about  how  to  use  a  piece  of  knowledge  might  concern 
various  aspects  of  processing.  One  form  of  control  is  to  indicate  the 
direction  in  which  an  implication  can  be  used.  For  example,  to  encode 
the  idea  that  to  prove  that  something  flies  you  might  want  to  show 
that  it  is  a  bird,  from  which  the  desired  conclusion  follows,  one  might 
write  something  like  this: 

(IF-MEEDED    FLIES  (X) 
TRY-SHOWING  BIRD  (X)) 

Thus,  if  we  are  trying  to  prove  that  Clyde  can  fly,  this  heuristic 
tells  us  to  try  first  to  prove  that  he  is  a  bird.  Note  that  the 
knowledge  that  All  birds  can  fly,  as  represented  here,  is  not  usable  in 
the  other  direction — if  we  learn  that  Fred  is  a  bird,  we  will  not  be  able 
immediately  to  conclude  anything  about  Fred  being  able  to  fly. 

Another  use  of  procedural  knowledge  is  in  trying  to  specify  what 
knowledge  will  be  relevant  to  achieving  a  specific  goal.  For  example,  if 
we  expect  that  we  might  want  to  prove  that  something  is  a  bird,  and 
that  two  facts  called,  say,  THEOREM1  and  THEOREM2  might  be  useful 
in  proving  birdhood,  we  could  write: 

(GOAL  BIRD  (TRY-USING  THEOREMl  THE0REN2) )  . 


C2  Procedural  Representations  175 

In  essence,  what  has  been  done  here  is  to  embellish  the  straight- 
forward deduction  provided  by  resolution  or  natural  deduction  theorem 
proving  in  a  logic-based  representation.  The  inferences  here  are  con- 
trolled; we  have  told  the  system  how  and  when  it  can  use  the  knowl- 
edge that  it  has.  Three  major  methods  of  specifying  control  information 
have  been  tried: 

1.  Specify  control  by  the  way  in  which  one  states  the  facts;  this  is 
the  approach  of  the  examples  above  and  of  PLANNER,  dis- 
cussed below. 

2.  Encode  the  representation  language  at  a  lower  level,  so  that  the 
user  has  access  to  the  set  of  mechanisms  for  specifying  the 
reasoning  process.  This  is  the  approach  taken  in  the  CON- 
NIVER  programming  language  (see  Sussman  and  McDermott, 
1972,  and  Article  VI.C2,  in  Vol.  n). 

3.  Define  an  additional  language,  for  expressing  control  information, 
that  works  together  with  the  representation  language.  This  idea 
was  the  foundation  for  the  GOLUX  project  (Hayes,  1973)  and 
for  Kowalski's  (1974)  predicate  calculus  programming. 

Of  the  three  approaches,  the  work  on  PLANNER  was  the  most  widely 
used  and  was  seminal  for  later  work  on  procedural  representations. 

PLANNER:     Guided  Inference  and  Extended  Logic 

PLANNER  (Hewitt,  1972)  was  an  AI  programming  language  designed 
to  implement  both  representational  and  control  information.  The  fea- 
tures of  the  language  are  described  in  Article  VI.C2  (in  Vol.  n),  and  we 
discuss  here  only  those  aspects  relevant  to  knowledge  representation. 
The  specific  concern  of  the  PLANNER  research  was  not  to  facilitate  the 
class  of  inferences  that  were  logically  possible,  as  would  be  the  focus  in 
theorem  proving  work,  but  to  expedite  the  inferences  that  were  expected 
to  be  actually  needed.  This  approach  created  its  own  problems;  there 
are  some  quite  straightforward  deductions  that  PLANNER  is  unable  to 
make,  as  will  be  discussed  later. 

The  relevant  features  of  the  PLANNER  language  include  being  able 
to  specify  whether  theorems  should  be  used  in  a  forward  or  backward 
direction  and  to  recommend  the  use  of  specific  theorems  in  given 
situations,  as  described  in  the  preceding  section.  In  fact,  the  ability  to 
recommend  pieces  of  knowledge  was  somewhat  more  general  than  in- 
dicated previously.  Besides  recommending  possibly  useful  theorems  by 
name,  general  classes  of  theorems  could  be  suggested  by  the  use  of 
filters.     For    example,    the    following   PLANNER    expression    states    that 


176  Knowledge  Representation  m 

using  theorems  about  zoology  might  be  a  useful  way  to  prove  that 
something  is  a  bird: 

(GOAL  BIRD  (FILTER  ABOUT-ZOOLOGY))  . 

The  implementation  of  these  inference  guiding  control  features  did 
not  change  the  nature  of  the  possible  inferences  themselves.  However, 
other  procedural  knowledge  implemented  in  PLANNER  did  allow  infer- 
ences beyond  those  found  in  classical  logical  systems,  particularly  the 
various  forms  of  default  reasoning  (Reiter,  1978).  One  form  of  default, 
as  implemented  in  PLANNER,  is  the  THNOT  primitive.  For  example, 
the  expression 

(THNOT  OSTRICH  (X)   ASSUME  FLIES  (X)) 

refers  to  all  birds,  X,  and  means  that  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  X  is 
an  ostrich,  assume  that  it  can  fly. 

The  primitive  THNOT  can  function  correctly  only  if  certain  aspects 
of  our  knowledge  are  complete.  In  the  above  example,  we  assume  that, 
if  X  were  an  ostrich,  we  would  either  know  that  fact  or  have  some  way 
to  deduce  it.  If  the  knowledge  base  is  not  complete  in  this  sense,  the 
system  might  make  incorrect  inferences.  This  is  not  necessarily  a  seri- 
ous problem;  there  might  be  times  that  we  want  the  system  to  "jump 
to  conclusions."     This  will  be  discussed  later. 

THNOT  and  similar  functions  take  us  beyond  the  realm  of  ordinary 
logic,  since  they  violate  the  property  of  monotonicity.  Monotonicity 
states  that  if  a  conclusion  is  derivable  from  a  certain  collection  of  facts, 
the  same  conclusion  remains  derivable  if  more  facts  are  added.  Thus, 
procedural  and  declarative  systems  implement  different  logics  (Reiter, 
1978).  As  Hewitt  (1972)  points  out,  the  logic  of  PLANNER  is  a  com- 
bination of  classical  logic,  intuitionistic  logic,  and  recursive  function 
theory.  Winograd  (1980a)  outlines  a  taxonomy  of  extended  inference 
modes  that  are  outside  the  provision  of  ordinary  logic. 

PLANNER  thus  serves  as  a  programming  language  in  which 
knowledge  about  both  the  problem  to  be  solved  and  the  methods  of 
solution  can  be  stated  in  a  modular,  flexible  style  reminiscent  of  logic. 
The  intent  is  that  the  user  be  able  to  state  as  much  or  as  little 
domain- specific  knowledge  as  required.  The  most  extensive  use  of 
PLANNER  was  in  Winograd's  (1972)  SHRDLU  system  (see  Article  IV.F4). 
A  number  of  AI  programming  language  projects  followed  PLANNER, 
including  CONNIVER  (Sussman  and  McDermott,  1972),  QA4  (Rulifson, 
Derkson,  and  Waldinger,  1972),  POPLER  (Davies,  1972),  and  QLISP 
(Reboh  et  al.,  1976).  For  further  discussion  of  many  of  these  languages, 
see  Chapter  VI,  in  Volume  n. 


C2  Procedural  Representations  177 

Advantages  and  Disadvantages  of  Procedural  Representations 

Chief  among  the  advantages  of  using  procedures  to  represent  knowl- 
edge is  their  facility  for  representing  heuristic  knowledge,  especially 
domain- specific  information  that  might  permit  more  directed  deduction 
processes.  This  includes  information  about  whether  a  theorem  should  be 
used  in  a  backward  or  a  forward  direction,  about  what  knowledge 
should  be  applied  in  a  given  situation,  and  about  which  subgoals  should 
be  tried  first.  The  most  important  result  of  this  ability  to  encode 
heuristic  knowledge  is  the  directedness  realized  by  such  systems,  which, 
of  course,  is  crucial  in  large  systems  that  would  get  bogged  down  if  the 
problem  solving  were  not  efficient.  Efficiency  in  this  sense  was  the 
motivation  behind  most  of  the  work  on  procedural  representations. 

A  related  advantage  is  the  ability  to  perform  extended-logical  in- 
ferences, like  the  default  reasoning  described  in  the  preceding  section. 
There  are  attempts  to  achieve  this  kind  of  informal  or  plausible 
reasoning  in  more  formal  logical  systems  (McCarthy,  1977).  Winograd 
(1980a)  discusses  this  issue  further,  arguing  that  these  types  of  inferences 
are  necessary  in  a  system  that  attempts  to  model  human  reasoning. 

Procedural  representation  may  also  be  at  an  advantage  with  regard 
to  what  is  called  modeling,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  frame  problem 
as  identified  by  McCarthy  and  Hayes  (1969).  This  difficulty,  common  to 
all  representation  formalisms,  is  their  inability  to  model  side  effects  of 
actions  taken  in  the  world  by  making  corresponding  modifications  in  the 
database  representing  the  state  of  the  world.  (Note  that  the  frame 
problem  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  frame  as  a  representation  formalism, 
discussed  in  Article  m.C7.)  For  example,  suppose  we  are  reasoning 
about  a  robot,  with  a  key,  moving  from  ROOM-1  to  ROOM-2  to  find 
and  unlock  a  safe.  The  initial  situation,  S0,  might  be  represented  in 
the  database  with  assertions  like: 

1.  IN    (ROOM-1,    ROBOT,    SO) 

2.  IN    (R00M-1,    KEY,    SO) 

3.  IN    (ROOM-2,    SAFE,    SO) 

After  the  robot  has  moved  from  ROOM-1  to  ROOM-2,  the  system 
must  somehow  know  that  assertions  1  and  2  are  now  false,  while 
assertion  3  is  still  true. 

In  a  large  system  with  many  facts,  keeping  track  of  these  changes — 
especially  the  side  effects  of  actions,  like  the  moving  of  the  key  to  the 
safe — can  be  very  tricky.  The  propagation  of  those  facts  that  have  not 
changed  is  sometimes  much  easier  in  a  procedural  system:  The 
procedure  that  performs  the  actions  can  update  the  database 
immediately.  (See  also  the  discussion  of  a  similar  way  of  dealing  with 
the  the  frame  problem  in  a  direct  representation,  Article  m.C5.) 


178  Knowledge  Representation  EI 

Two  problems  of  the  procedural  approach  in  relation  to  more  formal 
representational  schemes  concern  completeness  and  consistency.  Many- 
procedural  systems  are  not  complete,  meaning  that  there  are  cases  in 
which  a  system  like  PLANNER  could  know  all  the  facts  required  to 
reach  a  certain  conclusion  but  not  be  powerful  enough  to  make  the 
required  deductions  (Moore,  1975).  Of  course,  completeness  is  not  nec- 
essarily always  desirable.  There  are  cases  when  we  might  want  the 
system  to  work  quickly  and  not  spend  a  long  time  finding  a  particular 
answer  or  concluding  that  it  cannot  find  the  answer. 

A  deductive  system  is  consistent  if  all  its  deductions  are  correct — 
that  is,  if  the  conclusion  necessarily  follows  from  the  premises.  Again, 
most  theorem-proving  systems  have  this  property,  but  procedural  sys- 
tems often  do  not.  For  example,  the  use  of  default  reasoning  can 
introduce  inconsistency  in  the  presence  of  incomplete  knowledge.  Thus, 
if  we  use  the  fact  that  Fred  is  a  bird  to  conclude  that  he  can  fly  and 
later  discover  that  he  is  an  ostrich,  we  will  have  inconsistency.  Hewitt 
(1975)  refers  to  this  as  the  "Garbage  In — Garbage  Out"  principle. 

Like  completeness,  consistency  is  not  necessarily  always  desirable. 
McDermott  and  Doyle  (in  press)  argue  that  much  of  our  reasoning  is 
done  by  revising  our  beliefs  in  the  presence  of  new  information. 
Similarly,  Hewitt  points  out  that  most  of  our  knowledge  is  not  absolute; 
we  regularly  accept  caveats  and  exceptions.  If  we  control  the  reasoning 
sufficiently  tightly  in  the  presence  of  inconsistency,  the  Garbage  In — 
Garbage  Out  effect  can  be  avoided. 

Another  drawback  of  procedural  representations  in  their  current  form 
is  that  the  control  information  sometimes  gets  in  the  way.  For  ex- 
ample, if  we  want  to  prove  that  both  statements  A  and  B  are  true, 
PLANNER  allows  us  to  express  this  as  a  goal:  (THAND  A  B).  But 
this  expression  really  means,  "Prove  A  and  then  prove  B" — there  is  no 
way  to  state  the  goal  without  including  some  control  information. 

Another  feature  that  is  sacrificed  in  the  procedural  approach  is  the 
modularity  of  knowledge  in  the  database  that  was  so  advantageous  in 
logic  and  other  declarative  schemes.  In  a  procedural  representation,  the 
interaction  between  various  facts  is  unavoidable  because  of  the  heuristic 
information  itself.  Therefore,  a  change  in  or  addition  to  the  knowledge 
base  might  have  more  far-reaching  effects  than  a  similar  change  in  a 
base  of  logic  assertions.  In  essence,  this  is  the  price  that  is  paid  for  the 
greater  degree  of  control  permitted  using  procedures. 

Two  specific  criticisms  have  been  directed  at  PLANNER'S  method  of 
specifying  control.  First,  it  is  too  local:  PLANNER  is  unable  to 
consider  the  overall  shape  of  the  problem's  solution  and  therefore  can 
make   only   local    problem-solving   decisions.     Second,    PLANNER   cannot 


C2  Procedural  Representations  179 

reason  about  its  control  information;  ideally,  it  should  be  able  to  make 
decisions  on  the  basis  of  facts  about  control,  as  it  can  now  make  de- 
cisions on  the  basis  of  facts  about  the  world. 

Conclusions 

The  consensus  among  AI  researchers  is  that  there  should  be  ways  to 
embed  control  in  a  deductive  system,  but  that  the  methods  tried  thus 
far  have  many  flaws  in  them  (see,  e.g.,  Moore,  1975,  Chap.  5).  Current 
research,  especially  on  frame  systems  (Article  m.C7),  emphasizes  a 
somewhat  different  approach  to  the  problem  of  organizing  knowledge 
with  special  regard  to  its  expected  use,  called  procedural  attachment. 

References 

The  most  readable  discussion  of  the  issues  involved  in  procedural 
knowledge  representation  is  Winograd  (1975).  Hayes  (1977a)  presents 
these  issues  from  the  perspective  of  a  declarativist.  The  original  state- 
ment of  what  procedural  representation  was  all  about  is  Hewitt  (1972) 
and,  more  readably,  Winograd  (1972).  Winograd  (in  press)  offers  a 
recent  study  of  knowledge  representation  in  which  procedural  ideas  are 
fully  discussed. 


C3.     Semantic  Networks 

Many  of  the  recent  systems  developed  in  AI  research  use  a  class  of 
knowledge  representation  formalisms  that  are  called  semantic  networks. 
These  representation  formalisms  are  grouped  together  because  they  share 
a  common  notation,  consisting  of  nodes  (drawn  as  dots,  circles,  or  boxes 
in  illustrations)  and  arcs  (or  links;  drawn  as  arrows)  connecting  the 
nodes.  Both  the  nodes  and  the  arcs  can  have  labels.  Nodes  usually 
represent  objects,  concepts,  or  situations  in  the  domain,  and  the  arcs 
represent  the  relations  between  them. 

The  superficial  similarity  of  this  notation  is  all  that  some  semantic 
network  systems  have  in  common.  For  example,  researchers  in 
psychology,  such  as  Quillian  (1968),  Norman  and  Rumelhart  (1975),  and 
Anderson  and  Bower  (1973),  have  developed  semantic  network  systems 
primarily  as  psychological  models  of  human  memory.  Researchers  in 
computer  science  have  been  more  concerned  with  developing  functional 
representations  for  the  variety  of  types  of  knowledge  needed  in  their 
systems.  Because  of  these  diverse  goals,  there  is  no  simple  set  of 
unifying  principles  to  apply  across  all  semantic  network  systems.  This 
article,  however,  will  attempt  to  characterize  some  of  the  most  common 
network  schemes.  We  will  present  a  description  of  how  simple  concepts 
are  represented  in  semantic  networks  and  then  review  some  AI  systems 
that  use  semantic  networks.  Finally,  some  more  difficult  problems  in 
semantic  net  representation  will  be  mentioned  and  some  of  the  proposed 
solutions  reviewed. 

A  Basic  Description  of  the  Representation  Scheme 

Suppose  we  wish  to  represent  a  simple  fact  like  All  robins  are  birds 
in  a  semantic  network.  We  might  do  this  by  creating  two  nodes  to 
designate  robins  and  birds  with  a  link  connecting  them,  as  follows: 


1  ' sa  i 

ROBIN       ►         BIRD 


C3 


Semantic  Networks 


181 


If  Clyde  were  a  particular  individual  who  we  wished  to  assert  is  a 
robin,  we  could  add  a  node  for  Clyde  to  the  network  as  follows: 


CLYDE 

i  sa 

ROBIN 

i  sa 

BIRD 

Notice  that  in  this  example  we  have  not  only  represented  the  two 
facts  we  initially  intended  to  represent,  but  we  have  also  made  it  very 
easy  to  deduce  a  third  fact,  namely,  that  Clyde  is  a  bird,  simply  by 
following  the  ISA  links:  Clyde  is  a  robin.  Robins  are  birds.  So,  Clyde 
is  a  bird.  The  ease  with  which  it  is  possible  to  make  deductions  about 
inheritance  hierarchies  such  as  this  is  one  reason  for  the  popularity  of 
semantic  networks  as  a  knowledge  representation.  In  a  domain  where 
much  of  the  reasoning  is  based  on  a  very  complicated  taxonomy,  a 
semantic  network  is  a  natural  representation  scheme  (see,  e.g.,  the 
PROSPECTOR  system,  Article  F2). 

Besides  their  taxonomic  classification,  one  usually  needs  to  represent 
knowledge  about  the  properties  of  objects.  For  example,  one  might 
wish  to  express  the  fact  Birds  have  wings  in  the  network.  We  could  do 
this  as  follows: 


sa 


sa 


CLYDE 


ROBIN 


BIRD 


has— part 


WINGS 


182 


Knowledge  Representation 


m 


As  in  the  previous  example,  our  choice  of  representation  has  made  it 
very  easy  to  write  a  procedure  to  make  the  deductions  that  robins  have 
wings  and  that  Clyde  has  wings.  All  that  is  necessary  is  to  trace  up 
the  ISA-hierarchy,  assuming  any  facts  asserted  about  higher  nodes  on 
the  hierarchy  can  be  considered  assertions  about  the  lower  ones  also, 
without  having  to  represent  these  assertions  explicitly  in  the  net.  In  AI 
terminology,  this  kind  of  reasoning  is  called  property  inheritance,  and 
the  ISA  link  is  often  referred  to  as  a  property  inheritance  link. 

Suppose  we  wish  to  represent  the  fact  Clyde  owns  a  nest.  Our  first 
impulse  may  be  to  encode  this  fact  using  an  ownership  link  to  a  node 
representing  Clyde's  nest: 


CLYDE 

i  sa 

ROBIN 

isa 

BIRD 

owns 


JEST— 1 


i  sa 


I  EST 


In  the  above  example,  NEST-1  is  the  nest  that  Clyde  owns.  It  is  an 
instance  of  NEST;  that  is,  the  NEST  node  represents  a  general  class  of 
objects  of  which  the  NEST-1  node  represents  an  example.  The  above 
representation  may  be  adequate  for  some  purposes,  but  it  has  short- 
comings. Suppose  one  wanted  to  encode  the  additional  information  that 
Clyde  owned  NEST-1  from  spring  until  fall.  This  is  impossible  to  do  in 
the  current  network  because  the  ownership  relation  is  encoded  as  a  link, 
and  links,  by  their  nature,  can  encode  only  binary  relations.  What  is 
needed  is  the  semantic- net  equivalent  of  a  four-place  predicate  in  logic, 
which  would  note  the  start-time  and  end-time  of  the  ownership  relation, 
as  well  as  the  owner  and  the  object  owned. 

A  solution  to  this  problem  was  proposed  by  Simmons  and  Slocum 
(1972)  and  later  adopted  in  many  semantic  net  systems:  to  allow  nodes 
to  represent  situations  and  actions,  as  well  as  objects  and  sets  of 
objects.  Each  situation  node  can  have  a  set  of  outgoing  arcs,  called  a 
case  frame,  which  specifies  the  various  arguments  to  the  situation 
predicate.  For  example,  using  a  situation  node  with  case  arcs,  the 
network  representation  of  the  fact  Clyde  owned  a  nest  from  spring  until 
fall  becomes 


C3 


Semantic  Networks 


183 


CLYDE 

i  sa 

ROBIN 

i  sa 

BIRD 

owner 


OWM-1 

ownee 

NEST-1 

i  sa 

NEST 

sa 


sta rt—t  i me 

i  sa 

Spri  ng 

TINE 

end— ti me 


Fa 


sa 


OWNERSHIP 


sa 


SITUATION 


The  node  NEST-1  is  created  to  represent  Clyde's  nest,  which,  of  course, 
ISA  nest,  as  shown.  The  OWN-1  node  represents  a  particular  instance 
of  OWNERSHIP,  namely,  Clyde  owning  his  nest.  And  like  all  nodes 
that  are  instances  of  OWNERSHIP,  OWN-1  inherits  case  arcs  to 
OWNER,  OWNEE,  START-TIME,  and  END-TIME  nodes.  Many  semantic 
network  systems  use  sets  of  case  arcs  motivated  by  linguistic  con- 
siderations, for  example,  general  case  structures  for  agent  and  object  (see 
Article  IV.  C4).  One  important  use  of  the  case- frame  structure  for  nodes 
is  the  possibility  of  allowing  instance  nodes,  like  OWN-1,  to  inherit 
expectations  about,  and  even  default  values  for,  certain  of  their  attri- 
butes (see  Article  m.C7  for  a  discussion  of  inheritance  in  frame  systems). 
One  more  thing  to  note  about  the  representation  scheme  described 
above  is  that  it  lends  itself  to  the  expression  of  states  and  actions  in 
terms  of  a  small  number  of  primitive  concepts.  For  example,  FLYING 
might  be  considered  a  type  of  MOTION  and  could  be  represented  by  a 
FLYING  node  having  an  ISA  arc  to  the  MOTION  node  and  case  arcs 
that  describe  how  flying  is  a  specialization  of  moving.  The  use  of  a 
small  number  of  semantic  primitives  as  the  basis  of  a  system's  knowl- 
edge representation  has  both  advantages  and  disadvantages,  and  it  is 
discussed  fully  in  Article  m.C6. 


184 


Knowledge  Representation 


m 


There  are  still  some  serious  problems  with  our  semantic  net 
representation  as  it  has  been  developed  so  far.  Suppose  one  wished  to 
make  the  assertion  The  robin  is  an  endangered  species.  The  simplest 
thing  to  do  would  be  to  create  the  following  representation  for  this  fact 
in  our  net  structure: 


BIRD 

1 1  a  o — u  a  i  kj 

WINGS 

stud  i  ed— by 

I  ^a 

i  sa 

CLYDE 

ROBIN 

' 

i  sa 

f 

» 

ENDANGERED 

cpcrjpc; 

NATURALISTS 

This  structure  indicates  that  ROBINS  are  an  ENDANGERED  SPECIES, 
and  that  ENDANGERED  SPECIES  are  studied  by  NATURALISTS.  The 
problem  that  is  illustrated  in  this  simple  example  involves  inheritance. 
Since  the  reasoning  procedures,  as  they  have  been  defined,  treat  the  ISA 
link  as  a  property  inheritance  link,  the  instance  node  CLYDE  inherits  all 
the  properties  of  ENDANGERED  SPECIES,  just  as  it  inherits  the 
property  of  having  wings  from  the  BIRD  node.  In  this  way,  one  might 
conclude  from  the  fact  that  Naturalists  study  endangered  species  that 
Naturalists  study  Clyde,  which  may  or  may  not  be  true. 

The  source  of  the  problem  is  that  that  there  is  as  yet  no  distinction 
in  our  network  formalism  between  an  individual  and  a  class  of 
individuals.  Furthermore,  some  things  said  about  a  class  are  meant  to 
be  true  of  all  members  of  a  class,  like  Robins  are  birds,  while  some 
refer  to  the  class  itself,  for  example,  Robins  are  an  endangered  species. 
Recent  semantic  net  research  has  explored  various  ways  of  making  the 
semantics  of  network  structures  more  precise  and  of  specifying  different 
property  inheritance  strategies  (Woods,  1975b;  Hendrix,  1976;  Brachman, 
1979;  Stefik,  1980). 


C3  Semantic  Networks  185 

A  Brief  History  of  Semantic-network-based  Systems 

The  node-and-link  formalism  of  semantic  networks  has  found  use  in 
many  AI  systems  in  different  application  domains.  It  is  impossible  to 
mention  every  one  of  these  systems  here,  but  we  will  try  to  note  the 
highlights  and  point  out  where  in  the  AI  literature  these  and  related 
systems  are  described  more  fully. 

Ross  Quillian  (1968)  designed  two  early  semantic-network-based  sys- 
tems that  were  intended  primarily  as  psychological  models  of  associative 
memory.  Quillian  was  the  first  to  make  use  of  the  node-and-link 
formalism,  but  his  networks  were  simpler  than  those  in  the  bird's  nest 
example  above:  They  consisted  of  a  number  of  groups  of  nodes,  called 
planes.  Each  plane  encoded  knowledge  about  a  particular  concept 
through  interconnections  of  nodes  representing  other  concepts  in  the 
system.  These  interconnecting  links  allowed  a  few  simple  ways  of 
combining  concepts:  conjunction,  disjunction,  and  the  modification  of 
one  concept  by  another. 

Quillian  wrote  procedures  that  manipulated  the  network  to  make 
inferences  about  a  pair  of  concepts  by  finding  connections  between  the 
nodes  that  represented  them.  The  method,  called  spreading  activation, 
started  from  the  two  nodes  and  "activated"  all  the  nodes  connected  to 
each  of  them.  Then  all  of  the  nodes  connected  to  each  of  those  were 
in  turn  activated,  forming  an  expanding  sphere  of  activation  around 
each  of  the  original  concepts.  When  some  concept  was  activated  simul- 
taneously from  two  directions,  a  connection  had  been  found.  The 
program  then  tried  to  describe  the  connecting  route  through  the  net  in 
a  stylized  version  of  English  (see  Article  IV.E  for  an  example). 

Quillian' s  second  system,  called  the  Teachable  Language  Com- 
prehender  (1969),  attempted  to  solve  some  of  the  problems  with  the 
original  system,  like  the  lack  of  directedness  in  the  net  search,  and  was 
a  bit  more  complex.  Other  semantic-network-based  computer  programs 
that  were  designed  as  psychological  models  of  memory,  including  the 
HAM  program  (Anderson  and  Bower,  1973)  and  the  Active  Structural 
Network  system  (Norman  and  Rumelhart,  1975),  are  described  fully  in 
Chapter  XI,  in  Volume  m. 

Bertram  Raphael's  (1968)  early  AI  system,  SIR,  mentioned  earlier  in 
Article  m.C2,  was  one  of  the  first  programs  to  use  semantic  network 
techniques.  SIR  could  answer  questions  requiring  a  variety  of  simple 
reasoning  tasks,  such  as  A  finger  is  part  of  a  hand;  a  hand  is  part  of  an 
arm;  therefore  a  finger  is  part  of  an  arm.  Although  he  did  not  claim 
to  use  a  node-and-link  formalism,  Raphael's  use  of  binary  predicates, 
such  as  PART-OF  (FINGER,  HAND),  and  reasoning  procedures  was  much 


186  Knowledge  Representation  IE 

like  the  early  semantic  net  systems  and  faced  many  of  the  same 
problems  that  these  systems  faced.  (SIR  is  described  in  Article  IV.Fi  on 
early  natural  language  understanding  systems.) 

In  the  early  1970s,  Robert  Simmons  designed  a  semantic  network 
representation  for  use  in  his  research  on  natural  language  understanding. 
As  mentioned  in  the  previous  section,  Simmons 's  system  used  a  lin- 
guistically motivated  case  frame  approach  for  choosing  arc  types.  The 
system  could  parse  sentences  (with  an  ATN  grammar),  translate  their 
meaning  into  network  structures,  and  finally  generate  answers  to  ques- 
tions using  the  semantic  network  (Simmons  and  Slocum,  1972;  Simmons, 
1973). 

Around  the  same  time,  Jaime  Carbonell  used  a  semantic  network  as 
the  basis  of  his  tutoring  program,  SCHOLAR,  which  answered  questions 
about  the  geographical  information  stored  in  the  net.  In  a  mixed  ini- 
tiative dialogue  on  the  subject  of  South  American  geography,  SCHOLAR 
answered  questions  posed  by  the  student  and  also  generated  appropriate 
questions  on  its  own  initiative,  giving  timely  hints  when  necessary 
(Carbonell,  1970;  Carbonell  and  Collins,  1974;  SCHOLAR  is  described 
fully  in  Article  DC.Ci,  in  Vol.  n). 

Two  of  the  AI  speech  understanding  systems,  the  systems  developed 
at  Bolt,  Beranek  and  Newman  (Woods  et  al.,  1976)  and  SRI  Inter- 
national (Walker,  1976),  used  semantic  networks  to  represent  knowledge 
about  their  subject  domains  (see  Chap.  v).  In  connection  with  the  SRI 
speech  understanding  research,  Hendrix  (1976)  developed  the  idea  of 
network  partitioning,  which  provides  a  mechanism  for  dealing  with  a 
variety  of  difficult  representation  problems  including  representing  logical 
connectives,  quantification,  and  hypothetical  worlds. 

Recent  network  research  involves  structuring  of  the  nodes  and  links 
in  the  network  and  is  related  to  the  work  on  frame  systems  described 
in  Article  m.C7.  For  example,  Myopolous  and  his  associates  (1975) 
designed  a  system  for  grouping  related  parts  of  a  semantic  network  into 
units  called  scenarios.  The  network  was  used  by  the  TORUS  system,  a 
program  to  provide  natural-language  access  to  a  database  management 
system.  Hayes  (1977b)  also  designed  a  system  that  incorporates  higher 
level  structures  similar  to  scenarios,  which  he  calls  depictions. 

Reasoning  with  Semantic  Networks 

In  semantic  network  representations,  there  is  no  formal  semantics, 
no  agreed-upon  notion  of  what  a  given  representational  structure  means, 
as  there  is  in  logic,  for  instance.  Meaning  is  assigned  to  a  network 
structure    only   by    the    nature   of   the   procedures    that    manipulate   the 


C3 


Semantic  Networks 


187 


network.     A  wide  variety  of  network-based  systems  have  been  designed 
that  use  totally  different  procedures  for  making  inferences. 

One  example  of  a  network  reasoning  procedure  was  Quillian's 
spreading  activation  model  of  human  memory,  described  above.  However, 
the  reasoning  mechanism  used  by  most  semantic  network  systems  is 
based  on  matching  network  structures:  A  network  fragment  is  con- 
structed, representing  a  sought-for  object  or  a  query,  and  then  matched 
against  the  network  database  to  see  if  such  an  object  exists.  Variable 
nodes  in  the  fragment  are  bound  in  the  matching  process  to  the  values 
they  must  have  to  make  the  match  perfect.  For  example,  suppose  we 
use  the  following  network  as  a  database 


CLYDE 


sa 


ROBIM 


sa 


owner 


0WM1 


ownee 


NEST1 


isa 


BIRD 


NEST 


sa 


OWNERSHIP 


isa 


SITUATION 


and  suppose  we  wish  to  answer  the  question  What  does  Clyde  own?    We 
might  construct  the  fragment 


CLYDE 


owner 


OWN-? 


ownee 


sa 


OWNERSHIP 


188 


Knowledge  Representation 


m 


which  represents  an  instance  of  OWNERSHIP  in  which  Clyde  is  the 
owner.  This  fragment  is  then  matched  against  the  network  database 
looking  for  an  OWN  node  that  has  an  OWNER  link  to  CLYDE.  When 
it  is  found,  the  node  that  the  OWNEE  link  points  to  is  bound  in  the 
partial  match  and  is  the  answer  to  the  question.  Had  no  match  been 
found,  the  answer  would  have  been,  of  course,  Clyde  doesn't  own  any- 
thing. 

The  matcher  can  make  inferences  during  the  matching  process  to 
create  network  structure  that  is  not  explicitly  present  in  the  network. 
For  example,  suppose  we  wish  to  answer  the  question  Is  there  a  bird 
who  owns  a  nest?  We  could  translate  that  question  into  the  following 
network  fragment: 


BIRD-? 


owner 


0WM-? 


sa 


OWNERSHIP 


sa 


ownee 


BIRD 


NEST-? 


sa 


JEST 


Here,  the  BIRD-?,  NEST-?,  and  OWN-?  nodes  represent  the  yet  to  be 
determined  bird-owning-nest  relation.  Notice  that  the  query  network 
fragment  does  not  match  the  knowledge  database  exactly.  The  de- 
duction procedure  would  have  to  construct  an  ISA  link  from  CLYDE  to 
BIRD  to  make  the  match  possible.  The  matcher  would  bind  BIRD-?  to 
the  node  CLYDE,  OWN-?  to  OWN-1,  and  NEST-?  to  NEST-1,  and  the 
answer  to  the  question  would  be  Yes,  Clyde,  since  the  CLYDE  node  was 
bound  to  BIRD-?  in  order  to  match  the  query  fragment  to  the  database. 
A  good  example  of  a  network  deduction  system  constructed  around 
this  matching  paradigm  is  the  SNIFFER  system  (Fikes  and  Hendrix, 
1977).  SNIFFER  has  the  general  power  of  a  theorem  prover  for  making 
deductions  from  the  network  database.  It  is  also  capable  of  taking 
advantage  of  heuristic  knowledge  embedded  in  procedures  called  selector 
functions,  which  provide  advice  about  which  network  elements  should  be 
matched  first  and  about  how  to  match  the  selected  element.  These 
heuristics  allow  the  system  to  proceed  in  a  direct  and  sensible  way  when 


C3  Semantic  Networks  189 

the  amount  of  information  in  the  database  becomes  very  large  and  blind 
retrieval  strategies,  like  spreading  activation  or  systematic  matching,  are 
useless  because  they  take  too  long  to  retrieve  an  answer. 

Status  of  Network  Representations 

Semantic  networks  are  a  very  popular  representation  scheme  in  AI. 
Node-and-link  structure  captures  something  essential  about  symbols  and 
pointers  in  symbolic  computation  and  about  association  in  the  psy- 
chology of  memory.  Most  current  work  on  the  representation  of 
knowledge  involves  elaboration  of  the  semantic  net  idea,  in  particular, 
work  on  aggregate  network  structures  called  frames.  But  like  most  of 
the  efforts  to  deal  with  knowledge  in  AI,  the  simple  idea  of  having 
nodes  that  stand  for  things  in  the  world  and  links  that  represent  the 
relations  between  things  can't  be  pushed  too  far.  Besides  computational 
problems  that  arise  when  network  databases  become  large  enough  to 
represent  nontrivial  amounts  of  knowledge,  there  are  many,  more  subtle 
problems  involving  the  semantics  of  the  network  structures.  What  does 
a  node  really  mean?  Is  there  a  unique  way  to  represent  an  idea?  How 
is  the  passage  of  time  to  be  represented?  How  does  one  represent 
things  that  are  not  facts  about  the  world  but  rather  ideas  or  beliefs? 
What  are  the  rules  about  inheritance  of  properties  in  networks?  Cur- 
rent research  on  network-representation  schemes  attempts  to  deal  with 
these  and  similar  concerns. 

References 

Introductory  discussions  of  semantic  networks  can  be  found  in 
Simmons  (1973),  Anderson  and  Bower  (1973),  Norman  and  Rumelhart 
(1975),  and  Winograd  (in  press).  Current  semantic  network  research  is 
surveyed  in  the  articles  in  Findler  (1979). 


C4.     Production  Systems 

Production  systems  were  first  proposed  by  Post  (1943)  but  have 
since  undergone  such  theoretical  and  application-oriented  development  in 
AI  that  the  current  systems  have  little  in  common  with  Post's  for- 
mulation. In  fact,  just  as  the  term  semantic  net  refers  to  several 
different  knowledge-representation  schemes  based  on  the  node-and-link 
formalism,  so  the  term  production  system  is  used  to  describe  several 
different  systems  based  on  one  very  general,  underlying  idea — the  notion 
of  condition-action  pairs,  called  production  rules,  or  just  productions.  In 
this  article  we  illustrate  the  basics  of  a  production  system  (PS)  with  an 
elementary  example  and  discuss  some  of  the  design  decisions  that  give 
rise  to  the  variety  of  production  system  architectures.  We  also  describe 
some  of  the  important  AI  systems  that  have  been  built  with  PS 
architectures  and  discuss  current  issues  in  PS  design. 

A  Sample  Production  System 

A  production  system  consists  of  three  parts:  (a)  a  rule  base  com- 
posed of  a  set  of  production  rules;  (b)  a  special,  buffer-like  data  struc- 
ture, which  we  shall  call  the  context;  and  (c)  an  interpreter,  which 
controls  the  system's  activity.  After  briefly  describing  each  of  these 
components,  we'll  go  step  by  step  through  an  example  to  show  how  a 
production  system  works. 

A  production  rule  is  a  statement  cast  in  the  form  "If  this  condition 
holds,  then  this  action  is  appropriate."     For  example,  the  rule 

Always  punt  on  fourth  down  with  long  yardage  required 

might  be  encoded  as  the  production  rule 

IF  it  is  fourth  down  AND  long  yardage  is  required  THEN  punt. 

The  IF  part  of  the  productions,  called  the  condition  part  or  left-hand 
side,  states  the  conditions  that  must  be  present  for  the  production  to  be 
applicable,  and  the  THEN  part,  called  the  action  part  or  right-hand  side, 
is  the  appropriate  action  to  take.  During  the  execution  of  the  pro- 
duction system,  a  production  whose  condition  part  is  satisfied  can  fire, 
that  is,  can  have  its  action  part  executed  by  the  interpreter.  Although 
there  are  only  a  few  productions  in  the  rule  base  of  our  example  below, 
typical  AI  systems  nowadays  contain  hundreds  of  productions  in  their 
rule  bases. 

The    context,    which    is    sometimes    called    the    data    or    short-term 


C4  Production  Systems  191 

memory  buffer,  is  the  focus  of  attention  of  the  production  rules.  The 
left-hand  side  of  each  production  in  the  rule  base  represents  a  condition 
that  must  be  present  in  the  context  data  structure  before  the  production 
can  fire.  For  example,  the  sample  production  above  requires  that  the 
facts  it's  fourth  down  and  long  yardage  required  be  in  the  context.  The 
actions  of  the  production  rules  can  change  the  context,  so  that  other 
rules  will  have  their  condition  parts  satisfied.  The  context  data  struc- 
ture may  be  a  simple  list,  a  very  large  array,  or,  more  typically,  a 
medium-sized  buffer  with  some  internal  structure  of  its  own. 

Finally  there  is  the  interpreter,  which,  like  the  interpreters  in  all 
computer  systems,  is  a  program  whose  job  is  to  decide  what  to  do  next. 
In  a  production  system,  the  interpreter  has  the  special  task  of  deciding 
which  production  to  fire  next. 

Consider  a  production  system  that  might  be  used  to  identify  food 
items,  given  a  few  hints,  by  a  process  similar  to  that  used  in  the  game 
of  Twenty  Questions.  The  context  data  structure  for  this  system  is  a 
simple  list  of  symbols,  called  a  context  list  (CL).  "On-CL  X"  means 
that  the  symbol  X  is  currently  in  the  context.  The  system  has  the 
following  rule  base  and  interpreter. 

PRODUCTIONS: 

PI.     IF  On-CL  green  THEN  Put-On-CL  produce 

P2.     IF  On-CL  packed  in  small  container  THEN  Put-On-CL  delicacy 

P3.     IF    On-CL    refrigerated    OR    On-CL    produce    THEN    Put-On-CL 
perishable 

P4.     IF  On-CL  weighs  15  lbs  AND  On-CL  inexpensive  AND  NOT  On- 
CL  perishable  THEN  Put-On-CL  staple 

P5.     IF   On-CL  perishable  AND  On-CL   weighs  15  lbs  THEN  Put-On- 
CL  turkey 

P6.     IF  On-CL   weighs  15  lbs  AND  On-CL  produce  THEN  Put-On-CL 

watermelon 

INTERPRETER: 

1.  Find  all  productions  whose  condition  parts  are  TRUE  and  make 
them  applicable. 

2.  If  more  than  one  production  is  applicable,  then  deactivate  any 
production  whose  action  adds  a  duplicate  symbol  to  the  CL. 

3.  Execute  the  action  of  the  lowest  numbered  (or  only)  applicable 
production.     If  no  productions  are  applicable,  then  quit. 

4.  Reset  the  applicability  of  all  productions  and  return  to  SI. 


192  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

The  condition  part  of  each  of  the  productions  corresponds  to  a 
question  one  might  ask  in  the  Twenty  Questions  game:  Is  the  item 
green?  does  it  come  in  a  small  container?  and  so  on.  The  action  parts 
of  the  productions  represent  additions  to  our  knowledge  about  the  un- 
known item. 

Production  systems  operate  in  cycles.  In  each  cycle,  the  productions 
are  examined  in  a  manner  specified  by  the  interpreter  to  see  which  are 
appropriate  and  could  fire.  Then,  if  more  than  one  is  found  appro- 
priate, a  single  production  is  selected  from  among  them.  Finally,  the 
production  is  fired.  These  three  phases  of  each  cycle  are  called  match- 
ing, conflict  resolution,  and  action. 

Suppose  the  original  knowledge  about  the  mystery  food  item  is  that 
it  is  green  and  weighs  15  pounds;  in  other  words,  the  value  of  the  con- 
text list  before  the  beginning  of  the  first  cycle  is: 

CL  =  (green,  weighs  15  lbs)  . 

The  cycle  starts  with  step  1  of  the  interpreter  algorithm:  finding  all 
the  applicable  productions  by  testing  their  condition  parts.  Since  only 
PI  is  applicable,  step  2  is  not  necessary,  and  step  3  causes  the  action 
part  of  PI  to  be  executed.  This  adds  the  symbol  produce  to  the  con- 
text list,  representing  a  new  fact  about  the  unknown  food  item: 

CL  =  (produce,  green,  weighs  15  lbs)  . 

Step  4  ends  the  first  cycle  and  brings  us  back  to  step  1 — finding  all 
the  applicable  productions.  In  the  second  cycle,  productions  PI,  P3,  and 
P6  are  all  applicable.  So  in  step  2  we  must  check  if  any  of  these  three 
adds  a  duplicate  symbol  to  the  context  list.  PI  adds  produce,  which  is 
a  duplication,  so  it  is  eliminated.  Then  in  step  3  we  select  P3  to  be 
executed  (because  it  has  a  lower  number  than  P6),  resulting  in: 

CL  =  (perishable,  produce,  green,  weighs  15  lbs)  . 

In  the  third  cycle,  we  find  that  productions  PI,  P3,  P5,  and  P6  are 
applicable.  Checking,  in  step  2,  for  redundant  entries,  we  eliminate  PI 
and  P3  from  consideration.  In  step  3,  we  decide  to  execute  P5,  once 
again  because  it  comes  before  P6.    This  results  in  the  context  list 

CL  =  (turkey,  perishable,  produce,  green,  weighs  15  lbs)  . 

Clearly  this  last  step  was  a  mistake — we  wouldn't  want  to  ascribe  to 
something  that  we  know  is  green  produce  the  attribute  turkey. 

In  its  next  two  cycles  of  execution,  our  sample  production  system 
will  finish.  In  cycle  4,  the  symbol  watermelon  is  added  to  the  context 
list,  and  in  the  last  cycle,  finding  no  nonredundant  productions  to  fire, 
the  interpreter  finally  quits,  leaving  the  context  list 


C4  Production  Systems  193 

CL  =  (watermelon,  turkey,  perishable,  produce,  green,  weighs  15  lbs)  . 

If  we  define  the  system's  answer  to  be  the  first  symbol  on  the  context 
list,  we  can  ignore  the  suspicious  attribute  turkey.  The  reader  can 
probably  think  of  more  satisfying  ways  to  "fix  up"  the  rule  base,  or  the 
interpreter,  such  as  changing  the  productions  (particularly  adding  con- 
ditions to  the  condition  part  of  P5),  switching  the  order  of  the  produc- 
tions in  the  rule  base  around,  adding  new  productions,  and  so  on.  This 
feeling  of  manageability  of  the  rule  base  is  perhaps  one  of  the  strongest 
attractions  of  production  systems  as  a  knowledge-representation  scheme. 

Advantages  and  Disadvantages  of  Production  Systems 

Production  systems  have  most  often  been  used  in  AI  programs  to 
represent  a  body  of  knowledge  about  how  people  do  a  specific,  real- 
world  task,  like  speech  understanding,  medical  diagnosis,  or  mineral  ex- 
ploration. In  psychology,  production  systems  have  also  been  a  popular 
tool  for  modeling  human  behavior,  perhaps  because  of  the  stimulus- 
response  character  of  production  rules  (Anderson  and  Bower,  1973; 
Newell,  1973b).  These  psychological  models  are  described  in  Chapter  xi, 
in  Volume  m.  The  AI  systems  based  on  productions  have  been  quite 
diverse  in  most  respects,  but  there  are  some  features  of  the  production- 
system  formalism,  both  good  and  bad,  that  can  be  generalized. 

Modularity.  One  obvious  quality  of  production  systems  is  that  the 
individual  productions  in  the  rule  base  can  be  added,  deleted,  or 
changed  independently.  They  behave  much  like  independent  pieces  of 
knowledge.  Changing  one  rule,  although  it  may  change  the  performance 
of  the  system,  can  be  accomplished  without  having  to  worry  about 
direct  effects  on  the  other  rules,  since  rules  communicate  only  by  means 
of  the  context  data  structure  (looking  to  see  if  their  conditions  are 
satisfied  in  the  context  and  then  modifying  the  context);  they  don't  call 
each  other  directly.  This  relative  modularity  of  the  rules  is  important  in 
building  the  large  rule  bases  of  current  AI  systems — knowing  what  a 
proposed  rule  will  mean,  in  whatever  situation  it  is  used,  makes  the 
creation  of  the  database  much  easier.  There  are  indications,  however, 
that  modularity  is  harder  to  maintain  as  one  moves  to  larger  systems 
(Rychener,  1976),  and,  even  if  modularity  can  be  preserved,  strongly 
constraining  interaction  between  rules  leads  to  inefficiencies  that  might 
become  important  problems  in  large  systems  (see  below). 

Uniformity.  Another  general  attribute  of  production  systems  is  the 
uniform  structure  imposed  on  the  knowledge  in  the  rule  base.     Since  all 


194  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

information  must  be  encoded  within  the  rigid  structure  of  production 
rules,  it  can  often  be  more  easily  understood,  by  another  person,  or  by 
another  part  of  the  system  itself,  than  would  be  possible  in  the  rel- 
atively free  form  of  semantic  net  or  procedural  representation  schemes, 
for  example.  Production  systems  that  examine  and  automatically  mod- 
ify their  own  rules  are  exemplified  by  those  of  Waterman,  Davis,  and 
Anderson  (see  below). 

Naturalness.  A  further  advantage  of  the  production- system  for- 
malism is  the  ease  with  which  one  can  express  certain  important  kinds 
of  knowledge.  In  particular,  statements  about  what  to  do  in  prede- 
termined situations  are  naturally  encoded  into  production  rules.  Fur- 
thermore, it  is  these  kinds  of  statements  that  are  most  frequently  used 
by  human  experts  to  explain  how  they  do  their  jobs. 

Inefficiency.  There  are,  however,  significant  disadvantages  inherent 
in  the  production- system  formalism.  One  of  these  is  inefficiency  of  pro- 
gram execution.  The  strong  modularity  and  uniformity  of  the  produc- 
tions result  in  high  overhead  in  their  use  in  problem  solving.  For 
example,  since  production  systems  perform  every  action  by  means  of  the 
match- action  cycle  and  convey  all  information  by  means  of  the  context 
data  structure,  it  is  difficult  to  make  them  efficiently  responsive  to 
predetermined  sequences  of  situations  or  to  take  larger  steps  in  their 
reasoning  when  the  situation  demands  it  (see  Barstow,  1979).  Lenat 
and  McDermott  (1977)  propose  solutions  to  this  type  of  problem,  sac- 
rificing some  of  the  advantages  of  production  systems. 

Opacity.  A  second  disadvantage  of  the  production- system  formalism 
is  that  it  is  hard  to  follow  the  flow  of  control  in  problem  solving — 
algorithms  are  less  apparent  than  they  would  be  if  they  were  expressed 
in  a  programming  language.  In  other  words,  although  situation- action 
knowledge  can  be  expressed  naturally  in  production  systems,  algorithmic 
knowledge  is  not  expressed  naturally.  Two  factors  that  contribute  to 
this  problem  are  the  isolation  of  productions  (they  don't  call  each  other) 
and  the  uniform  size  of  productions  (there  is  nothing  like  a  subroutine 
hierarchy  in  which  one  production  can  be  composed  of  several  sub- 
productions).  Function  calls  and  subroutines,  common  features  of  all 
programming  languages,  would  help  to  make  the  flow  of  control  easier  to 
follow. 

Appropriate  Domains  for  Production  Systems 

The  features  of  production  systems  described  in  the  previous  section 
can  be  seen  as  having  both  good  and  bad  consequences.  A  more  fruit- 
ful way  to  evaluate  the  utility  of  production  systems  is  to  characterize 


C4  Production  Systems  195 

the  domains  for  which  production  rules  might  be  a  useful  knowledge- 
representation  scheme.     Davis  and  King  (1977)  proposed  as  appropriate — 

1.  domains  in  which  the  knowledge  is  diffuse,  consisting  of  many 
facts  (e.g.,  clinical  medicine),  as  opposed  to  domains  in  which 
there  is  a  concise,  unified  theory  (physics); 

2.  domains  in  which  processes  can  be  represented  as  a  set  of 
independent  actions  (a  medical  patient-monitoring  system),  as 
opposed  to  domains  with  dependent  subprocesses  (a  payroll  pro- 
gram); 

3.  domains  in  which  knowledge  can  be  easily  separated  from  the 
manner  in  which  it  is  to  be  used  (a  classificatory  taxonomy, 
like  those  used  in  biology),  as  opposed  to  cases  in  which  rep- 
resentation and  control  are  merged  (a  recipe). 

Rychener  (1976)  rephrased  this  characterization  of  appropriate  domains 
in  AI  terms:  If  we  can  view  the  task  at  hand  as  a  sequence  of  tran- 
sitions from  one  state  to  another  in  a  problem  space  (see  Article  n.A), 
we  can  model  this  behavior  with  production  systems,  since  each  tran- 
sition can  be  effectively  represented  by  one  or  more  production  firings. 
The  following  examples  of  important  AI  production  systems  may  help 
demonstrate  their  utility. 

Waterman  (1970)  implemented  an  adaptive  production  system  to  play 
the  game  of  draw  poker  (see  Article  XV.D3,  in  Vol.  m).  The  program 
was  adaptive  in  that  it  automatically  changed  the  productions  in  its  rule 
base — it  started  with  a  set  of  fairly  simple  heuristics  for  playing  poker 
(when  to  raise,  when  to  bluff,  etc.)  and  extended  and  improved  these 
rules  as  it  gained  experience  in  actually  playing  the  game.  The  fact 
that  knowledge  in  production  systems  is  represented  in  a  constrained, 
modular  fashion  facilitated  the  learning  aspect  of  the  system,  since  the 
program  needed  to  analyze  and  manipulate  its  own  representation. 
Other  examples  of  production  systems  that  model  human  learning  are 
those  of  Hedrick  (1976),  Vere  (1977),  and  Anderson,  Kline,  and  Beasley 
(1979). 

The  MYCIN  system  (Shortliffe,  1976;  Davis,  Buchanan,  and  Shortliffe, 
1977)  acts  as  a  medical  consultant,  aiding  in  the  diagnosis  and  selection 
of  therapy  for  patients  with  bacteremia  or  meningitis  infections  (see 
Article  vm.Bi,  in  Vol.  n).  It  carries  on  an  interactive  dialogue  with  a 
physician  and  is  capable  of  explaining  its  reasoning.  It  also  includes  a 
knowledge  acquisition  subsystem,  TEIRESIAS,  which  helps  expert  phy- 
sicians expand  or  modify  the  rule  base  (Article  vn.B,  in  Vol.  n). 
MYCIN'S  rule  base  contains  several  hundred  production  rules  representing 
human-expert-level     knowledge     about     the     domain.       The     system     is 


196  Knowledge  Representation  in 

distinguished  by  its  use  of  a  backward  chaining  control  structure  (see 
below)  and  inexact  reasoning,  involving  confidence  factors  that  are 
attached  to  the  conclusion  part  of  each  production  to  help  determine 
the  relative  strengths  of  alternative  diagnoses. 

Lenat  (in  press)  modeled  the  process  of  discovery  in  mathematics, 
viewed  as  heuristic  search,  in  his  AM  production  system  (see  Article 
VTI.D2,  in  Vol.  n).  AM  started  with  a  minimal  knowledge  of  mathe- 
matical concepts  and  used  heuristics,  represented  as  production  rules,  to 
expand  its  knowledge  about  these  concepts  and  learn  new  ones.  In  the 
course  of  its  operation,  AM  discovered  a  large  number  of  important 
mathematical  concepts,  such  as  prime  numbers  and  the  arithmetic 
functions,  and  also  two  mathematical  concepts  that  had  not  been 
discovered  before.  AM  is  especially  important  because  of  its  sophis- 
ticated data  structures  and  control  mechanisms. 

Rychener  (1976)  built  several  production  systems  to  reimplement  a 
number  of  AI  systems  that  had  been  developed  previously  with  other 
techniques,  including  Bobrow's  STUDENT,  Newell  and  Simon's  GPS,  Fei- 
genbaum's  EPAM,  Winograd's  SHRDLU,  and  Berliner's  CAPS.  Rychener's 
intent  was  to  show  that  the  production- system  formalism  was  a  natural 
one  for  programming.  His  primary  problem  was  the  difficulty  of  build- 
ing very  complex  control  structures  (Rychener,  1977). 

Current  Issues  in  the  Design  of  Production  Systems 

Complexity  of  left-  and  right-hand  sides.  The  structure  of  the  two 
sides  of  the  productions  in  the  rule  base  has  been  progressively  extended 
as  the  size  and  complexity  of  systems  have  increased,  so  that  in  many 
current  systems  the  left-hand  side  (LHS)  is  a  LISP  function  that  can 
evaluate  an  arbitrarily  complex  condition.  In  some  systems,  the  testing 
of  the  LHS  can  even  have  side  effects,  so  that  the  rule  can  alter  the 
context  or  change  the  control  sequence  without  ever  being  fired. 
Similarly,  the  form  of  the  right-hand  side  (RHS)  has  been  extended  to 
include  variables,  whose  values  are  bound  during  the  test  phase  of  the 
cycle,  and  to  allow  arbitrary  programs  to  be  run  rather  than  just 
making  changes  in  the  context.  These  programs  usually  specify  actions 
in  terms  of  a  set  of  domain- specific  conceptual  primitives.  In  some 
systems  (Riesbeck,  1975;  Rychener,  1976)  these  actions  could  include 
activation  or  deactivation  of  sets  of  other  productions.  Again,  this  rep- 
resents a  radical  extension  of  the  original  production- system  formalism. 

Structure  of  the  rule  base  and  context.  Of  the  three  phases  of  each 
production-system  cycle — matching,  conflict  resolution,  and  action — the 
matching    process    uses    by    far    the   most    computational    resources.     As 


C4  Production  Systems  197 

production  systems  have  become  bigger  and  more  complex,  questions  of 
efficiency  have  necessitated  making  both  the  rule  base  and  the  context 
into  more  complex  data  structures.  For  example,  to  allow  rapid 
determination  of  which  productions  are  applicable  in  a  given  situation 
without  checking  through  all  of  the  rule  base,  the  productions  are  often 
indexed  or  partitioned  according  to  conditions  that  will  make  them  fire 
(see  Davis,  in  press;  Lenat  and  McDermott,  1977).  The  context  data 
structure  has  increased  in  internal  complexity  both  to  make  it  more 
efficient  and  to  allow  it  to  represent  more  complicated  situations. 
MYCIN'S  context  tree  (Shortliffe,  1976),  HEARSAY'S  blackboard  (Erman 
and  Lesser,  1975),  and  PROSPECTOR'S  semantic  net  (Duda  et  al.,  1978) 
are  examples  of  complex  context  data  structures.  A  good  example  of 
the  work  in  organizing  the  rule  base  and  database  is  that  of 
McDermott,  Newell,  and  Moore  (1978). 

Conflict  resolution.  In  practice,  it  is  often  the  case  that  more  than 
one  rule  could  fire  in  each  cycle  of  the  operation  of  a  typical  large 
production  system;  the  system  is  required  to  choose  one  rule  from 
among  this  set  (called  the  conflict  set).  This  conflict  resolution  phase  of 
each  cycle  is  where  basic  cognitive  traits  like  action  sequencing, 
attention  focusing,  interruptibility,  and  control  of  instability  are  realized. 
Several  different  approaches  to  conflict  resolution  have  been  tried, 
including  choosing — 

1.  the  first  rule  that  matches  the  context,  where  "first"  is  defined 
in  terms  of  some  explicit  linear  order  of  the  rule  base; 

2.  the  highest  priority  rule,  where  "priority"  is  defined  by  the 
programmer  according  to  the  demands  and  characteristics  of  the 
task  (as  in  DENDRAL); 

3.  the  most  specific  rule,  that  is,  the  one  with  the  most  detailed 
condition  part  that  matches  the  current  context; 

4.  the  rule  that  refers  to  the  element  most  recently  added  to  the 
context; 

5.  a  new  rule,  that  is,  a  rule-binding  instantiation  that  has  not 
occurred  previously; 

6.  a  rule  arbitrarily; 

7.  not  to  choose — exploring  all  the  applicable  rules  in  parallel  (as 
in  MYCIN). 

Different  systems  use  different  combinations  of  these  simple  conflict- 
resolution  methods,  some  of  which  become  quite  complicated  scheduling 
algorithms  (see,  e.g.,  AM  and  HEARSAY).  Good  discussions  of  conflict 
resolution   can  be   found   in  Davis   and  King   (1977).     Also,   McDermott 


198  Knowledge  Representation  m 

and  Forgy  (1978)  discuss  the  way  conflict-resolution  strategies  affect  two 
important  characteristics  for  production  systems:  sensitivity,  the  ability 
to  respond  quickly  to  changes  in  the  environment,  and  stability,  the 
ability  to  carry  out  relatively  long  sequences  of  actions.  They  conclude 
that  no  simple  conflict-resolution  strategy  can  be  completely  satisfactory. 

Direction  of  inference.  Research  on  deductive  inference  has  rec- 
ognized two  fundamentally  different  ways  that  people  reason.  Sometimes 
we  work  in  a  data  driven,  event  driven,  or  bottom-up  direction,  starting 
from  the  available  information  as  it  comes  in  and  trying  to  draw 
conclusions  that  are  appropriate  to  our  goals.  This  is  how  our  sample 
production  system  worked,  for  example.  In  production- system  research 
this  is  called  a  forward  chaining  method  of  inference.  We  sometimes 
work  the  other  way,  however,  starting  from  a  goal  or  expectation  of 
what  is  to  happen  and  working  backwards,  looking  for  evidence  that 
supports  or  contradicts  our  hunch.  This  is  called  goal  driven,  expec- 
tation driven,  or  top-down  thinking,  and  in  production  systems  it  is 
referred  to  as  backward  chaining,  since  it  requires  looking  at  the  action 
parts  of  rules  to  find  ones  that  would  conclude  the  current  goal,  then 
looking  at  the  left-hand  sides  of  those  rules  to  find  out  what  conditions 
would  make  them  fire,  then  finding  other  rules  whose  action  parts  con- 
clude these  conditions,  and  so  on.  MYCIN'S  use  of  backward  chaining  is 
described  fully  in  Article  vm.Bi,  in  Volume  n. 

Primitive  vocabulary.  As  the  complexity  of  the  condition  and  action 
parts  of  the  productions  in  the  rule  base  increases,  there  has  been 
greater  concern  about  the  nature  of  the  expressions  allowed — the  kinds 
of  conditions  and  actions  that  can  be  expressed.  A  significant  aspect  of 
the  representation  language  issue  concerns  the  choice  of  vocabulary  or 
semantic  primitives,  that  is,  the  functions  or  predicates  in  terms  of 
which  the  rules  and  context  elements  are  expressed  (see  Article  m.C6). 
Different  systems  will  define  their  vocabulary  at  higher  or  lower  levels, 
depending  upon  the  task  to  be  accomplished. 

Conclusion 

Perhaps  the  final  word  on  production  systems  is  that  they  capture 
in  a  manageable  representation  scheme  a  certain  type  of  problem- solving 
knowledge — knowledge  about  what  to  do  in  a  specific  situation.  Al- 
though this  kind  of  knowledge  is  basically  procedural,  the  production- 
system  formalism  has  many  of  the  advantages  of  declarative  rep- 
resentation schemes,  most  importantly,  modularity  of  the  rules. 
Furthermore,  the  way  that  the  productions  themselves  are  structured  is 
very  similar  to  the  way  that  people  talk  about  how  they  solve  problems. 


C4  Production  Systems  199 

For  this  reason,  production  systems  have  been  used  as  the  backbone  of 
expert  AI  systems  like  DENDRAL,  MYCIN,  and  PROSPECTOR  (see 
Chaps,  vn,  vm,  and  DC,  in  Vol.  n).  Research  on  these  knowledge- based 
expert  systems,  called  knowledge  engineering  (Feigenbaum,  1977;  Bern- 
stein, 1977)  is  concerned  not  only  with  expert-level  performance  but  also 
with  the  interactive  transfer  of  expertise — acquisition  of  knowledge  from 
human  experts  and  explanation  of  reasoning  to  human  users  (Davis, 
in  press). 

References 

Winston  (1977)  gives  a  basic  introduction  to  production  systems  with 
examples.  An  excellent  review  of  production  systems  and  the  issues 
involved  in  their  design  was  prepared  by  Davis  and  King  (1977). 
Current  research  in  production- system  design  and  applications  is  reported 
in  the  collection  of  papers  edited  by  Waterman  and  Hayes-Roth  (1978). 


C5.    Direct  (Analogical)  Representations 

There  is  a  class  of  representation  schemes,  called  analogical  or  direct 
representations — like  maps,  models,  diagrams,  and  sheet  music — that  can 
represent  knowledge  about  certain  aspects  of  the  world  in  especially 
natural  ways.  This  type  of  knowledge  representation  is  central  to  many 
AI  tasks  but  seems  at  first  quite  different  from  the  usual  propositional 
representation  schemes  like  logic  and  semantic  nets.  Understanding  the 
sense  in  which  direct  and  propositional  representations  are  the  same  may 
help  clarify  the  meaning  of  concepts  like  representation,  data  structure, 
and  interpretative  procedure. 

Direct  representations  have  been  defined  as  schemes  in  which  "prop- 
erties of  and  relations  between  parts  of  the  representing  configuration 
represent  properties  and  relations  of  parts  in  a  complex  represented  con- 
figuration, so  that  the  structure  of  the  representation  gives  information 
about  the  structure  of  what  is  represented"  (Sloman,  1971).  The  sig- 
nificant point  here  is  the  requirement  of  correspondence  between  the 
relations  in  the  representational  data  structures  and  the  relations  in  the 
represented  situation.  For  example,  a  street  map  is  a  direct  repre- 
sentation of  a  city  in  the  sense  that  the  distance  between  two  points  on 
the  map  must  correspond  to  the  distance  between  the  places  they 
represent  in  the  city.  Hayes  (1974)  calls  this  form  of  connection 
between  the  representation  and  the  situation  one  of  homomorphism 
(structural  similarity)  rather  than  just  denotation. 

Direct  representations  may  be  contrasted  with  the  more  prevalent 
propositional  or  Fregean  forms  (so  called  after  Gottlob  Frege,  who 
invented  the  predicate  calculus),  which  do  not  require  this  homomorphic 
correspondence  between  relations  in  the  representation  and  relations  in 
the  situation.  Proximity  of  assertions  in  the  database  of  a  logic  system, 
for  instance,  indicates  nothing  about  the  location  of  objects  in  the 
world.  Note  that  the  propositional  and  direct  representations  may  ac- 
tually use  the  same  data  structures  but  differ  in  how  they  use  them — 
which  properties  of  the  data  structures  are  used  in  what  way  by  the 
routines  that  operate  on  the  representation  to  make  inferences. 
Continuing  with  the  map  example,  if  a  routine  for  examining  a  map 
retrieved  all  distances  from  an  internal  table,  rather  than  looking  at  the 
map,  it  would  be  pointless  to  say  that  the  map  was  direct  with  respect 
to  distance. 

Thus,  it  is  the  combination  of  the  data  structures  and  the  semantic 
interpretation  function  (SIF)  manipulating  them  that  should  be  referred 


C5  Direct  (Analogical)  Representations  201 

to  as  direct,  and  only  with  respect  to  certain  properties  (Pylyshyn,  1975, 
1978).  For  example,  a  map  (with  a  reasonable  semantic  interpretation 
function)  is  direct  with  respect  to  location  and  hence  distance,  but  not, 
usually,  with  respect  to  elevation.  For  some  problems,  direct  represen- 
tation has  significant  advantages.  In  particular,  the  problem  of  updating 
the  representation  to  reflect  changes  in  the  world  is  simpler.  For 
example,  if  we  add  a  new  city  to  a  map,  we  need  only  put  it  in  the 
right  place.  It  is  not  necessary  to  state  explicitly  its  distance  from  all 
the  old  cities,  since  the  distance  on  the  map  accurately  represents  the 
distance  in  the  world.  See  the  discussion  in  Article  m.C2  of  the  frame 
problem  (McCarthy  and  Hayes,  1969). 

The  distinction  between  direct  and  propositional  representations  has 
also  been  the  subject  of  discussions  in  psychology  concerning  the  char- 
acter of  human  memory,  which  seems  to  have  properties  of  both  types 
(Pylyshyn,  1973).  The  next  section  of  this  article  presents  some  AI 
systems  that  use  direct  representations.  The  final  section  returns  to  a 
discussion  of  their  advantages  and  disadvantages. 

Systems  Using  Analogical  Representations 

The  Geometry  Theorem  Prover  (Gelernter,  1963)  was  one  of  the 
earliest  automated  theorem  provers  and  was  distinguished  by  its  reliance 
on  a  diagram  to  guide  the  proof.  The  system  proved  simple,  high-school- 
level  theorems  in  Euclidean  geometry  like  the  following: 

Given:   Angle  ABD  equals  angle  DBC. 

Segment  AD  perpendicular  segment  AB. 
Segment  DC  perpendicular  segment  BC. 

Prove:   Segment  AD  equals  segment  CD. 


Using  problem  reduction  techniques,  the  system  worked  backward  from 
the  goal  to  be  proved. 

In  Gelernter's  system,  which  is  described  fully  in  Article  n.D3,  the 
problem  diagram  was  used  in  two  ways.  The  more  important  of  these 
was  the  pruning  heuristic:  "Reject  as  false  any  hypothesis  (goal)  that  is 
not  true  in  the  diagram."  In  other  words,  those  subgoals  that  were 
obviously  false  in  the  diagram  were  not  pursued  through  the  formal 
proof  methods.  This  use  of  the  diagram  to  guide  the  solution  search 
resulted  in  the  pruning  of  about  995  out  of  every  1,000  subgoals  at  each 
level  of  search. 


202 


Knowledge  Representation 


m 


The  other  use  of  the  diagram  was  to  establish  obvious  facts 
concerning,  for  example,  the  order  in  which  points  fall  on  a  given  line 
and  the  intersection  properties  of  lines  in  a  plane.  Many  of  these  are 
self-evident  from  the  diagram  but  would  be  tiresome  to  prove  from 
fundamental  axioms.  In  certain  such  circumstances,  the  program  would 
assume  the  fact  to  be  true  if  it  were  true  in  the  diagram,  while 
explicitly  noting  that  it  had  made  such  an  assumption.  The  program 
was  also  able  to  add  lines  to  the  diagram,  when  necessary,  to  facilitate 
the  proof. 

Work  on  the  General  Space  Planner  (Eastman,  1970,  1973)  ad- 
dressed the  task  of  arranging  things  in  a  space  (e.g.,  furniture  in  a 
room)  subject  to  given  constraints  that  must  be  satisfied  (e.g.,  room  for 
walkways  and  no  overlapping).    A  simple  problem  is  the  following: 


Given  the  space 


0 

and  the  objects 


1 

2 

and  the  constraints 


(3)  must  be  adjacent  to  (4) 

(2)  must  be  adjacent  to  (3) 

(l)  must  be  visible  from  (3) 

(l)  must  not  be  adjacent  to  any  other  objects, 


one  solution  is: 


2 

1 

3 

4 

The  system  used  a  direct  representation,  called  a  variable  domain 
array,  which  was  a  specialization  of  the  sort  of  two-dimensional  diagram 
used  by  Gelernter.  Since  the  structure  of  the  representation  reflected 
the  structure  of  the  space,  with  respect  to  the  properties  of  size,  shape, 


C5 


Direct  (Analogical)  Representations 


203 


and  position,  the  system  could  be  described  as  analogical  for  those  prop- 
erties. Space  was  partitioned  into  a  set  of  rectangles,  and  in  addition 
to  the  above  properties,  two  others  that  are  particularly  important  for 
the  space-planning  task  were  easily  detectable  from  the  variable-domain 
array  representation:  (a)  filled  versus  empty  space  and  (b)  overlapping 
objects. 

The  system  solved  the  problems  by  means  of  a  depth-first  search 
algorithm,  finding  locations  for  successive  objects  and  backing  up  when  it 
couldn't  proceed  without  violating  some  constraint.  The  search  was 
facilitated  by  a  constraint  graph  that  represented,  by  restrictions  on  the 
amount  of  area  left,  the  effects  of  constraints  between  pairs  of  objects. 
Thus,  by  attacking  the  most  restrictive  constraint  first,  the  search  was 
relatively  efficient.  This  method  has  been  called  constraint  structured 
planning. 

Note  that  Eastman's  work  is  in  one  sense  the  reverse  of  Gelernter's. 
Gelernter's  system  performed  search  in  a  propositional  space  (sets  of 
formal  statements)  using  an  analogical  representation  (the  diagram)  for 
guidance.  Eastman's  system  performed  search  in  an  analogical  space 
(the  diagrammatic  array)  using  a  propositional  form  for  heuristic  guid- 
ance (the  constraint  graph). 

WHISPER  (Funt,  1976,  1977)  was  a  system  designed  to  reason  ex- 
clusively by  the  analogical  representation.  WHISPER  operated  in  a  sim- 
plified blocks-world  environment,  solving  problems  like  the  following: 


Given  four  blocks  that  start 

in  this  configuration,  what  will 

happen  when  block  B  tumbles  onto  block  D? 


204  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

The  system  had  three  components: 

1.  Diagram:  An  array  that  represented  the  two-dimensional  scene 
in  the  obvious  way,  as  shown  above; 

2.  Retina:  A  set  of  parallel  receptors  arranged  in  concentric  circles, 
with  each  receptor  viewing  a  small  part  of  the  diagram; 

3.  High-level  reasoner:  The  domain-dependent  part  of  the  system 
that  contained  qualitative  physical  knowledge  (in  this  case,  it 
employed  information  regarding  the  behavior  of  rigid  bodies 
when  acted  upon  by  gravity). 

The  significance  of  the  diagram  to  WHISPER  lay  in  the  fact  that  there 
were  two  types  of  analogues  present — analogues  between  static  states  of 
the  diagram  and  the  world  and  also  between  dynamic  behavior  of  ob- 
jects in  the  diagram  and  of  objects  in  the  world. 

The  correspondences  between  the  diagram  and  the  world  were  simple 
and  well  defined;  no  complicated  processes  were  required  to  map  from 
one  to  the  other.  A  number  of  properties,  such  as  position,  orientation, 
and  size  of  blocks,  were  represented  analogically.  For  these  properties, 
it  was  not  necessary  to  perform  complicated  deductions,  since  the 
desired  information  "fell  out"  of  the  diagrams.  For  example,  as  in 
Eastman's  space  planner,  to  test  whether  or  not  a  particular  area  of  the 
world  was  empty  (i.e.,  not  occupied  by  any  block),  the  system  had  only 
to  look  at  the  corresponding  area  of  the  diagram.  With  most  propo- 
sitional  representations,  it  would  be  necessary  to  examine  each  block 
individually,  testing  whether  or  not  that  block  overlapped  the  space  in 
question  (see,  e.g.,  Fahlman,  1974).  The  retina  also  provided  a  number 
of  perceptual  primitives,  including  center  of  area,  contact  finding,  and 
similarity  testing.  The  high-level  reasoner  never  looked  at  the  diagram 
directly.  Note  that  certain  properties  (color  and  weight)  were  not 
represented  in  the  analogue.  To  reason  about  these,  normal  inference- 
making  processes  would  be  necessary. 

Baker  (1973)  had  earlier  suggested  a  similar  representational  formal- 
ism. Like  Funt,  he  envisioned  a  two-dimensional  array  to  represent  the 
diagram;  however,  he  also  discussed  the  possibility  of  retaining  spatial 
smoothing  information  within  each  cell  of  the  array,  to  remove  some  of 
the  error  caused  by  the  coarseness  of  the  array.  Both  Funt  and  Baker 
suggested  that  the  parallelism  of  their  systems,  pursuing  several  goals 
simultaneously,  coupled  well  with  the  analogical  representations.  Indi- 
vidual elements  of  their  processors  (in  Funt's  case,  the  retina)  could 
operate  autonomously,  with  connections  only  to  their  (spatially) 
neighboring  cells.  In  this  sort  of  network,  arbitrary  transformations, 
through  combinations  of  translation  and  rotation,  could  be  represented. 


C5  Direct  (Analogical)  Representations  205 

Issues  Concerning  Direct  Representations 

The  work  done  to  date  on  direct  representations  raises  a  number  of 
questions.  First,  following  Sloman  (1975),  we  should  clarify  some  com- 
mon misconceptions  about  direct  representations.  Analogical  represen- 
tations need  not  be  continuous,  nor  need  they  be  two-dimensional;  an 
ordered  list  of  numbers,  for  example,  can  be  analogical  with  respect  to 
size.  Also,  like  propositional  representations,  analogical  ones  may  have  a 
grammar  that  defines  what  data  structures  are  well  formed,  or  "legal." 
The  difference  between  the  two  types  of  representation  schemes  lies  in 
the  nature  of  the  correspondence  between  aspects  of  the  structure  of  the 
representation  and  the  structure  of  the  represented  situation. 

One  of  the  advantages  of  analogical  representations  over  their  prop- 
ositional counterparts  relates  to  the  difference  between  observation  and 
deduction.  In  some  situations,  the  former  can  be  accomplished  relatively 
cheaply  in  terms  of  the  computation  involved,  and  direct  representations 
often  facilitate  observation  since  important  properties  are  "directly  ob- 
servable" (Funt,  1976).  For  example,  determining  whether  three  points 
are  collinear  might  be  much  easier  using  a  direct  representation  (a 
diagram)  than  it  would  be  to  calculate  analytically  using  their  coor- 
nates.  As  another  example,  Filman  (1979)  implemented  a  chess  reason- 
ing system  that  relied  on  both  inference  (searching  several  moves  ahead) 
and  observation  (looking  at  a  semantic  model  of  the  current  state  of  the 
chess  board). 

Funt  (1976)  relates  a  more  abstract  justification  for  the  use  of  ana- 
logical representations.  A  propositional  representation  of  a  situation — for 
example,  a  set  of  statements  in  the  predicate  calculus — will  often  admit 
to  several  models.  In  other  words,  there  might  be  many  situations  of 
the  world  that  would  be  represented  by  the  same  statements,  since  they 
are  distinguished  in  aspects  that  are  not  captured  in  the  representation. 
Direct  representations,  on  the  other  hand,  are  usually  more  exhaustive 
and  specific,  admitting  fewer  models  and,  in  turn,  making  for  more 
efficient  problem  solving. 

In  addition,  as  illustrated  by  Gelernter's  work,  the  use  of  analogical 
representations  can  facilitate  search.  Constraints  in  the  problem  situ- 
ation are  represented  by  constraints  on  the  types  of  transformations 
applied  to  the  representation,  so  that  impossible  strategies  are  rejected 
immediately. 

There  are,  however,  some  disadvantages  to  the  use  of  these  direct 
representations.  First,  the  tendency  toward  more  specific  inference 
schemes  mentioned  earlier  has  its  drawbacks — as  Sloman  (1975)  points 
out,  there  are  times  when  generality  is  needed.     For  example,  consider 


206  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

the  problem  "If  I  start  in  room  A  and  then  move  back  and  forth 
between  room  A  and  room  B,  which  room  will  I  be  in  after  exactly  377 
moves?"  For  this  case,  the  best  approach  is  not  to  simulate  the  action, 
but  to  generalize  the  effects  of  odd  and  even  numbers  of  moves. 

Second,  Funt  notes  that  some  features  of  the  analogue  may  not  hold 
in  the  actual  situation,  and  we  might  not  know  which  ones  these  are. 
This  is  related  to  the  general  problem  of  knowing  the  limits  of  the  rep- 
resentation. 

Third,  analogical  representations  become  unwieldy  for  certain  kinds 
of  incomplete  information.  That  is,  if  a  new  city  is  added  to  a  map, 
its  distance  from  other  cities  is  obtained  easily.  But  suppose  that  its 
location  is  known  only  indirectly,  for  example,  that  it  is  equidistant 
from  cities  Y  and  Z.  Then  the  distance  to  other  cities  must  be  rep- 
resented as  equations,  and  the  power  of  the  analogue  has  been  lost. 

To  conclude,  direct  representations  are  analogous  with  respect  to 
some  properties  to  the  situation  being  represented.  Some  properties 
(especially  physical  ones)  may  be  relatively  easily  represented  analog- 
ically, resulting  in  significant  savings  in  computation  for  certain  types  of 
inferences. 

References 

General  discussions  of  the  research  on  direct  representations  in  AI 
are  Funt  (1976)  and  Sloman  (1971,  1975).  Related  psychological  con- 
cerns are  discussed  by  Pylyshyn  (1975,  1978). 


C6.     Semantic  Primitives 

The  knowledge  representation  formalisms  described  in  this  chapter — 
logic,  procedures,  semantic  nets,  productions,  direct  representations,  and 
frames — are  all  ways  of  expressing  the  kinds  of  things  we  express  in 
English,  that  is,  the  kinds  of  things  we  know.  Having  chosen  a  rep- 
resentation technique,  another  major  question  in  the  design  of  an  AI 
system  concerns  the  vocabulary  to  be  used  within  that  formalism.  In  a 
logic-based  representation,  for  example,  what  predicates  are  to  be  used? 
In  a  semantic  net,  what  node  and  link  types  should  be  provided? 
Research  on  semantic  primitives  is  concerned  with  this  problem  of 
establishing  the  representational  vocabulary.  This  article,  then,  is  not 
about  a  knowledge  representation  technique  per  se,  but  rather  about  a 
representational  issue  that  concerns  all  of  the  techniques  used  in  AI. 

The  term  semantic  primitive  has  no  clear-cut  definition.  As  a 
starting  point,  one  may  think  of  a  primitive  as  any  symbol  that  is  used 
but  not  defined  within  the  system.  The  term  is  so  used  by  Wilks,  for 
example,  who  accordingly  concludes  that  "primitives  are  to  be  found  in 
all  natural  language  understanding  systems — even  those  .  .  .  that  argue 
vigorously  against  them"  (Wilks,  1977c).  A  second  and  narrower  usage 
takes  semantic  primitives  to  be  elements  of  meaning  into  which  the 
meanings  of  words  and  sentences  can  be  broken  down;  examples  of  such 
work  come  from  linguistics  (e.g.,  Jackendoff,  1975,  1976)  and  psychology 
(Miller,  1975;  Miller  and  Johnson-Laird,  1976;  Norman  and  Rumelhart, 
1975),  as  well  as  from  AI. 

Additional  issues  have  arisen  as  to  what  primitives  really  are,  how 
they  may  be  used  in  reasoning,  and  what  alternatives  there  are  to  using 
primitives.  Winograd  (1978)  provides  a  general  survey  and  analysis  of 
such  questions.  Some  of  these  are  illustrated  in  the  following  discussion 
of  the  two  major  AI  systems  for  natural  language  understanding  that 
are  characterized  by  their  authors  as  using  semantic  primitives. 

Wilks 's  System 

Yorick  Wilks,  now  of  the  University  of  Essex,  has  been  developing  a 
natural  language  system  for  machine  translation  since  1968  (described 
fully  in  Article  IV.F2).  The  system  accepts  paragraphs  of  English  text, 
producing  from  them  an  internal  representation  that  is  a  data  structure 
composed  of  nodes  representing  semantic  primitives.  From  this  struc- 
ture, a  French  translation  of  the  input  is  generated.  The  translation 
serves  as  a  test  of  whether  the  English  has  been  understood,  which  is  a 


208  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

more  objective  test  than  just  inspection  of  the  internal  representation. 
The  translation  task  also  has  the  advantage,  Wilks  suggests,  that  correct 
translation  of  the  input  may  often  require  a  shallower  understanding 
than  would  the  ability  to  answer  arbitrary  questions  about  it.  Con- 
sistent with  these  reasons  for  the  choice  of  translation  as  a  task,  most 
of  the  effort  in  Wilks 's  system  is  spent  in  converting  the  English  input 
to  the  internal  representation. 

The  first  major  problem  that  Wilks  addressed  was  the  resolution  of 
word-sense  ambiguity,  for  this  was  the  problem  on  which  earlier  at- 
tempts at  machine  translation  had  foundered  (see  Article  rv.B).  For  ex- 
ample, in  the  sentence  The  old  salt  was  damp,  it  is  necessary  to 
determine  from  the  surrounding  context  whether  salt  means  a  chemical 
compound  or  a  sailor.  Wilks's  system  also  addressed  problems  involving 
other  kinds  of  ambiguity  and  extended  word  senses,  as  for  the  word 
drink  in  My  car  drinks  gas. 

The  general  idea  of  Wilks's  approach,  which  he  calls  preference 
semantics,  is  to  use  knowledge  of  possible  word  meanings  to  dis- 
ambiguate other  words.  For  example,  part  of  the  meaning  of  drink  is 
that  it  prefers  a  fluid  object,  and  part  of  the  meanings  of  wine  and  gas 
is  that  they  are  fluids.  If  the  best  fit  among  possible  word  senses  does 
not  satisfy  all  preferences  (such  as  the  preference  of  drink  for  an 
animate  subject),  then  an  extended  word  sense  can  be  accepted.  The 
formalism  within  which  preferences  are  expressed,  Wilks  suggests,  is 
closer  to  a  frame  representation  than  to  a  semantic  net. 

As  the  description  above  should  make  clear,  a  central  requirement  in 
Wilks's  system  is  a  dictionary  distinguishing  among  the  various  senses  of 
words  that  can  appear  in  the  input  text.  Definitions  in  the  dictionary 
use  a  vocabulary  of  semantic  primitives,  grouped  into  five  classes.  Ex- 
amples from  each  class  are  given  below: 


Ent i  ti  es 


Actions 


MAM     a  human 

STUFF   a  substance 

PART    a  part  of  an  entity 


CAUSE   causing  something  to  happen 

BE      being  as  equivalence  or  predication 

FLOW    moving  as  liquids  do 


C6  Semantic  Primitives  209 


Cases 


TO      direction  toward  something 
IN      containment 

Qua  I  i  f  i  ers 

GOOD    morally  correct  or  approved 
MUCH    much,  applied  to  a  substance 

Type  indicators 

HOW     being  a  type  of  action — for  adverbial  constructions 
KIND    being  a  quality — for  adjectival  constructions 

In  addition  to  the  primitive  elements,  of  which  there  are  currently  over 
80,  WUks  uses  several  elements,  distinguished  by  names  beginning  with 
an  asterisk,  that  are  defined  as  equivalent  to  a  class  of  primitives.  For 
example,  *ANI  (animate)  encompasses  MAN,  FOLK  (a  human  group), 
BEAST  (a  nonhuman  animal),  and  certain  others.  A  typical  definition 
using  the  primitives  is  the  following  definition  for  one  sense  of  the  word 
break: 

(BREAK:   (*HUN  SUBJ) 

(*PHYS0B  OBJE) 

((((N0TWH0LE  KIND)  BE)  CAUSE)  GOAL) 

(THING  INST) 

STRIK) 

This  says  roughly  that  break  means  a  STRIKing,  done  preferably  by  a 
HUMan  SUBJect  and  preferably  with  an  INSTrument  that  is  a  THING, 
with  the  GOAL  of  CAUSing  a  PHYSical  OBject  to  BE  NOT  WHOLE. 
Words  other  than  verbs  are  also  defined  by  such  structured  formulas. 
A  detailed  description  of  the  syntax  of  such  word-sense  definitions,  or 
semantic  formulas,  is  given  in  Wilks  (1977c). 

The  completed  representation  of  a  text  is  a  structure  made  up  of 
such  word- sense  formulas.  At  a  level  corresponding  to  the  clause  or 
simple  sentence,  formulas  are  arranged  into  triples,  or  templates,  stand- 
ing for  an  agent,  an  action,  and  an  object;  any  of  the  three  may  itself 
be  qualified  by  other  formulas.  For  example,  Small  men  sometimes 
father  big  sons  would  be  structured  as  follows: 

[man]      < ►     [father]      < ►     [sons] 

A  A  A 

[small]       [sometimes]         [big] 

Here  the  bracketed  English  words  should  be  imagined  as  being  replaced 
by  the  semantic  formulas  representing  their  appropriate  sense.  Rela- 
tions among  templates  are  indicated  at  a  still  higher  level  of  structure. 


210  Knowledge  Representation  IE 

What  is  the  status  of  the  primitive  vocabulary  in  Wilks's  system? 
First,  he  argues,  primitives  are  not  essentially  different  from  natural- 
language  words.  A  semantic  description  in  terms  of  primitives  is  just  a 
description  in  "a  reduced  micro-language,  with  all  the  normal  weaknesses 
and  vagueness  of  a  natural  language"  (Wilks,  1977c).  The  justification 
for  using  a  language  of  primitives,  then,  is  that  it  provides  "a  useful 
organizing  hypothesis  ...  for  an  AI  natural  language  system." 

Second,  Wilks  claims  that  individual  primitives  have  their  meaning 
in  the  same  way  that  English  words  do:  neither  by  direct  reference  to 
things,  nor  by  correspondence  to  nonlinguistic  psychological  entities,  but 
only  by  their  function  within  the  overall  language. 

Third,  in  light  of  the  nature  of  primitives,  there  is  no  one  correct 
vocabulary  for  a  primitive  language,  any  more  than  there  is  a  correct 
vocabulary  for  English.  The  test  of  the  adequacy  of  a  particular  set  of 
primitives  is  an  operational  one — the  success  or  failure  of  the  linguistic 
computations  that  use  it.  As  suggestive  evidence  that  Wilks's  own  set 
of  primitives  will  indeed  turn  out  to  be  adequate,  he  observes  that  it  is 
very  similar  to  the  80  words  that  occur  most  frequently  in  definitions  in 
Webster's  dictionary. 

Finally,  there  are  some  general  considerations  in  choosing  a  set  of 
primitives.    Wilks  (1977c)  identifies  the  following  properties  as  desirable: 

1.  Finitude.  The  number  of  primitives  should  be  finite  and  should 
be  smaller  than  the  number  of  words  whose  meanings  the  rep- 
resentation scheme  is  to  encode. 

2.  Comprehensiveness.  The  set  should  be  adequate  to  express  and 
distinguish  among  the  senses  of  the  word  set  whose  meanings  it 
is  to  encode. 

3.  Independence.  No  primitive  should  be  definable  in  terms  of  other 
primitives. 

4.  Noncircularity.  No  two  primitives  should  be  definable  in  terms 
of  each  other. 

5.  Primitiveness.  No  subset  of  the  primitives  should  be  replacable 
by  a  smaller  set. 

A  qualification  should  be  noted  concerning  the  property  of  compre- 
hensiveness: The  definition  in  primitives  of  a  word  sense  is  not  required 
to  be  exhaustive  of  meaning.  Wilks  cites  hammer,  mallet,  and  axe  as 
terms  among  which  a  representation  in  primitives  cannot  be  expected  to 
distinguish.  In  addition,  the  definition  of  a  term  is  not  expected  to  say 
everything;  Wilks  distinguishes  between  the  meanings  of  words,  which 
definitions  express,  and  facts  about  things.  The  definition  of  water,  for 
example,  might  say  that  water  is  a  liquid  substance,  but  not  that  water 


C6  Semantic  Primitives  211 

freezes  into  ice.  Facts  of  the  latter  sort  are  expressed  in  Wilks's  system 
as  commonsense  inference  rules,  which  are  separate  from  the  dictionary 
and  are  used  only  as  a  last  resort  in  disambiguation. 

Schank's  Conceptual  Dependency  Theory 

The  conceptual  dependency  theory  of  Roger  Schank,  now  of  Yale 
University,  has  been  under  development  since  1969.  Its  most  distinctive 
feature,  the  attempt  to  provide  a  representation  of  all  actions  using  a 
small  number  of  primitives,  was  first  introduced  in  1972.  (See  Articles 
IV.F5  and  IV.F6  on  Schank's  natural  language  understanding  systems.) 

There  are  significant  differences  between  the  systems  of  Schank  and 
Wilks,  both  in  the  general  outline  of  their  systems  and  in  their  views  of 
primitives.  Wilks's  system,  for  example,  is  oriented  toward  the  task 
of  machine  translation,  whereas  conceptual  dependency  theory  makes 
broader  claims.  First,  Schank  emphasizes  task  independence.  The  theory 
has  been  used,  in  fact,  as  the  basis  for  programs  that,  among  other 
things,  can  paraphrase  an  input  text,  translate  it  to  another  language, 
draw  inferences  from  it,  or  answer  questions  about  it.  Second,  the 
theory  is  offered  not  only  as  a  basis  for  computer  programs  that 
understand  language,  but  also  as  an  intuitive  theory  of  human  language 
processing. 

Consistent  with  these  claims,  Schank  holds  that  it  is  the  business  of 
an  adequate  representation  of  natural-language  utterances  to  capture 
their  underlying  conceptual  structure.  A  first  requirement  is  that  the 
representation  be  unambiguous,  even  though  the  input  may  contain  syn- 
tactic ambiguity,  as  in  /  saw  the  Grand  Canyon  flying  to  New  York,  or 
semantic  ambiguity,  as  in  The  old  man's  glasses  were  filled  with  sherry. 
The  speaker  of  an  ambiguous  sentence  usually  intends  an  unambiguous 
meaning,  so  the  representation  is  expected  to  reflect  only  the  most  likely 
version  of  what  was  intended. 

A  second  requirement  is  that  the  representation  be  unique — that  is, 
that  distinct  sentences  with  the  same  conceptual  content  should  have 
the  same  representation.  Some  examples  of  groups  of  sentences  that  are 
all  represented  the  same  way  are 

/  want  a  book. 
I  want  to  get  a  book. 
I  want  to  have  a  book. 
and 

Don't  let  John  out  of  the  room. 

Prevent  John  from  getting  out  of  the  room. 


212  Knowledge  Representation  EI 

The  principle  of  uniqueness  of  representation  has  been  characterized 
as  the  basic  axiom  of  the  system.  It  has  also  been  identified  as 
accounting  for  human  abilities  to  paraphrase  and  translate  text.  The 
problem  of  paraphrase — "how  sentences  which  were  constructed  differ- 
ently lexically  could  be  identical  in  meaning" — is  a  major  theme 
throughout  Schank's  work  (Schank,  1975c). 

To  obtain  unique,  unambiguous  representations  of  meaning,  Schank's 
system  relies  principally  on  a  set  of  11  primitive  ACTs  (Schank,  1975a; 
Schank  and  Abelson,  1977): 

Physical  acts 

PROPEL  apply  a  force  to  a  physical  object 

MOVE  move  a  body  part 

INGEST  take  something  to  the  inside  of  an  animate  object 

EXPEL  force  something  out  from  inside  an  animate  object 

GRASP  grasp  an  object  physically 

Acts  characterized  by  resulting  state  changes 

PTRAMS   change  the  location  of  a  physical  object 
ATRAMS   change  an  abstract  relationship,  such  as 

possession  or  ownership,  with  respect  to  an  object 

Acts  used  mainly  as  instruments  for  other  acts 

SPEAK    produce  a  sound 

ATTEND   direct  a  sense  organ  toward  a  stimulus 

Mental  acts 

MTRANS   transfer  information 

MBUILD   construct  new  information  from  old  information 

There  are  several  other  categories,  or  concept  types,  besides  the  primi- 
tive ACTs  in  the  representational  system.     They  are: 

Picture  Producers  (PPs),  which  are  physical  objects.  Some  special 
cases  among  the  PPs  are  natural  forces  like  wind  and  three 
postulated  divisions  of  human  memory:  the  Conceptual  Pro- 
cessor (where  conscious  thought  takes  place),  the  Intermediate 
Memory,  and  the  Long  Term  Memory. 

Picture  Aiders  (PAs),  which  are  attributes  of  objects. 

Times. 

Locations. 

Action  Aiders  (AAs),  which  are  attributes  of  ACTs. 

Only  a  little  work  has  been  done  on  reducing  these  latter  categories  to 
a  primitive  set;  see  Russell  (1972)  and  Lehnert  (1978)  on  the  analysis  of 


C6  Semantic  Primitives  213 

picture  producers  and  Schank  (1975a)  on  the  treatment  of  picture  aiders 
as  at  tribute- value  pairs. 

Detailed  rules  are  provided  for  the  ways  that  elements  of  these 
categories  can  be  combined  into  representations  of  meaning.  There  are 
two  basic  kinds  of  combinations,  or  conceptualizations.  One  involves  an 
actor  (a  picture  producer — PP)  doing  a  primitive  ACT;  the  other  in- 
volves an  object  (again,  a  PP)  and  a  description  of  its  state  (a  picture 
aider — PA).  Conceptualizations  can  be  tied  together  by  relations  of  in- 
strumentality or  causation,  among  others. 

The  primitive  elements  that  occur  in  conceptualizations  are  not 
words,  according  to  Schank,  but  concepts;  they  reflect  a  level  of  thought 
underlying  language  rather  than  language  itself.  Consequently,  repre- 
sentations of  text  in  conceptual  dependency  are  said  to  be  language-free. 
The  task  of  translation,  then,  becomes  only  one  task  among  many;  it  is 
accomplished  by  parsing  from  one  language  into  conceptual  dependency 
and  then  generating  text  in  the  second  language  from  the  conceptual 
dependency  representation. 

The  notion  of  language-free  primitive  concepts  requires  explication. 
For  Schank,  as  for  Wilks,  the  justification  for  using  primitives  is  func- 
tional. Schank  differs  from  Wilks,  however,  in  his  choice  of  the  sort  of 
function  to  be  optimized,  as  well  as  in  his  view  of  primitives  as 
language-free  and  psychologically  plausible.  Schank  particularly  empha- 
sizes the  computational  advantages,  to  both  programs  and  people,  of 
storing  propositions  in  a  canonical  form  (Schank,  1975b).  This  requires, 
in  Schank's  view,  that  information  implicit  in  a  sentence  be  made 
explicit  (Schank,  1975a;  Schank  and  Abelson,  1977).  Obtaining  the 
implicit  information  in  turn  requires  inferring,  and  it  is  as  an  aid  to 
making  inferences  that  the  use  of  primitives  receives  its  most  important 
justification: 

Rather  than  stating  that  if  you  see  something  then  you  know  it 
and  if  you  hear  something  then  you  know  it  and  if  you  read 
something  then  you  know  it  and  so  on,  we  simply  state  that 
whenever  an  MTRANS  exists,  a  likely  inference  is  that  the 
MTRANSed  information  is  in  the  mental  location  LTM  [Long  Term 
Memory]  (our  representation  for  "know").  This  is  a  tremendous 
savings  of  time  and  space.     (Schank,  1975b,  p.  40) 

Each  primitive  ACT,  then,  entails  its  own  set  of  inferences.  As  a  fuller 
example,  the  following  are  the  main  inferences  from  the  fact  that  X 
PTRANSed  Y  from   W  to  Z: 

1.  Y  is  now  located  at  Z. 

2.  Y  is  no  longer  at  location   W. 


214  Knowledge  Representation  EI 

3.  If  Z  =  X,  or  Z  is  human  and  requested  the  PTRANS,  then  Z 
will  probably  do  whatever  one  ordinarily  does  with  Y.  More- 
over, Z  probably  will  become  pleased  by  doing  this.  (Schank, 
1975a,  p.  71) 

Such  inferences  provide  both  the  criterion  for  choosing  a  set  of  prim- 
itives and  the  definition  of  what  primitives  are.  The  primitive  ACTs, 
Schank  and  Abelson  (1977)  state,  are  no  more  than  the  sets  of  infer- 
ences to  which  they  give  rise.    Moreover: 

The  theoretical  decision  for  what  constitutes  a  primitive  ACT  is 
based  on  whether  the  proposed  new  ACT  carries  with  it  a  set  of 
inferences  not  already  accounted  for  by  an  ACT  that  is  already  in 
use.  Similarly,  a  primitive  ACT  is  dropped  when  we  find  that  its 
inferences  are  already  handled  by  another  ACT.  (Schank,  1975b, 
p.  40) 

In  his  earlier  work,  Schank  (1973a)  claimed  that  the  primitive  ACTs 
of  conceptual  dependency,  together  with  some  set  of  possible  states  of 
objects,  were  sufficient  to  represent  the  meaning  of  any  English  verb.  It 
soon  became  clear,  however,  that  additional  mechanisms  would  be 
needed  for  a  general-purpose  language-understanding  system.  For  exam- 
ple, there  are  problems  of  quantification  and  of  metaphor,  which  have 
not  yet  been  addressed  (Schank  and  Abelson,  1977).  There  are  prob- 
lems raised  by  the  fact  that  natural-language  communications  often 
presuppose  a  great  deal  of  background  knowledge,  some  of  which  has  to 
do  with  the  typical  course  of  events  in  commonplace  situations  like 
eating  in  a  restaurant  or  taking  a  bus  (see  Article  m.C7  on  frame 
systems).  Finally,  of  particular  importance  with  respect  to  the  use  of 
primitives,  there  are  problems  arising  from  the  fact  that  conceptual 
dependency  generally  expresses  the  meaning  of  an  action  verb  only  in 
terms  of  its  physical  realization.  One  example  is  the  reduction  of  kiss 
to  MOVE  lips  to  lips  (Schank  and  Abelson,  1977).  The  inadequacy  of 
this  representation  becomes  especially  apparent  in  light  of  the  claim  that 
no  information  is  lost  by  the  use  of  primitive  ACTs  to  represent  actions. 

Recently  Schank  has  added  several  new  devices  to  his  repre- 
sentational system  to  reflect  the  purposive  aspects  of  actions  as  well  as 
their  physical  descriptions.  These  include  goals,  which  can  be  realized 
by  appropriate  sequences  of  acts;  scripts,  which  provide  such  sequences 
in  simple  stereotyped  situations;  plans,  which  provide  a  more  flexible 
way  of  specifying  the  appropriate  action  sequences,  including  the  treat- 
ment of  a  whole  set  of  alternative  sub-sequences  as  a  single  subgoal; 
and  themes,  which  include  people's  occupations  (e.g.,  lawyer),  their 
relationships  with  others  (e.g.,  love),  and  their  general  aims  (e.g.,  getting 


C6  Semantic  Primitives  215 

rich)  and  which  are  offered  as  the  source  of  their  goals.  The 
representation  of  a  piece  of  text  is  thus  extended  to  try  to  take  into 
account  not  only  what  caused  what,  but  also  what  was  intended  to 
cause  what  and  why  the  actor  might  have  had  such  an  intention  in  the 
first  place.  In  addition,  Schank  has  recently  supplemented  the  primitive 
ACTs  with  several  social  ACTs— AUTHORIZE,  ORDER,  DISPUTE,  and 
PETITION — in  order  to  represent  yet  another  dimension  of  human 
actions  more  readily.  None  of  these  devices,  however,  is  characterized 
as  introducing  a  new  set  of  primitives. 

References 

The  best  descriptions  of  the  two  systems  using  semantic  primitives 
in  AI  discussed  here  are  Wilks  (1975c)  and  Schank  and  Abelson  (1977). 
Norman  and  Rumelhart  (1975)  describe  a  computer  model  of  human 
memory,  MEMOD,  and  discuss  the  psychological  basis  of  the  semantic 
primitives  used  in  their  model  (see  also  Article  XI.E4,  in  Vol.  m).  See 
Wilks  (1977a,  1977c)  and  Winograd  (1978)  for  further  discussions  of  the 
issue  of  semantic  primitives. 


C7.     Frames  and  Scripts 

There  is  abundant  psychological  evidence  that  people  use  a  large, 
well- coordinated  body  of  knowledge  from  previous  experiences  to  inter- 
pret new  situations  in  their  everyday  cognitive  activity  (Bartlett,  1932). 
For  example,  when  we  visit  a  restaurant  where  we  have  never  been 
before,  we  have  an  extensive  array  of  expectations  based  on  experience 
in  other  restaurants  about  what  we  will  find:  menus,  tables,  waiters, 
and  so  forth.  In  addition  to  these  expectations  about  the  objects  in  a 
typical  restaurant,  we  have  strong  expectations  about  the  sequences  of 
events  that  are  likely  to  take  place.  Representing  knowledge  about  the 
objects  and  events  typical  to  specific  situations  has  been  the  focus  of  the 
AI  knowledge-representation  ideas  called  frames  and  scripts.  Frames 
were  originally  proposed  by  Minsky  (1975)  as  a  basis  for  understanding 
visual  perception,  natural-language  dialogues,  and  other  complex  behav- 
iors. Scripts — frame-like  structures  specifically  designed  for  representing 
sequences  of  events — have  been  developed  by  Schank  and  Abelson  (1977) 
and  their  colleagues.  Both  refer  to  methods  of  organizing  the  knowledge 
representation  in  a  way  that  directs  attention  and  facilitates  recall  and 
inference. 

Organizing  Knowledge  and  Expectations 

Frames  provide  a  structure,  a  framework,  within  which  new  data  are 
interpreted  in  terms  of  concepts  acquired  through  previous  experience. 
Furthermore,  the  organization  of  this  knowledge  facilitates  expectation- 
driven  processing,  looking  for  things  that  are  expected  based  on  the 
context  one  thinks  one  is  in.  The  representational  mechanism  that 
makes  possible  this  kind  of  reasoning  is  the  slot,  the  place  where 
knowledge  fits  within  the  larger  context  created  by  the  frame.  For 
example,  a  simple  frame  for  the  generic  concept  of  chair  might  have 
slots  for  number  of  legs  and  style  of  back.  A  frame  for  a  particular 
chair  has  the  same  slots — they  are  inherited  from  the  CHAIR  frame — but 
the  contents  of  the  slots  are  more  fully  specified: 

CHAIR  Frame 

Special  ization-of:  FURNITURE 

Number-of- I egs :  an  integer  (DEFAULT=4) 

Sty  I e-of-back :  straight,  cushioned,  .  .  . 

l\lumber-of-arms :  0,  1,  or  2 


C7  Frames  and  Scripts  217 

JOHN'S-CHAIR  Frame 

Speci a  I i zation-of :  CHAIR 

Number-of- I egs:  4 

Sty  I e-of-back :  cushioned 

Number-of-arms:  0 

By  supplying  a  place  for  knowledge,  and  thus  creating  the  possibility  of 
missing  or  incompletely  specified  knowledge,  the  slot  mechanism  per- 
mits reasoning  based  on  seeking  confirmation  of  expectations — "filling  in 
slots." 

To  illustrate  some  of  the  current  ideas  about  slots  and  frames  and 
how  they  might  be  used  by  a  frame-based  reasoning  system,  consider 
the  following  example  of  a  Restaurant  Frame.  The  terminology  used 
for  this  example  is  intended  only  to  give  a  sense  of  the  structure  of 
knowledge  in  a  frame  and  does  not  follow  any  of  the  varied  formalisms 
developed  by  the  different  researchers  in  this  area  (e.g.,  Minsky,  1975; 
Bobrow  and  Winograd,  1977b;  Schank  and  Abelson,  1977;  Szolovitz, 
Hawkinson,  and  Martin,  1977;  Goldstein  and  Roberts,  1977;  Brachman, 
1978;  Aikins,  1979;  Stefik,  1980). 

Generic  RESTAURANT  Frame 

Speci  a  I i zation-of :   Busi  ness-Establ ishment 
Types: 

range:     (Cafeteria,  Seat-Yoursel f ,  Wa i t-To-Be-Seated) 
default:   Wa i t-to-be-Seated 

if-needed:  IF  plastic-orange-counter  THEM  Fast-Food, 
IF  stack-of-trays  THEM  Cafeteria, 
IF  wa it-for-wa i tress-sign  or  reservations-made 

THEM  Wait-To-Be-Seated, 
OTHERWISE  Seat-Yoursel f. 
Location : 

range:     an  ADDRESS 
if-needed:  (Look  at  the  MENU) 
Name: 

if-needed:  (Look  at  the  MENU) 
Food-Sty  I e : 

range:     (Burgers,  Chinese,  American,  Seafood,  French) 

default:   American 

if-added:   (Update  Alternatives  of  Restaurant) 


218  Knowledge  Representation  IE 

Times-of-Operation : 

range:     a  Time-of-Day 

default:   open  evenings  except  Mondays 
Payment-Form: 

range:     (Cash,  CreditCard,  Check,  Washing-Dishes-Script) 
Event-Sequence: 

default:   Eat-at-Restaurant  Script 
A  I ternati  ves : 

range:     all  restaurants  with  same  FoodSty I e 

if-needed:  (Find  all  Restaurants  with  the  same  FoodStyle) 

There  are  several  different  kinds  of  knowledge  represented  in  this  ex- 
ample. The  Specialization-of  slot  is  used  to  establish  a  property  inher- 
itance hierarchy  among  the  frames,  which  in  turn  allows  information 
about  the  parent  frame  to  be  inherited  by  its  children,  much  like  the 
ISA  link  in  semantic  net  representations  (see  Article  m.C3).  Note  that 
the  Location  slot  has  subslots  of  its  own — slots  can  have  a  complex, 
frame-like  structure  in  some  systems.  The  contents  of  the  Range  slot  in 
this  generic  restaurant  example  is  an  expectation  about  what  kinds  of 
things  the  Location  of  a  restaurant  might  be.  And  the  If-Needed  slot 
contains  an  attached  procedure  that  can  be  used  to  determine  the  slot's 
value  if  necessary  (see  discussion  of  procedural  attachment  below). 
Another  important  slot  type  is  Default,  which  suggests  a  value  for  the 
slot  unless  there  is  contradictory  evidence.  Many  other  types  of  slots 
are  used  in  the  various  frame  systems,  and  the  descriptions  here  are 
quite  incomplete,  but  they  will  at  least  give  an  idea  of  the  kinds  of 
knowledge  represented  in  frames. 

As  indicated  in  the  Event- Sequence  slot,  knowledge  about  what  typ- 
ically happens  at  a  restaurant  might  be  represented  in  a  script,  like  the 
one  below: 

EAT-AT-RESTAURANT  Script 

Props:  (Restaurant,  Money,  Food,  Menu,  Tables,  Chairs) 

Roles:  (Hungry-Persons,  Wait-Persons,  Chef-Persons) 

Poi nt-of-Vi ew:  Hungry-Persons 

Ti me-of -Occurrence:  (Times-of-Operation  of  Restaurant) 

Place-of-Occurrence :  (Location  of  Restaurant) 


C7  Frames  and  Scripts  219 

Event-Sequence : 

first:   Enter-Restaurant  Script 

then:    if  (Wa i t-To- Be-Seated-Sign  or  Reservations) 

then  Get-Na i tre-d's-Attention  Script 
then:    PI ease-Be-Seated  Script 
then:    Order-Food-Script 
then:    Eat-Food-Scri pt  unless  (Long-Wait)  when 

Ex it-Restau rant- Angry  Script 
then:     if  (Food-Quality  was  better  than  Palatable) 

then  Compl i ments-To-The-Chef  Script 
then:    Pay-For-It-Scri pt 
finally:  Leave-Restaurant  Script 

This  is  a  rough  rendition  in  English  of  the  type  of  Restaurant  script 
described  by  Schank  and  Abelson  (1977).  The  script  specifies  a  normal 
or  default  sequence  of  events  as  well  as  exceptions  and  possible  error 
situations.  The  script  also  requires  the  use  of  a  few  static  descriptions 
such  as  Props  and  Roles  that  refer  to  other  frames.  Scripts  are  de- 
scribed more  fully  in  Article  IV.F6. 

Procedural  Knowledge  in  Frames  and  Scripts 

Underlying  the  declarative  structure  of  frames  and  scripts — the  way 
that  they  organize  the  representation  of  static  facts — is  an  important 
dynamic  or  procedural  aspect  of  frame-based  systems.  In  particular, 
procedures  can  be  attached  to  slots  to  drive  the  reasoning  or  problem- 
solving  behavior  of  the  system.  (See  the  general  discussion  of 
procedural  representation  of  knowledge  in  Article  m.C2.)  In  some  frame- 
based  systems,  attached  procedures  are  the  principal  mechanism  for 
directing  the  reasoning  process,  being  activated  to  fill  in  slots,  If-Needed, 
or  being  triggered  when  a  slot  is  filled  (Bobrow  et  al.,  1977). 

Filling  in  slots.  After  a  particular  frame  or  script  has  been  selected 
to  represent  the  current  context  or  situation,  the  primary  process  in  a 
frame-based  reasoning  system  is  often  just  filling  in  the  details  called  for 
by  its  slots.  For  example,  after  selecting  the  Generic  Restaurant  Frame 
above,  one  of  the  first  things  we  might  want  the  system  to  do  is  to 
determine  the  value  of  the  Type  slot.  This  could  be  accomplished  in 
one  of  several  ways.  Sometimes  the  type  is  directly  inherited,  but  in 
this  case  there  are  several  alternatives.  For  instance,  the  default  res- 
taurant type  can  be  used  if  there  are  no  contraindications,  or  the 
attached  If-Needed  procedure  can  be  used  to  decide. 

Default  and  inherited  values  are  relatively  inexpensive  methods  of 
filling  in  slots;  they  don't  require  powerful  reasoning  processes.     These 


220  Knowledge  Representation  EI 

methods  account  for  a  large  part  of  the  power  of  frames — any  new 
frames  interpreting  the  situation  can  make  use  of  values  determined  by 
prior  experience,  without  having  to  recompute  them.  When  the  needed 
information  must  be  derived,  attached  procedures  provide  a  means  of 
specifying  appropriate  methods  that  can  take  advantage  of  the  current 
context,  namely,  slot-specific  heuristics.  In  other  words,  general  problem- 
solving  methods  can  be  augmented  by  domain- specific  knowledge  about 
how  to  accomplish  specific,  slot-sized  goals. 

Besides  directing  the  gathering  of  further  information,  filling  in  the 
slots  provides  confirmation  that  the  frame  or  script  is  appropriate  for 
understanding  the  scene  or  event.  For  example,  Schank's  script-based 
story-understander,  SAM,  can  be  said  to  have  understood  a  written  story 
when  each  slot  in  the  appropriate  script  has  been  filled  by  an  event  in 
the  story,  either  explicit  in  the  text  or  implied  (see  Article  IV.F6). 
Should  the  frame  or  script  be  found  to  be  inappropriate,  attached  pro- 
cedures can  trigger  transfer  of  control  to  other  frames. 

Triggers.  Another  frequently  used  form  of  procedural  attachment 
is  routines  that  are  activated  when  the  value  of  a  slot  is  found  or 
changed.  These  "trigger"  procedures  implement  event-  or  data-driven 
processing,  since  they  take  over  control  only  when  certain  events  or 
data  occur  (see  Article  m.C4).  For  example,  the  If- Added  procedure  in 
the  Food- Style  slot  of  the  Generic  Restaurant  Frame  is  used  to  modify 
the  list  of  alternative  restaurants  once  a  particular  cuisine  is  chosen. 

In  some  systems,  trigger  procedures  attached  to  special  slots  in  the 
frame  are  used  to  decide  what  to  do  in  the  event  that  the  frame  is 
found  not  to  match  the  current  situation.  For  instance,  if  the  Eat-at- 
Restaurant  script  were  to  discover  a  food  line  and  a  stack  of  trays,  it 
might  trigger  the  Eat-at-Cafeteria  script  as  being  more  appropriate. 
This  triggering  procedure  has  been  used  in  various  frame-driven  systems 
for  medical  diagnosis  (Szolovitz,  Hawkinson,  and  Martin,  1977;  Aikins, 
1979).  Since  a  number  of  related  diseases  might  share  a  core  set  of 
signs  and  symptoms,  the  ability  to  make  a  differential  diagnosis  depends 
strongly  on  the  ability  to  detect  those  factors  that  rule  out  or  confirm  a 
particular  diagnosis.  Typically,  in  medicine,  when  one  diagnosis  is  ruled 
out,  a  similar  but  more  likely  disease  is  indicated. 

Current  Research  on  Frames  and  Scripts 

A  number  of  experimental  prototype  systems  have  been  implemented 
to  explore  the  idea  of  frame-based  processing  introduced  by  Minsky 
(1975).  The  following  descriptions  are  intended  to  give  an  indication  of 
the  domains  and  problems  that  researchers  in  this  area  address. 


C7  Frames  and  Scripts  221 

Bobrow  and  his  associates  (1977)  have  experimented  with  frame- 
based  natural  language  understanding  in  their  GUS  system,  and  their 
article  includes  clear  examples  of  how  frames  might  be  used  to  control  a 
system's  reasoning.  Designed  as  a  prototype  of  an  automated  airline 
reservation  assistant,  the  system  attempted  to  demonstrate  how  various 
aspects  of  dialogue  understanding — such  as  handling  mixed-initiative 
dialogues,  indirect  answers,  and  anaphoric  references — could  be  facilitated 
by  the  ability  to  make  expectations  and  defaults  available  with  frames. 
This  system  was  also  used  to  explore  procedural  attachment  issues. 

Concurrently  with  the  design  of  GUS,  a  frame-based  programming 
and  representation  language  called  KRL  (Knowledge  Representation 
Language)  was  developed  to  explore  frame-based  processing  (Bobrow  and 
Winograd,  1977b).  Many  of  the  specific  ideas  about  how  frame-based 
systems  might  work  were  first  suggested  by  the  KRL  research  group. 
As  part  of  their  early  design  work,  the  KRL  group  implemented  several 
AI  systems  in  the  first  version  of  the  language  (Bobrow  and  Winograd, 
1977a).  The  report  details  a  number  of  difficulties  and  shortcomings 
they  encountered,  some  of  which  are  inherent  in  frame-based  processing. 

Other  work  with  frame-based  systems  includes  the  NUDGE  system, 
developed  by  Goldstein  and  Roberts  (1977),  which  was  used  to  un- 
derstand incomplete  and  possibly  inconsistent  management-scheduling 
requests  and  to  provide  a  complete  specification  for  a  conventional 
scheduling  algorithm.  Implemented  in  their  FRL-0  language,  the  sys- 
tem also  used  a  frame-based  semantics  to  resolve  anaphoric  requests 
(Bullwinkle,  1977). 

A  program  that  solves  physics  problems  stated  in  English  was  de- 
veloped by  Novak  (1977).  It  used  a  set  of  canonical  object  frames,  such 
as  Point,  Mass,  and  Pivot,  to  interpret  the  actual  objects  and  their 
relations  in  a  number  of  statics  problems.  These  canonical  object 
frames  were  used  to  construct  a  view  of  an  actual  object  as  an  abstract 
object,  thereby  simplifying  the  problem  representation. 

The  UNITS  package,  developed  by  Stefik  (1980),  is  a  useful  imple- 
mentation of  a  variety  of  ideas  about  frame  systems  in  a  transportable 
programming  package.  The  UNITS  package  has  been  used  to  build 
working  AI  systems  for  scientific  applications. 

Finally,  work  on  KLONE  (Brachman,  1978)  represents  current 
research  in  the  theory  and  design  of  frame-based  systems. 

Work  on  script-based  processing  in  AI  has  for  the  most  part  been 
carried  on  by  Schank  and  Abelson  (1977)  and  their  colleagues.  They 
have  used  scripts  to  investigate  the  notions  of  causality  and  the  under- 
standing of  sequences  of  events.  In  particular,  the  SAM  program 
(Article   IV.F6)   attempts   to   understand   short   stories   using   a   script   to 


222  Knowledge  Representation  HI 

guide  the  interpretation  of  occurrences  in  the  story.  After  establishing 
the  appropriate  script  and  filling  some  of  its  slots  with  information  from 
the  story,  SAM  can  make  inferences  from  script-based  information  about 
similar  events. 

Summary 

Frames  and  scripts  are  recent  attempts  by  AJ  researchers  to  provide 
a  method  for  organizing  the  large  amounts  of  knowledge  needed  to  per- 
form cognitive  tasks.  Much  of  the  work  in  this  area  is  quite  conjec- 
tural, and  there  are  many  fundamental  differences  in  approach  among 
the  researchers  who  have  designed  frame-based  systems.  The  devel- 
opment of  large-scale  organizations  of  knowledge  and  the  concomitant 
ability  of  these  structures  to  provide  direction  for  active  cognitive 
processing  are  the  current  direction  of  AI  research  in  knowledge 
representation.  A  number  of  serious  problems  must  be  solved  before  the 
conjectured  benefits  of  frames  will  be  realized. 

References 

Minsky  (1975)  coined  the  word  frame  and  set  off  the  recent  flurry  of 
AI  work  in  the  area.  The  clearest  detailed  descriptions  of  frame-based 
reasoning  systems  are  Kuipers  (1975)  and  Bobrow  and  Winograd  (1977b). 
Fahlman  (1975),  Charniak  (1978),  and  Brachman  (1978)  discuss  some 
important  current  research  issues  in  this  area.  Schank  and  Abelson 
(1977)  provide  an  excellent  discussion  of  AI  research  on  scripts. 


Chapter  IV 
Understanding  Natural  Language 


CHAPTER  IV:  UNDERSTANDING  NATURAL  LANGUAGE 


A.  Overview  /  225 

B.  Machine  Translation  /  288 

C.  Grammars  /  289 

1.  Formal  Grammars  /  289 

2.  Transformational  Grammars  /  245 
8.  Systemic  Grammar  /  249 

4.  Case  Grammars  /  252 

D.  Parsing  /  256 

1.  Overview  of  Parsing  Techniques  /  256 

2.  Augmented  Transition  Networks  /  268 
8.   The  General  Syntactic  Processor  /  268 

E.  Text  Generation  /  278 

F.  Natural  Language  Processing  Systems  /  281 

1.  Early  Natural  Language  Systems  /  281 

2.  Wilks's  Machine  Translation  System  /  288 
8.  LUNAR  /  292 

4.  SHRDLU  /  295 

5.  MARGIE  /  800 

6.  SAM  and  PAM  /  806 

7.  LIFER  /  816 


A.     OVERVIEW 

The  MOST  COMMON  WAY  that  people  communicate  is  by  speaking  or 
writing  in  one  of  the  "natural"  languages,  like  English,  French,  or 
Chinese.  Computer  programming  languages,  on  the  other  hand,  seem 
awkward  to  humans.  These  "artificial"  languages  are  designed  so  that 
sentences  have  a  rigid  format,  or  syntax,  making  it  easier  for  compilers 
to  parse  the  programs  and  convert  them  into  the  proper  sequences  of 
computer  instructions.  Besides  being  structurally  simpler  than  natural 
languages,  programming  languages  can  express  easily  only  those  concepts 
that  are  important  in  programming:  "Do  this,  then  do  that,"  "See 
whether  such  and  such  is  true,"  and  so  forth.  The  things  that  can  be 
meant  by  expressions  in  a  language  are  referred  to  as  the  semantics  of 
the  language. 

The  research  described  in  this  chapter  concerns  the  development  of 
computer  programs  that  try  to  deal  with  the  full  range  of  meaning  in 
languages  like  English.  If  computers  could  understand  what  people 
mean  when  people  type  (or  speak)  English  sentences,  the  systems  would 
be  easier  to  use  and  would  fit  more  naturally  into  people's  lives. 
Furthermore,  AI  researchers  hope  that  learning  how  to  build  computers 
that  can  communicate  as  people  do  will  extend  our  understanding  of  the 
nature  of  language  and  of  the  mind. 

So  far,  programs  have  been  written  that  are  quite  successful  at  pro- 
cessing somewhat  constrained  input:  The  user  is  limited  in  either  the 
structural  variation  of  his  sentences  (syntax  constrained  by  an  artificial 
grammar)  or  in  the  number  of  things  he  can  mean  (in  domains  with 
constrained  semantics).  Some  of  these  systems  are  adequate  for  building 
English  "front  ends"  for  a  variety  of  data  processing  tasks  and  are 
available  commercially.  But  the  fluent  use  of  language  typical  of  hu- 
mans is  still  elusive,  and  understanding  natural  language  (NL)  is  an 
active  area  of  research  in  AI. 

This  article  presents  a  brief  sketch  of  the  history  of  research  in 
natural  language  processing  and  an  idea  of  the  state  of  the  art  in  NL. 
The  next  article  is  a  historical  sketch  of  research  on  machine  translation 
from  one  language  to  another,  which  was  the  subject  of  the  very  earliest 
ideas  about  processing  language  with  computers.  It  is  followed  by  sev- 
eral technical  articles  on  some  of  the  grammars  and  parsing  techniques 
that  AI  researchers  have  used  in  their  programs.  Then,  after  an  article 
on   text  generation,  that  is,  the  creation  of  sentences  by  a  program  to 


226  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

express  what  it  wants  to  say,  there  are  several  articles  describing  the 
NL  programs  themselves:  the  early  systems  of  the  1960s  and  the  major 
research  projects  of  the  last  decade,  including  Wilks's  machine 
translation  system,  Winograd's  SHRDLU,  Woods's  LUNAR,  Schank's 
MARGIE,  SAM,  and  PAM,  and  Hendrix's  LIFER. 

Two  other  chapters  of  the  Handbook  are  especially  relevant  to  NL 
research.  Speech  understanding  research  (Chap,  v)  attempts  to  build 
computer  interfaces  that  understand  spoken  language.  In  the  1970s,  re- 
search on  speech  and  understanding  natural  language  was  often  closely 
linked.  Increasingly  inseparable  from  NL  research  is  the  study  of 
knowledge  representation  (Chap,  m),  because  AI  researchers  have  come 
to  believe  that  a  very  large  amount  of  knowledge  about  the  world  is 
needed  to  understand  even  simple  dialogues.  AI  research  in  the  repre- 
sentation of  knowledge  explores  ways  of  making  this  world  knowledge 
accessible  to  the  computer  program  by  building  representational  data 
structures  in  the  machine's  memory. 

Early  History 

Research  in  computational  linguistics,  the  use  of  computers  in  the 
study  of  language,  started  soon  after  computers  became  available  in  the 
1940s  (Bott,  1970).  The  machine's  ability  to  manipulate  symbols  was 
readily  applied  to  written  text  to  compile  word  indexes  (lists  of  word 
occurrences)  and  concordances  (indexes  that  included  a  line  of  context 
for  each  occurrence).  Such  surface- level  machine  processing  of  text  was 
of  some  value  in  linguistic  research,  but  it  soon  became  apparent  that 
the  computer  could  perform  much  more  powerful  linguistic  functions 
than  merely  counting  and  rearranging  data. 

In  1949,  Warren  Weaver  proposed  that  computers  might  be  useful 
for  "the  solution  of  world-wide  translation  problems"  (Weaver,  1955, 
p.  15).  The  resulting  research,  on  what  was  called  machine  translation, 
attempted  to  simulate  with  a  computer  the  presumed  functions  of  a 
human  translator:  looking  up  each  word  in  a  bilingual  dictionary, 
choosing  an  equivalent  word  in  the  output  language,  and,  after  pro- 
cessing each  sentence  in  this  way,  arranging  the  resulting  string  of 
words  to  fit  the  output  language's  word  order. 

Despite  the  attractive  simplicity  of  the  idea,  many  unforeseen 
problems  arose,  both  in  selecting  appropriate  word  equivalences  and  in 
arranging  them  to  produce  a  sentence  in  the  output  language.  (Article 
IV.B  discusses  the  history,  problems,  and  current  state  of  research  on 
machine  translation.)  The  concept  of  translating  by  replacing  words 
with  their  equivalents  and  then  adjusting  the  word  order  was 
abandoned.     In  its  place,  eventually,   understanding  became  the  focus  of 


A  Overview  227 

AI  research  in  language — if  the  machine  could  actually  "understand  the 
meaning"  of  a  sentence,  it  could  presumably  paraphrase  it,  answer 
questions  about  it,  or  translate  it  into  another  language.  But  the 
nature  of  understanding  is  itself  a  difficult  problem.  New  AI  approaches 
to  natural  language  processing  were  influenced  by  many  scientific 
developments  of  the  1960s,  including  high-level  programming  languages 
and  list  processing,  vastly  expanded  computer  power  and  memory 
capacity,  and  Chomsky's  breakthroughs  in  linguistic  theory. 

In  the  1960s,  AI  researchers  developed  a  new  group  of  computer 
programs,  attempting  to  deal  with  some  of  the  issues  that  had  thwarted 
attempts  at  machine  translation.  These  early  natural  language  programs 
marked  the  beginning  of  AI  work  in  understanding  language.  They 
began  to  view  human  language  as  a  complex  cognitive  ability  involving 
knowledge  of  different  kinds:  the  structure  of  sentences,  the  meaning  of 
words,  a  model  of  the  listener,  the  rules  of  conversation,  and  an  ex- 
tensive, shared  body  of  general  information  about  the  world.  (Several  of 
these  programs  are  described  briefly  in  Article  iv.fi.)  The  general  AI 
approach  has  been  to  model  human  language  as  a  knowledge-based 
system  for  processing  communications  and  to  create  computer  programs 
that  serve  as  working  instantiations  of  those  models  (see  Winograd, 
1980b,  however,  for  a  discussion  of  some  possible  limitations  of  this 
approach  to  the  study  of  language). 

AI  researchers  in  natural  language  processing  expect  their  work  to 
lead  both  to  the  development  of  practical,  useful,  language  under- 
standing systems  and  to  a  better  understanding  of  language  and  the 
nature  of  intelligence.  The  computer,  like  the  human  mind,  has  the 
ability  to  manipulate  symbols  in  complex  processes,  including  processes 
that  involve  decision  making  based  on  stored  knowledge.  It  is  an 
assumption  of  the  field  that  the  human  use  of  language  is  a  cognitive 
process  of  this  sort.  By  developing  and  testing  computer-based  models 
of  language  processing  that  approximate  human  performance,  researchers 
hope  to  understand  better  how  human  language  works. 

Approaches  to  NL  Processing 

Natural  language  research  projects  have  had  diverse  emphases  and 
have  employed  diverse  methods,  making  their  classification  difficult. 
One  coherent  scheme,  borrowed  from  Winograd  (1972),  groups  natural 
language  programs  according  to  how  they  represent  and  use  knowledge 
of  their  subject  matter.  On  this  basis,  natural  language  programs  can 
be  divided  into  four  historical  categories. 

The    earliest    natural    language    programs    sought    to    achieve    only 


228  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

limited  results  in  specific,  constrained  domains.  These  programs,  like 
Green's  BASEBALL,  Lindsay's  SAD-SAM,  Bobrow's  STUDENT,  and 
Weizenbaum's  ELIZA,  used  ad  hoc  data  structures  to  store  facts  about  a 
limited  domain  (see  Article  rv.Fi).  Input  sentences  were  restricted  to 
simple  declarative  and  interrogative  forms  and  were  scanned  by  the 
programs  for  predeclared  key  words  or  patterns  that  indicated  known 
objects  and  relationships.  Domain- specific  rules,  called  heuristics,  were 
used  to  derive  the  required  response  from  the  key  words  in  the  sentence 
and  the  knowledge  in  the  database.  Because  their  domains  of  discourse 
were  so  restricted,  these  early  systems  were  able  to  ignore  many  of  the 
complexities  of  language  and  achieve  sometimes  impressive  results  in 
answering  questions.  (Weizenbaum,  1976,  argues  that  to  the  extent  the 
results  were  impressive,  they  were  also  misleading.) 

Another  early  approach  to  NL  processing  was  tried  in  PROTO- 
SYNTHEX-I  (Simmons,  Burger,  and  Long,  1966)  and  Semantic  Memory 
(Quillian,  1968).  These  systems  essentially  stored  a  representation  of  the 
text  itself  in  their  databases,  using  a  variety  of  clever  indexing  schemes 
to  retrieve  material  containing  specific  words  or  phrases.  In  this  text- 
based  approach,  the  systems  were  not  tied  by  their  construction  to  a 
specific  domain,  since  the  textual  database  could  cover  any  subject. 
However,  they  were  still  severely  restricted  in  the  sense  that  they  could 
only  respond  with  material  that  had  been  prestored  explicitly.  Though 
more  general  than  their  predecessors,  these  programs  still  failed  to  notice 
even  obvious  implications  of  the  sentences  in  the  database,  because  they 
did  not  deal  with  the  meaning  of  the  English  language  input — that  is, 
they  had  no  deductive  powers. 

To  approach  the  problem  of  how  to  characterize  and  use  the  mean- 
ing of  sentences,  a  third  group  of  programs  was  developed  during  the 
mid-1960s.  In  these  limited-logic  systems,  including  SIR  (Raphael,  1968), 
TLC  (Quillian,  1969),  DEACON  (Thompson,  1966),  and  CONVERSE 
(Kellogg,  1968),  the  information  in  the  database  was  stored  in  some 
formal  notation,  and  mechanisms  were  provided  for  translating  input 
sentences  into  this  internal  form  (semantic  analysis).  The  formal  nota- 
tion was  an  attempt  to  liberate  the  informational  content  of  the  input 
from  the  structure  of  English.  The  overall  goal  of  these  systems  was  to 
perform  inferences  on  the  database  in  order  to  find  answers  to  questions 
that  were  not  stored  explicitly  in  the  database.  For  instance,  if  a 
system  has  been  told  that  Fido  is  a  collie  and  that  All  collies  are  dogs, 
then  it  should  be  able  to  answer  the  question,  Is  Fido  a  dog?  The 
systems  of  this  period  were  limited  in  the  sense  that  the  deductions 
they  could  make  were  only  a  subset  of  the  full  range  of  logical 
inferences  used  in  ordinary  conversation. 


A  Overview  229 

The  fourth  group  of  natural  language  understanding  programs  might 
be  called  knowledge-based  systems;  their  development  is  closely  inter- 
twined with  AI  research  on  the  representation  of  knowledge  (see  Chap, 
m).  These  programs  use  a  large  amount  of  information  about  the 
domain  under  discussion  to  help  understand  sentences — knowledge  that  is 
stored  within  the  program  using  some  knowledge  representation  scheme 
like  logic,  procedural  semantics,  semantic  networks,  or  frames.  But 
before  discussing  these  knowledge-based  systems  of  the  1970s,  we  should 
first  mention  an  important  development  in  the  study  of  language  during 
the  preceding  decade  that  strongly  influenced  their  design. 

Grammars  and  Parsing 

A  grammar  of  a  language  is  a  scheme  for  specifying  the  sentences 
allowed  in  the  language,  indicating  the  syntactic  rules  for  combining 
words  into  well-formed  phrases  and  clauses.  The  theory  of  generative 
grammar  introduced  by  Chomsky  (1957)  radically  influenced  all  linguistic 
research,  including  AI  work  in  computational  linguistics.  In  natural 
language  processing  programs,  the  grammar  is  used  in  parsing  to  "pick 
apart"  the  sentences  that  were  input  to  the  program  to  help  determine 
their  meaning  and  thus  an  appropriate  response.  Several  very  different 
kinds  of  grammars  have  been  used  in  NL  programs,  including  phrase- 
structure  grammars,  transformational  grammars,  case  grammars,  systemic 
grammars  (described  in  Sec.  rv.C),  and  semantic  grammars  (see  Article 
DC.C3,  in  Vol.  n). 

Parsing  is  the  "delinearization"  of  linguistic  input,  that  is,  the  use  of 
grammatical  rules  and  other  sources  of  knowledge  to  determine  the  func- 
tions of  the  words  in  the  input  sentence  (a  linear  string  of  words)  in 
order  to  create  a  more  complicated  data  structure,  for  example,  a  der- 
ivation tree.  This  structure  depicts  some  of  the  relations  between  words 
in  the  sentence  ("this  adjective  modifies  that  noun,  which  is  the  object 
of  a  prepositional  phrase . . .  " )  and  can  be  used  to  get  at  the  "mean- 
ing" of  the  sentence.  All  natural-language-processing  computer  systems 
contain  a  parsing  component  of  some  sort,  but  those  of  the  early  NL 
programs  were  based  on  keywords  expected  in  the  input  or  were 
constrained  to  quite  limited  phrase  structures.  The  practical  application 
of  grammars  to  the  full  range  of  natural  language  has  proved  difficult. 

The  design  of  a  parser  is  a  complex  problem,  in  both  theory  and 
implementation.  The  first  part  of  the  design  concerns  the  specification 
of  the  grammar  to  be  used.  The  rest  of  the  parsing  system  is  con- 
cerned with  the  method  of  use  of  the  grammar,  that  is,  the  manner  in 
which  strings  of  words  are  matched  against  patterns  of  the  grammar. 
These  considerations  run  into  many  of  the  general  questions  of  computer 


230  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

science  and  Artificial  Intelligence  concerning  process  control  and  manip- 
ulation of  representational  data  structures  (see,  e.g.,  recent  work  by 
Marcus,  1980,  on  the  PARSIFAL  system). 

Knowledge-based  Natural  Language  Systems 

In  the  early  1970s,  two  systems  were  built  that  attempted  to  deal  in 
a  comprehensive  way  with  both  syntactic  and  semantic  aspects  of  lan- 
guage processing.  William  Woods's  LUNAR  program  answered  questions 
about  the  samples  of  rock  brought  back  from  the  moon,  using  a  large 
database  provided  by  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Agency  (see 
Article  IV.F3).  It  was  one  of  the  first  programs  to  attack  the  problems 
of  English  grammar,  by  means  of  an  augmented  transition  network 
parser  (Article  IV.D2).  LUNAR  utilized  the  notion  of  procedural  seman- 
tics in  which  queries  were  first  converted  systematically  into  a  "pro- 
gram" to  be  executed  by  the  information  retrieval  component.  The 
other  system,  Terry  Winograd's  SHRDLU,  carried  on  a  dialogue  with  a 
user  in  which  the  system  simulated  a  robot  manipulating  a  set  of  simple 
objects  on  a  table  top  (see  Article  IV.F4).  The  naturalness  of  the 
dialogue,  as  well  as  SHRDLU's  apparent  reasoning  ability,  made  it 
particularly  influential  in  the  development  of  AI  ideas  on  natural 
language  processing.  These  two  systems  integrated  syntactic  and 
semantic  analysis  with  a  body  of  world  knowledge  about  a  limited 
domain,  allowing  them  to  deal  with  more  sophisticated  aspects  of 
language  and  discourse  than  had  previously  been  possible. 

Central  to  these  two  systems  is  the  idea  of  representing  knowledge 
about  the  world  as  procedures  within  the  system.  The  meanings  of 
words  and  sentences  were  expressed  as  programs  in  a  computer  lan- 
guage, and  the  execution  of  these  programs  corresponded  to  reasoning 
from  the  meanings.  Procedural  representations  are  often  the  most 
straightforward  way  to  implement  the  specific  reasoning  steps  needed  for 
a  natural  language  system.  Most  of  the  actual  working  systems  that 
have  been  developed  have  made  heavy  use  of  specialized  procedural 
representations,  to  fill  in  those  places  where  the  more  declarative 
representation  schemes — those  where  the  "knowledge"  is  encoded  in 
passive  data  structures  that  are  interpreted  by  other  procedures — are 
insufficient.  (The  procedural-declarative  controversy  was  at  one  time  an 
important  focus  in  the  development  of  AI;  see  Article  m.A.) 

Perhaps  the  most  influential  declarative  representation  schemes  were 
logic  and  semantic  networks.  Semantic  networks  were  first  proposed  by 
Quillian  (1968)  as  a  model  for  human  associative  memory.  They  applied 
the  concepts  of  graph  theory,  representing  words  and  meanings  as  a  set 


A  Overview  231 

of  linked  nodes  implemented  as  data  structures  in  the  computer  pro- 
gram. By  using  a  systematic  set  of  link  types,  Quillian  was  able  to 
program  simple  operations  (such  as  following  chains  of  links)  that  cor- 
responded to  drawing  inferences.  The  advantage  of  semantic  networks 
over  standard  logic  as  a  representation  scheme  (see  Article  m.Ci)  is  that 
some  selected  set  of  inferences,  of  those  that  are  possible,  can  be  made 
in  a  specialized  and  efficient  way.  If  these  correspond  to  the  inferences 
that  people  make  naturally,  then  the  system  will  be  able  to  do  a  more 
natural  sort  of  reasoning  than  can  be  easily  achieved  by  formal  logical 
deduction.  Semantic  networks  have  been  the  basis  for  representation  of 
the  knowledge  in  a  number  of  systems,  including  LIFER  (Article  IV.F7) 
and  many  of  the  speech  understanding  systems  (Chap.  v).  Recently 
there  has  been  a  good  deal  of  work  on  formalizing  the  network  notions, 
so  that  there  is  a  clear  correspondence  between  the  graph  operations 
and  the  formal  semantics  of  the  statements  represented  (see  Article  m.C3 
on  semantic  nets). 

Case  representations  extend  the  basic  notions  of  semantic  nets  with 
the  idea  of  a  case  frame,  a  cluster  of  the  properties  of  an  object  or 
event  into  a  single  concept  (Article  IV.C4).  There  have  been  several 
variations  on  this  idea,  some  of  which  remain  close  to  the  linguistic 
forms.  Others,  such  as  conceptual  dependency,  are  based  on  the  notion 
of  semantic  primitives,  that  is,  the  construction  of  all  semantic  notions 
from  a  small  set  of  elementary  concepts  (see  Article  m.C6).  Conceptual 
dependency  theory  was  developed  by  Roger  Schank  and  his  colleagues 
and  used  in  their  NL  systems,  MARGIE  and  SAM.  (See  Articles  IV.F5 
and  IV.F6  and  also  Schank,  1980,  which  is  a  recent  review  of  his  work 
in  natural  language  understanding.) 

As  with  semantic  networks,  the  advantage  of  case  representations 
lies  in  their  focus  on  grouping  relevant  sets  of  relationships  into  single 
data  structures.  The  idea  of  clustering  structures  in  a  coherent  and  effi- 
cient way  has  been  carried  much  further  in  representation  schemes  based 
on  the  notion  of  a  frame  (Minsky,  1975;  see  Article  m.C7).  Where  case 
representations  deal  primarily  with  single  sentences  or  acts,  frames  are 
applied  to  whole  situations,  complex  objects,  or  series  of  events.  In 
analyzing  a  sentence,  narrative,  or  dialogue,  a  frame-based  language 
understanding  system  tries  to  match  the  input  to  the  prototypes  of 
objects  and  events  in  its  domain  that  are  stored  in  its  database. 

For  example,  Schank's  SAM  system  makes  use  of  frame-like  data 
structures  called  scripts,  which  represent  stereotyped  sequences  of  events, 
to  understand  simple  stories.  It  assumes  that  the  events  being  described 
will  fit  (roughly)  into  one  of  the  scripts  in  its  knowledge  base,  which  it 
then    uses    to    fill    in    missing    pieces    in    the    story.      The    GUS    system 


232  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

(Bobrow  et  al.,  1977)  is  an  experimental,  frame-based  travel  consultant, 
engaging  in  dialogue  to  help  a  person  schedule  an  air  trip. 

The  important  common  element  in  all  of  these  systems  is  that  the 
prototype  frames  make  it  possible  to  use  expectations  about  the  usual 
properties  of  known  concepts  and  about  what  typically  happens  in  a 
variety  of  familiar  situations  to  help  understand  sentences  about  those 
objects  and  situations.  When  a  sentence  or  phrase  is  input  that  is  am- 
biguous or  under  specified,  it  can  be  compared  to  a  description  of  what 
would  be  expected  based  on  the  prototype.  If  there  is  a  plausible  match, 
assumptions  can  be  made  about  what  was  meant.  This  expectation- 
driven  processing  seems  to  be  an  important  aspect  of  the  human  use  of 
language,  where  incomplete  or  ungrammatical  sentences  can  be  under- 
stood in  appropriate  contexts  (see  Article  v. A). 

Investigation  of  script-  and  frame- based  systems  is  the  most  active 
area  of  AI  research  in  natural  language  understanding  at  the  present 
time.  Recent  systems  expand  the  domain  of  expectations  used  in  pro- 
cessing language  beyond  those  involving  typical  objects  and  events  to 
include  those  based  on  how  people  use  plans  to  achieve  goals  (see,  e.g., 
Schank  and  Abelson,  1977;  Wilensky,  1978b)  and  on  the  rules  people 
appear  to  follow  in  a  dialogue  (Cohen  and  Perrault,  1979;  Kaplan,  1979; 
Grosz,  1980;  Robinson  et  al.,  1980).  The  state  of  the  art  in  operational 
(nonexperimental)  NL  systems  is  exemplified  by  ROBOT  (Harris,  1979), 
LIFER  (Hendrix,  1977a),  and  PHLIQA1  (Landsbergen,  1976). 

References 

General  discussions  of  natural-language-processing  research  in  AI  in- 
clude those  by  Boden  (1977),  Charniak  and  Wilks  (1976),  Schank  and 
Abelson  (1977),  and  Winograd  (in  press).  The  recent  review  articles  by 
Schank  (1980)  and  Winograd  (1980b)  give  interesting  perspectives  to  the 
history  of  their  NL  research.  Waltz  (1977)  contains  more  than  50  brief 
summaries  of  current  projects  and  systems. 

In  addition,  many  historically  important  NL  systems  are  described 
in  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman  (1963),  Minsky  (1968),  and  Rustin  (1973). 
Bobrow  and  Collins  (1975),  COLING  (1976),  TINLAP-1  (1975),  and 
TINLAP-2  (1978)  are  proceedings  of  conferences  that  describe  current 
work  in  the  field.  Related  AI  work  on  speech  understanding  is  described 
in  the  collection  of  articles  edited  by  Lea  (1980b). 


B.     MACHINE  TRANSLATION 

The  concept  of  translation  from  one  language  to  another  by  machine 
is  older  than  the  computer  itself.  According  to  Yehoshua  Bar-Hillel, 
one  of  the  early  investigators  in  the  field,  the  idea  was  conceived 
perhaps  already  in  the  early  1930s  by  P.  P.  Smirnov-Troyansky  of  the 
Soviet  Union  and  G.  B.  Artsouni  of  France  (see  Bar-Hillel,  1964,  p.  7). 
Their  work  apparently  never  received  much  attention,  lying  dormant 
until  a  decade  later,  when  the  climate  was  much  more  favorable  because 
of  the  recent  invention  of  the  digital  computer.  In  certain  quarters  of 
the  scientific  world,  people  imagined — with  some  justification — that  com- 
puters would  lead  to  many  entirely  new  and  far-reaching  ideas  about 
man  and — perhaps  less  justifiably — that  computers  would  help  bring 
about  a  new  world  order.  In  short,  there  was  tremendous  excitement 
over  the  potential  of  these  new  thinking  machines,  as  they  were  quickly 
dubbed.  This  was  also  the  time  when  Claude  Shannon  was  formulating 
his  ideas  on  information  theory,  when  Norbert  Wiener  was  devising  the 
concept  of  cybernetics,  and  when  Pitts  and  McCullough  were  developing 
their  ideas  on  neural  nets  and  brain  function.  During  the  war,  more- 
over, computing  had  just  passed  with  flying  colors  its  initial  tests — in 
such  strategic  tasks  as  breaking  codes  and  calculating  complicated 
nuclear  cross  sections. 

It  would  be  well  to  bear  in  mind  that  when  machine  translation 
(MT)  work  began,  programming  was  done  by  wiring  boards  and  the  only 
computer  language  available  was  machine  language.  Such  concepts  as 
arrays  and  subroutines  were  yet  to  appear — not  to  mention  pushdown 
stacks,  compiler  languages,  recursive  procedures,  and  the  like.  Further- 
more, no  one  had  heard  of  context-free  and  context-sensitive  grammars, 
or  of  transformational  grammars,  or  of  augmented  transition  networks. 
At  the  forefront  of  computational  linguistics — the  application  of  the 
computer  to  the  study  of  language — were  statistical  experiments  with 
language,  such  as  compiling  matrices  of  letter  frequencies  and  of 
transition  frequencies  between  successive  letters.  Such  matrices  could  be 
used  to  produce  interesting  samples  of  pseudo-language  by  producing 
words  from  randomly  generated  letters  with  the  same  characteristics  as 
English  words.  (See  the  related  discussion  of  Yngve's  random  text 
generation  system  in  Article  IV.E.) 


234  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

First  Attempts 

The  real  genesis  of  machine  translation  dates  from  a  series  of  dis- 
cussions between  Warren  Weaver  and  A.  Donald  Booth  in  1946.  Both 
men  were  familiar  with  the  work  on  code  breaking  by  computers,  based 
on  letter-frequency  and  word-frequency  tables.  It  seemed  to  them  that 
some  of  the  same  methods  would  be  applicable  to  translation  and  that 
the  principal  obstacle  would  be  incorporating  a  full  dictionary  of  the 
two  languages.  Of  course,  they  recognized  that  simply  having  a  dic- 
tionary would  not  solve  all  problems.  Some  of  the  remaining  problems 
would  be  the  following:  (a)  Many  words  have  several  translations, 
depending  upon  context;  (b)  word  orders  vary  from  language  to  lan- 
guage; and  (c)  idiomatic  expressions  cannot  be  translated  word  for  word 
but  must  be  translated  in  toto.  Nevertheless,  it  appeared  plausible,  at 
the  time,  that  the  major  problem  in  translating  between  two  languages 
was  simply  that  of  vocabulary — and  so  at  least  a  large  part  of  trans- 
lation seemed  mechanizable. 

In  1947,  Booth  and  D.  H.  V.  Britten  worked  out  a  program  for  dic- 
tionary lookup.  This  was  a  full-form  dictionary,  in  that  each  variant  of 
any  basic  word  (e.g.,  love,  loves,  loving)  had  to  be  carried  as  a  separate 
entry  in  the  dictionary.  In  1948,  R.  H.  Richens  suggested  the  addition 
of  rules  concerning  the  inflections  of  words,  so  that  the  redundancy  of 
the  multiple  dictionary  entries  could  be  eliminated. 

In  1949,  Weaver  distributed  a  memorandum  entitled  "Translation" 
to  about  200  of  his  acquaintances  (see  Weaver,  1955),  and  a  considerable 
wave  of  interest  ensued.  In  addition  to  the  idea  that  all  languages  have 
many  features  in  common,  three  other  items  from  that  memorandum  are 
worth  repeating.  The  first  is  the  notion  of  a  window  through  which  one 
can  view  exactly  2N  +  1  words  of  text;  Weaver  suggests  that  when  N 
is  sufficiently  large,  one  will  be  able  to  determine  the  unique,  correct 
translation  for  the  word  that  sits  in  the  middle  of  the  window.  He 
then  points  out  that  N  may  be  a  function  of  the  word,  rather  than  a 
constant,  and  discusses  the  idea  of  choosing  a  value  of  N  such  that, 
say,  95%  of  all  words  would  be  correctly  translated  98%  of  the  time. 
The  second  is  this  intriguing  statement:  "When  I  look  at  an  article  in 
Russian,  I  say,  This  is  really  written  in  English,  but  it  has  been  coded 
in  some  strange  symbols.  I  will  now  proceed  to  decode."  This  certainly 
carries  to  an  extreme  the  concept  that  source  text  and  translated  text 
"say  the  same  thing."  In  fact,  it  leads  naturally  to  the  third  provocative 
idea  of  the  memorandum  that  translating  between  languages  A  and  B 
means  going  from  A  to  an  intermediate  "universal  language,"  or 
interlingua,  that,  supposedly,  all  humans  share,  and  thence  to  B.     This 


B  Machine  Translation  235 

idea,  of  an  intermediate  representation  of  the  semantics  or  meaning  of 
an  utterance,  appears  often  in  modern,  natural  language  processing  work 
in  AI  under  the  rubric  representation  of  knowledge  (see  discussion  in 
Article  IV. A  and  in  Chap.  m). 

After  Weaver's  memorandum,  work  began  in  several  centers  in  the 
United  States.  Erwin  Reifler  conceived  the  idea  of  two  auxiliary  func- 
tions to  be  performed  by  human  beings,  those  of  pre- editor  and  post- 
editor.  The  pre-editor  would  prepare  the  input  text  to  be  as  free  as 
possible  of  ambiguities  and  other  sources  of  difficulty;  the  post-editor 
would  take  the  machine-translated  text  and  turn  it  into  grammatical, 
comprehensible  prose. 

A  conference  in  1952  produced  recommendations  to  implement  a 
dictionary-lookup  program  and  to  work  towards  the  invention,  or  discov- 
ery, of  the  hypothetical  universal  language,  called  Machinese,  which 
Weaver  had  proposed  as  an  intermediate  language  for  machine  transla- 
tion. 

A.  G.  Oettinger  was  one  of  the  first  to  design  a  program  that  car- 
ried out  word-for-word  translation  of  Russian  text  into  English.  A  very 
high  percentage  of  the  Russian  words  had  more  than  one  possible  trans- 
lation, so  all  of  them  were  listed  in  the  output  English  text,  enclosed  in 
parentheses.     Thus,  a  sample  of  English  output  text  read  as  follows: 

(In,  At,  Into,  To,  For,  On)  (last,  latter,  new,  latest,  lowest,  worst) 
(time,  tense)  for  analysis  and  synthesis  relay-contact  electrical 
(circuit,  diagram,  scheme)  parallel- (series,  successive,  consecutive, 
consistent)  (connection,  junction,  combination)  (with,  from)  (success, 
luck)  (to  be  utilize,  to  be  take  advantage  of)  apparatus  Boolean 
algebra.     (Oettinger,  1955,  p.  55) 

A  cleaned-up  version  of  this  sentence  reads:  "In  recent  times  Boolean 
algebra  has  been  successfully  employed  in  the  analysis  of  relay  networks 
of  the  series-parallel  type"  (p.  58).  Readers  of  the  translated  text  were 
expected  to  discern  from  the  jumble  of  synonyms  what  the  cleaned-up 
text  really  should  be.  Clearly,  there  was  still  a  long,  long  way  to  go 
toward  mechanical  translation. 

In  the  next  year  or  two,  most  of  the  effort  was  directed  toward  de- 
vising ways  to  handle  different  endings  of  inflected  words  and  estimat- 
ing the  size  of  vocabulary  needed  for  translations  of  varying  degrees  of 
quality.  In  1954,  a  journal  of  mechanical  translation  was  founded, 
called  MT.  Machine  translation  received  considerable  public  attention 
when  a  group  from  IBM  and  Georgetown  University  made  grand  claims 
for  a  program  that  translated  from  Russian  to  English,  although  this 
program  was  not  particularly  advanced  over  any  others.  In  any  case, 
machine- translation  research  groups  sprang  up  in  many  countries. 


236  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

Problems  Encountered 

Early  attempts  focusing  on  syntactic  information  were  able  to  pro- 
duce only  low-quality  translation  and  led  eventually  to  extreme  pessi- 
mism about  the  possibility  of  the  endeavor.  It  has  since  become  clear 
that  high-quality  translation  systems  must  in  some  sense  understand  the 
input  text  before  they  can  reconstruct  it  in  a  second  language.  For  the 
first  time,  it  was  becoming  apparent  that  much  "world  knowledge"  is 
applied  implicitly  when  human  beings  translate  from  one  language  to 
another.  Bar-Hillel  gave  as  an  example  the  pair  of  sentences,  The  pen 
is  in  the  box  and  The  box  is  in  the  pen.  Of  this  example  he  said,  "I 
now  claim  that  no  existing  or  imaginable  program  will  enable  an 
electronic  computer  to  determine  that  the  word  pen"  in  the  second 
sentence  has  the  meaning  "an  enclosure  where  small  children  can  play" 
(Bar-Hillel,  1960,  p.  159).  He  goes  on  to  remark  that,  to  his  amaze- 
ment, no  one  had  ever  pointed  out  that  in  language  understanding  there 
is  a  world-modeling  process  going  on  in  the  mind  of  the  listener  and 
that  people  are  constantly  making  use  of  this  subconscious  process  to 
guide  their  understanding  of  what  is  being  said.    Bar-Hillel  continues: 

A  translation  machine  should  not  only  be  supplied  with  a  dic- 
tionary but  also  with  a  universal  encyclopedia.  This  is  surely 
utterly  chimerical  and  hardly  deserves  any  further  discussion.  . . . 
We  know  . .  .  facts  by  inferences  which  we  are  able  to  perform  .  .  . 
instantaneously,  and  it  is  clear  that  they  are  not,  in  any  serious 
sense,  stored  in  our  memory.  Though  one  could  envisage  that  a 
machine  would  be  capable  of  performing  the  same  inferences,  there 
exists  so  far  no  serious  proposal  for  a  scheme  that  would  make  a 
machine  perform  such  inferences  in  the  same  or  similar  cir- 
cumstances under  which  an  intelligent  human  being  would  perform 
them.     (pp.  160-161) 

Bar-Hillel  despaired  of  ever  achieving  satisfactory  machine  transla- 
tion. His  sentiments  were  not  universally  shared,  but  in  1966  they  came 
to  prevail  officially  in  the  so-called  ALPAC  report  (National  Research 
Council,  1966).  This  report,  made  to  the  National  Research  Council 
after  a  year  of  study  by  its  Automatic  Language  Processing  Advisory 
Committee,  resulted  in  the  discontinuance  of  funding  for  most  machine 
translation  projects.     The  report  stated: 

"Machine  Translation"  presumably  means  going  by  algorithm  from 
machine-readable  source  text  to  useful  target  text,  without  recourse 
to  human  translation  or  editing.  In  this  context,  there  has  been 
no  machine  translation  of  general  scientific  text,  and  none  is  in 
immediate  prospect,     (p.  19) 


B  Machine  Translation  237 

Examples  of  the  output  of  several  MT  systems  were  included  in  the  re- 
port; they  showed  little  improvement  from  the  results  Oettinger  had  ob- 
tained 10  years  before.  Even  with  post-editing,  the  output  was  found 
to  be  generally  of  poorer  quality,  and  sometimes  slower  and  more  ex- 
pensive to  obtain,  than  entirely  human  translation. 

Current  Status 

The  conclusions  of  the  ALPAC  report  were  directed  only  against 
funding  for  MT  as  a  practical  tool.  Support  for  computational  linguis- 
tics, evaluated  in  terms  of  its  scientific  worth  rather  than  its  immediate 
utility,  was  to  be  continued.  It  was  also  recognized  that  there  had  been 
fundamental  changes  in  the  study  of  linguistics,  partly  as  a  result  of 
cross-fertilization  with  computational  activities. 

Both  linguistics  and  computer  science  have  made  contributions  rele- 
vant to  the  revival  of  MT  research.  A  signal  event  was  the  publication 
in  1957  of  Noam  Chomsky's  Syntactic  Structures,  in  which  transforma- 
tional grammars  were  introduced.  This  book  spurred  many  new  de- 
velopments in  the  analysis  of  syntax.  Concurrently,  new  computer 
languages  and  new  types  of  data  structures  were  being  explored  by 
computer  scientists,  leading  to  the  creation  (in  1960)  of  both  ALGOL 
and  LISP,  with  their  features  of  lists,  recursion,  and  so  forth.  These 
languages  were  the  first  in  a  series  of  languages  geared  more  toward 
symbol  manipulation  than  toward  "number  crunching,"  as  discussed  in 
Chapter  VI,  in  Volume  n.  In  Artificial  Intelligence,  the  1960s  saw 
considerable  progress  toward  natural  language  understanding,  such  as  the 
development  of  programs  that  carried  on  a  dialogue  of  sorts  with  the 
user— BASEBALL,  SAD-SAM,  STUDENT,  SIR,  and  the  like— which  are 
described  in  Article  iv.fi. 

The  early  1970s  saw  some  revival  of  interest  in  machine  translation, 
partly  because  some  progress  had  been  made  in  the  internal  represen- 
tation of  knowledge.  The  programs  of  Wilks  (Article  IV.F2)  and  Schank 
(Articles  IV.F5  and  IV.F6)  can  perform  translation  tasks.  They  begin  by 
translating  input  sentences  into  internal  data  structures  based  on 
semantic  primitives  that  are  intended  to  be  language  independent — 
that  is,  elements  of  meaning  that  are  common  to  all  natural  languages. 
The  internal  representation  can  be  manipulated  relatively  easily  by 
procedures  that  carry  out  inferences;  it  forms  in  effect  an  internal 
language  or  inter  lingua  for  modeling  the  world. 

It  is  difficult  to  evaluate  the  practicality  of  machine  translation.  In 
some  applications  it  is  worthwhile  to  have  even  a  very  bad  translation, 
if  it  can  be  done  by  a  computer  in  a  much  shorter  time  (or  much  more 


238  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

cheaply)  than  by  humans.  In  others  (such  as  the  preparation  of  in- 
struction manuals)  it  is  possible  to  deal  with  input  texts  that  use  a 
specially  restricted  form  of  the  language,  thereby  making  translation 
easier.  There  is  also  the  possibility  of  machine-human  interactive  trans- 
lating, in  which  the  output  of  the  computer  is  used  not  by  the  ultimate 
reader  but  by  someone  engaged  in  producing  the  final  translation.  The 
computer  can  perform  subtasks  (like  dictionary  lookup)  or  can  produce 
more  or  less  complete  translations  that  are  then  checked  and  polished 
by  a  human  post-editor,  who  perhaps  does  not  know  the  original  lan- 
guage. 

At  the  present  time,  computers  are  being  used  in  these  ways  in  a 
number  of  translation  systems.  There  is  also  a  renewed  interest  in  fully 
automatic  translation,  based  on  some  of  the  techniques  developed  for 
dealing  with  the  meaning  of  sentences,  as  described  in  the  articles  that 
follow.  However,  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  goal  of  "fully  automatic, 
high-quality  translation"  is  yet  realistic.  Much  current  AI  work  on  lan- 
guage is  based  on  a  belief  that  deep  understanding  of  what  is  being  said 
is  vital  to  every  use  of  language.  Applied  to  translation,  this  means 
that  an  MT  program  must  first  understand  a  subject  before  it  can 
translate  material  written  about  that  subject.  And  the  machine's  ability 
to  understand  is,  of  course,  the  focus  of  current  AI  research  in  all  areas. 

References 

A  brief,  popular  review  of  current  work  in  machine  translation  can 
be  found  in  Wilks  (1977d).  For  the  earliest  history,  see  the  introduc- 
tion to  Locke  and  Booth  (1955).  Later  surveys  include  Bar-Hillel 
(1960),  Josselson  (1971),  and  Hays  and  Mathias  (1976). 

See  also  Bar-Hillel  (1964),  Booth  (1967),  National  Research  Council 
(1966),  Oettinger  (1955),  Schank  (1975a),  Weaver  (1955),  and  Wilks 
(1973). 


C.     GRAMMARS 
CI.     Formal  Grammars 

A  grammar  of  a  language  is  a  scheme  for  specifying  the  sentences 
allowed  in  the  language,  indicating  the  rules  for  combining  words  into 
phrases  and  clauses.  In  natural  language  processing  programs,  the  gram- 
mar is  used  in  parsing — "picking  apart" — the  sentences  input  to  the  pro- 
gram, in  order  to  determine  their  meaning  and  thus  an  appropriate 
response.  Several  very  different  kinds  of  grammars  have  been  used  in  NL 
programs  and  are  described  in  the  articles  that  follow. 

One  of  the  more  important  contributions  to  the  study  of  language 
was  the  theory  of  formal  languages  introduced  by  Noam  Chomsky  in  the 
1950s.  The  theory  has  developed  as  a  mathematical  study,  not  a  lin- 
guistic one,  and  has  strongly  influenced  computer  science  in  the  design 
of  computer  programming  languages  (artificial  languages).  Nevertheless, 
it  is  useful  in  connection  with  natural  language  understanding  systems, 
as  both  a  theoretical  and  a  practical  tool. 

Definitions 

A  formal  language  is  defined  as  a  (possibly  infinite)  set  of  strings  of 
finite  length  formed  from  a  finite  vocabulary  of  symbols.  (E.g.,  the 
strings  might  be  sentences  composed  from  a  vocabulary  of  words.)  The 
grammar  of  a  formal  language  is  specified  in  terms  of  the  following 
concepts. 

1.  The  syntactic  categories  (such  as  <SENTENCE>  and  <NOUN 
PHRASE>).  These  syntactic  categories  are  referred  to  as  nonterminal 
symbols,  or  variables.  Notationally,  the  nonterminals  of  a  grammar  are 
often  indicated  by  enclosing  the  category  names  in  angle  brackets,  as 
above. 

2.  The  terminal  symbols  of  the  language  (e.g.,  the  words  in  En- 
glish). The  terminal  symbols  are  to  be  concatenated  into  strings  called 
sentences  (if  the  terminals  are  words).  A  language  is  then  just  a  subset 
of  the  set  of  all  the  strings  that  can  be  formed  by  combining  the  ter- 
minal symbols  in  all  possible  ways.  Exactly  which  subset  is  permitted  in 
the  language  is  specified  by  the  rewrite  rules,  described  next. 

3.  The  rewrite  rules,  or  productions,  which  specify  the  relations 
between  certain  strings  of  terminal  and  nonterminal  symbols.  Some 
examples  of  productions  are: 


240  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

<SEI\ITEMCE>  -»   <I\I0UN   PHRASE)   <VERB  PHRASE) 

<I\I0UI\I   PHRASE)  — ►  the   <N0UI\l> 

<I\I0UI\I>  -►   dog 

<I\I0UN>  — ►  cat 

<VERB  PHRASE)  -»   runs 

The  first  production  says  that  the  nonterminal  symbol  <  SENTENCE  > 
may  be  "rewritten"  as  the  symbol  <NOUN  PHRASE  >  followed  by  the 
symbol  <VERB  PHRASE  >.  The  second  permits  <NOUN  PHRASE  >  to 
be  replaced  by  a  string  composed  of  the  word  the,  which  is  a  terminal 
symbol,  followed  by  the  nonterminal  <NOUN>.  The  next  two  allow 
<NOUN>  to  be  replaced  by  either  dog  or  cat.  Since  there  are  se- 
quences of  productions  permitting  <NOUN  PHRASE  >  to  be  replaced  by 
the  dog  or  the  cat,  the  symbol  <NOUN  PHRASE >  is  said  to  generate 
these  two  terminal  strings.  Finally,  <VERB  PHRASE >  can  be  replaced 
by  the  terminal  runs. 

4.  The  start  symbol.  One  nonterminal  is  distinguished  and  called 
the  "sentence"  or  "start"  symbol,  typically  denoted  <  SENTENCE  >  or  S. 
The  set  of  strings  of  terminals  that  can  be  derived  from  this  distin- 
guished symbol,  by  applying  sequences  of  productions,  is  called  the 
language  generated  by  the  grammar.  In  the  simple  grammar  of  our  ex- 
ample, exactly  two  sentences  are  generated: 

The  cat  runs. 
The  dog  runs. 

The  important  aspect  of  defining  languages  formally,  from  the  point 
of  view  of  computational  linguistics  and  natural  language  processing,  is 
that  if  the  structure  of  the  sentences  the  system  is  to  process  is  well 
understood,  then  a  parsing  algorithm  for  analyzing  the  input  sentences 
will  be  relatively  easy  to  write  (see  Article  iv.di). 

The  Four  Types  of  Formal  Grammars 

Within  the  framework  outlined  above,  Chomsky  delineated  four 
types  of  grammars  and  numbered  them  0  through  3.  The  most  general 
class  of  grammar  is  type  0,  which  has  no  restrictions  on  the  form  that 
rewrite  rules  can  take.  For  successive  grammar  types,  the  form  of  the 
rewriting  rules  allowed  is  increasingly  restricted,  and  the  languages  that 
are  generated  are  correspondingly  simpler.  The  simplest  formal  lan- 
guages (types  2  and  3)  are,  as  it  turns  out,  inadequate  for  describing 
the  complexities  of  human  languages  (see  Article  IV.C2  for  a  fuller  dis- 
cussion). On  the  other  hand,  the  most  general  formal  languages  are  dif- 
ficult  to   handle   computationally.    There   is   an   intimate   and   interesting 


CI  Formal  Grammars  241 

connection  between  the  theory  of  formal  languages  and  the  theory  of 
computational  complexity  (see  Hopcroft  and  Ullman,  1969).  The  follow- 
ing discussion  gives  a  brief,  formal  account  of  the  different  restrictions 
applied  in  each  of  the  four  grammar  types. 

A  grammar  G  is  defined  by  a  quadruple  ( VN,  VT,  P,  S )  represent- 
ing the  nonterminals,  the  terminals,  the  productions,  and  the  start  sym- 
bol, respectively.  The  symbol  V,  for  vocabulary,  represents  the  union  of 
the  sets  VN  and  VT,  which  are  assumed  to  have  no  elements  in  com- 
mon.    Each  production  in  P  is  of  the  form 

X^  Y, 

where  X  and  Y  are  strings  of  elements  in  V,  and  X  is  not  the  empty 
string.   * 

Type  0.  A  type  0  grammar  is  defined  as  above:  a  set  of  produc- 
tions over  a  given  vocabulary  of  symbols  with  no  restrictions  on  the 
form  of  the  productions.  It  has  been  shown  that  a  language  can  be  gen- 
erated by  a  type  0  grammar  if  and  only  if  it  can  be  recognized  by  a 
Turing  machine,  that  is,  if  we  can  build  a  Turing  machine  that  will 
halt  in  an  ACCEPT  state  for  exactly  those  input  sentences  that  can  be 
generated  by  the  language. 

Type  1.  A  type  0  grammar  is  also  of  type  1  if  the  form  of  the 
rewrite  rules  is  restricted  so  that,  for  each  production  X  — ►  Y  of  the 
grammar,  the  right-hand  side,  Y,  contains  at  least  as  many  symbols  as 
the  left-hand  side,  X.  Type  1  grammars  are  also  called  context-sensitive 
grammars.  An  example  of  a  context-sensitive  grammar  with  start  sym- 
bol S  and  terminals  a,  b,  and  c  is  the  following: 

S  ->  aSBC 

S   -►  aBC 

CB  -►  BC 

aB  — ►  ab 

bB  ->  bb 

bC  ->  be 

cC  — ►  cc 

The  language  generated  by  this  grammar  is  the  set  of  strings  abc, 
aabbec,  aaabbbece,  .  . .  This  language,  where  each  symbol  must  occur 
the  same  number  of  times  and  must  appear  in  the  proper  position  in 
the  string,  cannot  be  generated  by  any  grammar  of  a  more  restricted 
type  (i.e.,  type  2  or  type  3). 

An  alternate  (equivalent)  definition  for  context-sensitive  grammars  is 
that  the  productions  must  be  of  the  form 

uXv  — ►  uYv  , 


242  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

where  X  is  a  single  nonterminal  symbol;  u  and  v  are  arbitrary  strings, 
possibly  empty,  of  elements  of  V;  and  Y  is  a  nonempty  string  over  V. 
It  can  be  shown  that  this  restriction  generates  the  same  languages  as 
the  first  restriction,  but  this  latter  definition  clarifies  the  term  context- 
sensitive:    X  may  be  rewritten  as  Y  only  in  the  context  of  u  and  v. 

Type  2.  Context-free  grammars,  or  type  2  grammars,  are  grammars 
in  which  each  production  must  have  only  a  single  nonterminal  symbol 
on  its  left-hand  side.  For  example,  a  context-free  grammar  generating 
the  sentences  ab,  aabb,  aaabbb,  ...    is: 

S  -*  aSb 
S  ->  ab 

Again,  it  is  not  possible  to  write  a  context-free  grammar  for  the  lan- 
guage composed  of  the  sentences  abc,  aabbcc,  aaabbbccc,  . . .  ;  having 
the  same  number  of  c's  at  the  end  makes  the  language  more  complex. 
The  simpler  language  here,  in  turn,  cannot  be  generated  by  a  more 
restricted  (type  3)  grammar. 

An  example  of  a  context-free  grammar  that  might  be  used  to 
generate  some  sentences  in  natural  language  is  the  following: 

<SEI\ITEI\ICE>   ->  <I\I0UN   PHRASE)  <VERB  PHRASE) 
<I\I0UN   PHRASE)   -+   <DETERNINER>   <I\I0UN> 
<l\J0UN   PHRASE)   -►   <I\I0UI\I> 
<VERB  PHRASE)   ->   <VERB>   <M0UN   PHRASE) 
<DETERNIMER>  — ►  the 
<I\I0UM>   — ►   boys 
<N0UI\l>  — ►  apples 
<VERB>   — ►  eat 

In  this  example,  the,  boys,  apples,  and  eat  are  the  terminals  in  the 
language,  and  <  SENTENCE  >  is  the  start  symbol. 

An  important  property  of  context-free  grammars  in  their  use  in  NL 
programs  is  that  every  derivation  can  conveniently  be  represented  as  a 
tree,  which  can  be  thought  of  as  displaying  the  structure  of  the  derived 
sentence.  Using  the  grammar  above,  the  sentence  The  boys  eat  apples 
has  the  following  derivation  tree: 

<SEI\ITENCE> 

/         \ 

<M0UM  PHRASE)    <VERB  PHRASE) 

/     \  /       \ 

<DETERNII\IER>     <W0UI\J>        <VERB>        <N0UN   PHRASE) 
the  boys  eat  <N0UN> 

appl es 


CI  Formal  Grammars  243 

Of  course,  The  apples  eat  boys  is  also  a  legal  sentence  in  this  language. 
Derivation  trees  can  also  be  used  with  context-sensitive  (type  1)  gram- 
mars, provided  the  productions  have  the  alternate  form  uXv  — ►  uYv, 
described  above.  For  this  reason,  context-free  and  context-sensitive  gram- 
mars are  often  called  phrase- structure  grammars  (see  Chomsky,  1959, 
pp.  143-144,  and  Lyons,  1968,  p.  236). 

Type  3.    Finally,  if  every  production  is  of  the  form 

X  — ►  aY         or         X  — ►  a  , 

where  X  and  Y  are  single  variables  and  a  is  a  single  terminal,  the 
grammar  is  a  type  3  or  regular  grammar.  For  example,  a  regular 
grammar  can  be  given  to  generate  the  set  of  strings  of  one  or  more  a's 
followed  by  one  or  more  6's  (but  with  no  guarantee  of  an  equal  number 
of  a's  and  &'s): 

S  -►  aS 

S  -►  aT 
T  -►   b 
T  -►   bT 

Discussion:    Language  and  Computational  Algorithms 

Because  of  the  increasingly  restricted  forms  of  productions  in  gram- 
mars of  types  0,  1,  2,  and  3,  each  type  is  a  proper  subset  of  the  type 
above  it  in  the  hierarchy.  A  corresponding  hierarchy  exists  for  formal 
languages.  A  language  is  said  to  be  of  type  i  if  it  can  be  generated  by 
a  type  i  grammar.  It  can  be  shown  that  there  are  languages  that  are 
context  free  (type  2)  but  not  regular  (type  3),  context  sensitive  (type  1) 
but  not  context  free,  and  type  0  but  not  context  sensitive.  Examples 
of  the  first  two  have  been  given  above. 

For  regular  and  context-free  grammars,  there  are  practical  parsing 
algorithms  to  determine  whether  or  not  a  given  string  is  an  element  of 
the  language  and,  if  so,  to  assign  to  it  a  syntactic  structure  in  the  form 
of  a  derivation  tree.  Context-free  grammars  have  considerable  appli- 
cation to  programming  languages.  Natural  languages,  however,  are  not 
generally  context-free  (Chomsky,  1963;  Postal,  1964),  and  they  also 
contain  features  that  can  be  handled  more  conveniently,  if  not  exclu- 
sively, by  a  more  powerful  grammar.  An  example  is  the  requirement 
that  the  subject  and  verb  of  a  sentence  be  both  singular  or  both  plural. 
Some  of  the  types  of  grammars  and  parsing  algorithms  that  have  been 
explored  as  more  suitable  for  natural  language  are  discussed  in  the 
articles  that  follow. 


244  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

References 

For  a  general  discussion  of  the  theory  of  formal  grammars  and  their 
relation  to  automata  theory,  see  Hopcroft  and  Ullman  (1969).  Their  use 
in  NL  research  is  discussed  in  Winograd  (in  press). 

Also  of  interest  are  the  works  of  Chomsky  (especially  1956,  1957, 
and  1959),  as  well  as  Lyons  (1968,  1970)  and  Postal  (1964). 


C2.     Transformational  Grammars 

The  term  transformational  grammar  refers  to  a  theory  of  language 
introduced  by  Noam  Chomsky  in  Syntactic  Structures  (1957).  In  the 
theory,  an  utterance  is  characterized  as  the  surface  manifestation  of  a 
"deeper"  structure  representing  the  "meaning"  of  the  sentence.  The 
deep  structure  can  undergo  a  variety  of  "transformations"  of  form  (word 
order,  endings,  etc.)  on  its  way  up,  while  retaining  its  essential  meaning. 
The  theory  assumes  that  an  adequate  grammar  of  a  language  like 
English  must  be  a  generative  grammar,  that  is,  that  it  must  be  a 
statement  of  finite  length  capable  of  (a)  accounting  for  the  infinite 
number  of  possible  sentences  in  the  language  and  (b)  assigning  to  each  a 
structural  description  that  captures  the  underlying  knowledge  of  the 
language  held  by  an  idealized  native  user.  A  formal  system  of  rules  is 
such  a  statement;  it  "can  be  viewed  as  a  device  of  some  sort  for 
producing  the  sentences  of  the  language  under  analysis"  (Chomsky,  1957, 
p.  11).  The  operation  of  the  device  is  not  intended  to  reflect  the  pro- 
cesses by  which  people  actually  speak  or  understand  sentences,  just  as  a 
formal  proof  in  mathematics  does  not  purport  to  reflect  the  processes  by 
which  the  proof  was  discovered.  As  a  model  of  abstract  knowledge  and 
not  of  human  behavior,  generative  grammar  is  said  to  be  concerned  with 
competence,  as  opposed  to  performance. 

The  Inadequacy  of  Phrase -structure  Grammars 

Given  that  a  grammar  is  a  generative  rule-system,  it  becomes  a  cen- 
tral task  of  linguistic  theory  to  discover  what  the  rules  should  look  like. 
In  Syntactic  Structures  and  elsewhere  (Chomsky,  1957,  1963;  Postal, 
1964),  it  was  shown  that  English  is  neither  a  regular  nor  a  context-free 
language.  The  reason  is  that  those  restricted  types  of  grammars  (de- 
fined in  Article  rv.Ci)  cannot  generate  certain  common  constructions  in 
everyday  English,  such  as  the  one  using  respectively: 

Arthur,  Barry,  Charles,  and  David  are  the  husbands  of 
Jane,  Joan,  Jill,  and  Jennifer,  respectively. 

It  was  not  determined  whether  a  more  powerful  (i.e.,  context-sensitive) 
grammar  could  be  written  to  generate  precisely  the  sentences  of  English; 
rather,  such  a  grammar  was  rejected  for  the  following  reasons. 

1.  It  made  the  description  of  English  unnecessarily  clumsy  and 
complex — for  example,  in  the  treatment  required  for  conjunc- 
tion, auxiliary  verbs,  and  passive  sentences. 


246  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

2.  It  assigned  identical  structures  (derivation  trees)  to  sentences 
that  are  understood  differently,  as  in  the  pair: 

The  picture  was  painted  by  a  new  technique. 
The  picture  was  painted  by  a  new  artist. 

3.  It  provided  no  basis  for  identifying  as  similar  the  sentences  that 
have  different  surface  structures  but  much  of  their  "meaning"  in 
common: 

John  ate  an  apple. 
Did  John  eat  an  apple? 
What  did  John  eat? 
Who  ate  an  apple? 

The  failure  of  phrase- structure  grammar  to  explain  such  similarities  and 
differences  was  taken  to  indicate  the  need  for  analysis  on  a  higher  level, 
which  transformational  grammar  provides. 

Transformational  Rules 

In  Syntactic  Structures,  Chomsky  proposed  that  grammars  should 
have  a  tripartite  organization.  The  first  part  was  to  be  a  phrase- 
structure  grammar  generating  strings  of  morphemes  representing  simple, 
declarative,  active  sentences,  each  with  an  associated  phrase  marker  or 
derivation  tree.  Second,  there  would  be  a  sequence  of  transformational 
rules  rearranging  the  strings  and  adding  or  deleting  morphemes  to  form 
representations  of  the  full  variety  of  sentences.  Finally,  a  sequence  of 
morphophonemic  rules  would  map  each  sentence  representation  to  a 
string  of  phonemes.  Although  later  work  has  changed  this  model  of  the 
grammar,  as  well  as  the  content  of  the  transformational  rules,  it  pro- 
vides a  basis  for  a  simple  illustration. 

Suppose  the  phrase- structure  grammar  is  used  to  produce  the 
following  derivation  tree: 


SENTENCE 

NOUN 

/ 

PHRASE 

\ 

VERB 

PHRASE 

NP-SINGULAR 

/ 

VERB 

\ 

NOUN  PHRASE 

/ 

DETERMINER 

\ 

NOUN 

A 

AUX   V 

1 

NP-PLURAL 

the 

boy 

TENSE  eat 

/  1  \ 

DETERMINER  NOUN 

the  apple 


C2  Transformational  Grammars  247 

To  generate  The  boy  ate  the  apples,  one  would  apply  transformations 
mapping  "TENSE  +  eaf  to  "eat  +  PAST";  a  morphophonemic  rule 
would  then  map  "eat  +  PAST"  to  ate.  To  derive  The  boy  eats  the 
apples,  the  transformational  rule  used  would  select  present  tense  and, 
because  the  verb  follows  a  singular  noun  phrase,  would  map 
"TENSE  +  eaf  to  "eat  +  s."  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  transformational 
rule  must  look  at  nonterminal  nodes  in  the  derivation  tree  to  determine 
that  the  boy  is  in  fact  a  singular  noun  phrase.  This  example  illustrates 
one  way  in  which  transformational  rules  are  broader  than  the  rules  of  a 
phrase- structure  grammar. 

The  transformations  mentioned  so  far  are  examples  of  obligatory 
transformations,  ensuring  agreement  in  number  of  the  subject  and  the 
verb.  To  obtain  The  apples  were  eaten  by  the  boy,  it  would  be  neces- 
sary first  to  apply  the  optional  passive  transformation,  changing  a  string 
analyzed  as 

NOUM-PHRASE-l    +  AUX   +  V   +  NOUIM-PHRASE-2 

to 

l\IOUI\l-PHRASE-2   +    (AUX   +  be)    +    (en    +  V)    +  by   +  M0UI\I-PHRASE-1    . 

In  other  words,  this  optional  transformation  changes  "The  boy  TENSE 
eat  the  apples"  to  "The  apples  TENSE  be  (en  eat)  by  the  boy,"  and  then 
forces  agreement  of  the  auxiliary  verb  with  the  new  plural  subject. 
Further  obligatory  transformations  would  yield  "The  apples  be  PAST 
eaten  by  the  boy"  (where  "be  +  PAST,"  as  opposed  to  "be  +  s  +  PAST," 
is  ultimately  mapped  to  were).  The  ordering  of  transformational  rules 
is  thus  an  essential  feature  of  the  grammar. 

Revisions  to  the  Model 

In  Aspects  of  the  Theory  of  Syntax  (1965),  Chomsky  made  several 
revisions  to  the  model  presented  in  Syntactic  Structures  (1957).  The  ver- 
sion outlined  in  the  more  recent  book  has  been  called  the  "standard 
theory"  of  generative  grammar  and  has  served  as  a  common  starting 
point  for  further  discussion.  In  the  standard  theory  (as  summarized  in 
Chomsky,  1971),  sentence  generation  begins  from  a  context-free  grammar 
generating  a  sentence  structure  and  is  followed  by  a  selection  of  words 
for  the  structure  from  a  lexicon.  The  context-free  grammar  and  lexicon 
are  said  to  form  the  base  of  the  grammar;  their  output  is  called  a  deep 
structure.  A  system  of  transformational  rules  maps  deep  structures  to 
surface  structures;  together,  the  base  and  transformational  parts  of  the 
grammar  form  its  syntactic  component.  The  sound  of  a  sentence  is 
determined    by    its    surface    structure,    which    is    interpreted    by    the 


248  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

phonological  component  of  the  grammar;  deep  structure,  interpreted  by 
the  semantic  component,  determines  sentence  meaning.  It  follows  that 
the  application  of  transformational  rules  to  deep  structures  must  pre- 
serve meaning:  This  was  the  Katz-Postal  hypothesis,  which  required  en- 
larging the  generative  capacity  of  the  base  and  revising  many  of  the 
transformational  rules  suggested  earlier  (Katz  and  Postal,  1964). 

The  place  of  the  semantic  component  in  the  standard  theory  has 
been  the  major  source  of  current  issues.  For  example,  the  following 
pairs  of  sentences  have  different  meanings,  but  their  deep  structures,  in 
the  standard  theory,  are  the  same. 

Not  many   arrows  hit  the   target. 
Many   arrows  didn't   hit  the  target. 

Each   of  Mary's   sons    loves   his   brothers. 

His   brothers  are    loved   by   each  of  Mary's  sons. 

Chomsky's  response  was  to  revise  the  standard  theory  so  that  both  the 
deep  structure  of  a  sentence  and  its  subsequent  transformations  are 
input  to  the  semantic  component  (Chomsky,  1971).  He  exemplifies  the 
position  of  interpretive  semantics,  which  keeps  the  syntactic  component 
an  autonomous  system.  The  opposing  view,  called  generative  semantics, 
is  that  syntax  and  semantics  cannot  be  sharply  separated  and,  conse- 
quently, that  a  distinct  level  of  syntactic  deep  structure  does  not  exist. 
(This  issue  is  discussed  in  Charniak  and  Wilks,  1976.) 

There  have  been  a  number  of  developments  within  the  theory  of 
transformational  grammar  since  the  work  reviewed  here,  and  current  de- 
bates have  called  into  question  many  of  the  basic  assumptions  about  the 
role  of  transformations  in  a  grammar.  For  current  discussions  of  these 
issues,  see  Culicover,  Wasow,  and  Akmajian  (1977)  and  Bresnan  (1978). 

References 

The  classic  references  here  are,  of  course,  Chomsky  (1957)  and 
Chomsky  (1965).  Chomsky  (1971)  is  a  shorter  and  more  recent  dis- 
cussion. Culicover,  Wasow,  and  Akmajian  (1977)  and  Bresnan  (1978) 
are  the  latest  word  on  transformation  theory. 

Also  see  Akmajian  and  Heny  (1975),  Charniak  and  Wilks  (1976), 
Chomsky  (1956,  1959,  1963),  Harman  (1974),  Katz  and  Postal  (1964), 
Lyons  (1968,  1970),  Postal  (1964),  and  Steinberg  and  Jakobovits  (1971). 


C3.     Systemic  Grammar 

Systemic  grammar,  developed  by  Michael  Halliday  and  others  at  the 
University  of  London,  is  a  theory  within  which  linguistic  structure  as 
related  to  the  function  or  use  of  language,  often  termed  pragmatics,  is 
studied.  According  to  Halliday  (1961,  p.  241),  an  account  of  linguistic 
structure  that  pays  no  attention  to  the  functional  demands  made  on 
language  is  lacking  in  perspicacity,  since  it  offers  no  principles  for  ex- 
plaining why  the  structure  is  organized  one  way  rather  than  another. 
This  viewpoint  is  in  contrast  to  that  of  transformational  grammar,  which 
has  been  concerned  with  the  syntactic  structure  of  an  utterance  apart 
from  its  intended  use. 

The  Functions  of  Language 

Halliday  distinguishes  three  general  functions  of  language,  all  of 
which  are  ordinarily  served  by  every  act  of  speech. 

The  ideational  function  serves  for  the  expression  of  content.  It  says 
something  about  the  speaker's  experience  of  the  world.  Analyzing  a 
clause  in  terms  of  its  ideational  function  involves  asking  questions  like 
the  following:  What  kind  of  process  does  the  clause  describe — an  ac- 
tion, a  mental  process,  or  a  relation?  Who  is  the  actor  (the  logical  sub- 
ject)? Are  there  other  participants  in  the  process,  such  as  goal  (direct 
object)  or  beneficiary  (indirect  object)?  Are  there  adverbial  phrases 
expressing  circumstances  like  time  and  place?  The  organization  of  this 
set  of  questions  is  described  by  what  Halliday  calls  the  transitivity 
system  of  the  grammar.  (This  is  related  to  the  ideas  of  case  grammars 
discussed  in  Article  IV.  C4.) 

The  interpersonal  function  relates  to  the  purpose  of  the  utterance. 
The  speaker  may  be  asking  a  question,  answering  one,  making  a  request, 
giving  information,  or  expressing  an  opinion.  The  mood  system  of 
English  grammar  expresses  these  possibilities  in  terms  of  categories  such 
as  statement,  question,  command,  and  exclamation. 

The  textual  function  reflects  the  need  for  coherence  in  language  use 
(e.g.,  how  a  given  sentence  is  related  to  preceding  ones).  Concepts  for 
analysis  in  textual  terms  include  (a)  the  theme,  that  is,  the  element 
that  the  speaker  chooses  to  put  at  the  beginning  of  a  clause,  and 
(b)  the  distinction  between  what  is  new  in  a  message  and  what  is 
given — the  latter  being  the  point  of  contact  with  what  the  hearer 
already  knows. 


250 


Understanding  Natural  Language 


IV 


Categories  of  Systemic  Grammar 

The  model  of  a  grammar  proposed  by  Halliday  has  four  primitive 
categories: 

1.  The  units  of  language,  which  form  a  hierarchy.  In  English,  these 
are  the  sentence,  clause,  group,  word,  and  morpheme.  The  rank 
of  a  unit  refers  to  its  position  in  the  hierarchy. 

2.  The  structure  of  units.  Each  unit  is  composed  of  one  or  more 
units  at  the  rank  below,  and  each  of  these  components  fills  a 
particular  role.  The  English  clause,  for  example,  is  made  up  of 
four  groups,  which  serve  as  subject,  predicator,  complement,  and 
adjunct. 

3.  The  classification  of  units,  as  determined  by  the  roles  to  be  filled 
at  the  level  above.  The  classes  of  English  groups,  for  instance, 
are  the  verbal,  which  serves  as  predicator;  the  nominal,  which 
may  be  subject  or  complement;  and  the  adverbial,  which  fills 
the  adjunct  function. 

4.  The  system.  A  system  is  a  fist  of  choices  representing  the 
options  available  to  the  speaker.  Since  some  sets  of  choices  are 
available  only  if  other  choices  have  already  been  made,  the 
relation  between  systems  is  shown  by  combining  them  into 
networks,  as  in  the  simple  example  below: 


clause 


i  ndependent 
dependent  — 


imperati  ve 
i  nd  i  cati  ve 


dec larati  ve 
i  nterrogati  ve 


The  interpretation  is  that  each  clause  is  independent  or  depen- 
dent; if  independent,  it  is  either  imperative  or  indicative;  and  if 
either  indicative  or  dependent,  then  it  is  either  declarative  or 
interrogative.  In  general,  system  networks  can  be  defined  for 
units  of  any  rank,  and  entry  to  a  system  of  choices  may  be 
made  to  depend  on  any  Boolean  combination  of  previous 
choices. 


Conclusion 

Systemic  grammar  views  the  act  of  speech  as  a  simultaneous  selec- 
tion from  among  a  large  number  of  interrelated  options,  which  represent 
the  "meaning  potential"  of  the  language.  If  system  networks  represent- 
ing these  options  are  suitably  combined  and  carried  to  enough  detail, 
they  provide  a  way  of  writing  a  generative  grammar  quite  distinct  from 


C3  Systemic  Grammar  251 

that  proposed  by  transformational  grammar  (see  Hudson,  1971,  1976; 
McCord,  1975;  Self,  1975).  Furthermore,  this  formalism  has  been  found 
more  readily  adaptable  for  use  in  natural  language  understanding  pro- 
grams in  AI  (see  especially  Winograd's  SHRDLU  system,  Article  IV.F4). 

References 

Halliday  (1961)  and  Halliday  (1970b)  are  the  most  general  original 
references.  Winograd  (1972)  discusses  the  application  of  systemic  gram- 
mar in  his  famous  SHRDLU  system. 

Also  see  Halliday  (1967-68,  1970a),  Hudson  (1971,  1976),  McCord 
(1975),  Mcintosh  and  Halliday  (1966),  and  Self  (1975). 


C4.     Case  Grammars 

Case  systems,  as  used  both  in  modern  linguistics  and  in  Artificial 
Intelligence,  are  descendants  of  the  concept  of  case  as  it  occurs  in 
traditional  grammar.  Traditionally,  the  case  of  a  noun  was  denoted  by 
an  inflectional  ending  indicating  the  noun's  role  in  the  sentence.  Latin, 
for  example,  has  at  least  six  cases:  nominative,  accusative,  genitive, 
dative,  ablative,  and  vocative.  The  rules  for  case  endings  make  the 
meaning  of  a  Latin  sentence  almost  independent  of  word  order:  The 
function  of  a  noun  depends  on  its  inflection  rather  than  on  its  position 
in  the  sentence.  Some  present-day  languages,  including  Russian  and 
German,  have  similar  inflection  systems,  but  English  limits  case  forms 
mainly  to  the  personal  pronoun — as  in  I,  my,  me — and  to  the  possessive 
ending  "'5."  Case  functions  for  nouns  are  indicated  in  English  by  word 
order  or  by  the  choice  of  preposition  to  precede  a  noun  phrase — as  in 
"of  the  people,  by  the  people,  and  for  the  people." 

The  examples  above  describe  what  have  been  called  "surface"  cases; 
they  are  aspects  of  the  surface  structure  of  the  sentence.  Case  systems 
that  have  attracted  more  recent  attention  are  "deep"  cases,  proposed  by 
Fillmore  (1968)  in  his  paper  "The  Case  for  Case,"  as  a  revision  to  the 
framework  of  transformational  grammar.  The  central  idea  is  that  the 
proposition  embodied  in  a  simple  sentence  has  a  deep  structure  con- 
sisting of  a  verb  (the  central  component)  and  one  or  more  noun  phrases. 
Each  noun  phrase  is  associated  with  the  verb  in  a  particular  relation- 
ship. These  relationships,  which  Fillmore  characterized  as  "semantically 
relevant  syntactic  relationships,"  are  called  cases.  For  example,  in  the 
sentence 

John  opened  the  door  with  the  key. 

John  would  be  the  AGENT  of  the  verb  opened,   the  door  would  be  the 
OBJECT,  and  the  key  would  be  the  INSTRUMENT.     For  the  sentence 

The  door  was  opened  by  John  with  the  key. 

the    case    assignments    would    be    the    same,    even    though    the    surface 
structure  has  changed. 

It  was  important  to  Fillmore's  theory  that  the  number  of  possible 
case  relationships  be  small  and  fixed.  Fillmore  (1971b)  proposed  the 
following  cases: 


C4  Case  Grammars  253 

Agent         —  the  instigator  of  the  event. 
Counter-Agent  —  the  force  or  resistance  against  which  the 

action  is  carried  out. 
Object        —  the  entity  that  moves  or  changes  or  whose 

position  or  existence  is  in  consideration. 
Result        —  the  entity  that  comes  into  existence  as  a 

resu It  of  the  action . 
Instrument     — the  stimulus  or  immediate  physical  cause  of 

an  event. 
Source        — the  place  from  which  something  moves. 
Goal  —  the  place  to  which  something  moves. 

Experiencer    — the  entity  which  receives  or  accepts  or 

experiences  or  undergoes  the  effect  of  an  action. 

Still  another  proposal  (Fillmore,  1971a)  recognizes  nine  cases:  Agent,  Ex- 
periencer, Instrument,  Object,  Source,  Goal,  Location,  Time,  and  Path. 

Verbs  were  classified  according  to  the  cases  that  could  occur  with 
them.  The  cases  for  any  particular  verb  formed  an  ordered  set  called  a 
case  frame.  For  example,  the  verb  open  was  proposed  to  have  the  case 
frame 

[  OBJECT      (INSTRUMENT)       (AGENT)    ] 

indicating  that  the  object  is  obligatory  in  the  deep  structure  of  the 
sentence,  whereas  it  is  permissible  to  omit  the  instrument  (John  opened 
the  door)  or  the  agent  (The  key  opened  the  door),  or  both  (The  door 
opened).  Thus,  verbs  provide  templates  within  which  the  remainder  of 
the  sentence  can  be  understood. 

The  Case  for  Case 

The  following  are  some  of  the  kinds  of  questions  for  which  case 
analysis  was  intended  to  provide  answers: 

1.  In  a  sentence  that  is  to  contain  several  noun  phrases,  what 
determines  which  noun  phrase  should  be  the  subject  in  the  sur- 
face structure?  Cases  are  ordered,  and  the  highest  ranking  case 
that  is  present  becomes  the  subject. 

2.  Since  one  may  say  Mother  is  baking  or  The  pie  is  baking,  what  is 
wrong  with  Mother  and  the  pie  are  baking?  Different  cases  may 
not  be  conjoined. 

3.  What  is  the  precise  relationship  between  pairs  of  words  like  buy 
and  sell  or  teach  and  learn?  They  have  the  same  basic  meaning 
but  different  case  frames. 


254  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

One  way  of  looking  at  deep  cases  is  to  view  the  verb  as  a  predicate 
taking  an  appropriate  array  of  arguments.  Fillmore  has  extended  the 
class  of  predicates  to  include  other  parts  of  speech,  such  as  nouns  and 
adjectives,  as  well  as  verbs.  Viewing  warm  as  a  predicate,  for  example, 
enabled  case  distinctions  to  account  for  the  differences  among  the  fol- 
lowing sentences: 

I  am  warm.  [experiencer] 

This  jacket  is  warm.  [instrument] 

Summer  is  warm.  [time] 

The  room  is  warm.  [location] 

The  Representation  of  Case  Frames 

In  AI  programs,  such  predicates  and  their  arguments  can  readily  be 
equated  to  nodes  in  semantic  networks;  and  the  case  relations,  to  the 
types  of  links  between  them.  Systems  making  such  identifications  in- 
clude those  of  Hendrix  (Article  IV.F7),  Schank  (Articles  IV.F5  and  IV.F6), 
Simmons  (Article  iv.e),  and  Norman  and  Rumelhart  (Article  XI.E4,  in 
Vol.  m).  Semantic  nets  and  related  work  on  semantic  primitives  and 
frames  are  discussed  in  Chapter  m. 

There  are  many  other  systems  using  case  representations.  As  point- 
ed out  in  an  extensive  survey  by  Bruce  (1975),  considerable  variation  is 
found  in  both  the  sets  of  cases  adopted  and  the  ways  in  which  case 
representation  is  applied.  The  number  of  cases  used  varies  from  four  or 
five  (Schank)  to  over  30  (Martin).  Bruce's  proposal  on  criteria  for 
choosing  cases,  which  departs  significantly  from  Fillmore's  original  goal 
of  finding  a  small,  fixed  set  of  relationships,  is  that 

a  case  is  a  relation  which  is   "important"  for  an  event  in  the  con- 
text in  which  it  is  described.     (Bruce,  1975) 

Case  notation  has  been  used  to  record  various  levels  of  sentence 
structure.  As  Fillmore  introduced  it,  within  the  transformational  gram- 
mar framework,  deep  cases  were  deep  in  the  sense  that  John  opened  the 
door  and  The  door  was  opened  by  John  were  given  the  same  repre- 
sentation. They  can  also  be  viewed  as  relatively  superficial,  however,  in 
that  John  bought  a  car  from  Bill  and  Bill  sold  a  car  to  John  could  have 
distinct  representations  since  they  have  different  verbs.  At  this  level, 
cases  have  been  used  in  parsing  (Taylor  and  Rosenberg,  1975;  Wilks, 
1976);  in  the  representation  of  English  sentences  as  opposed  to  their 
underlying  meanings,  as  discussed  above  (Simmons,  1973);  and  in  text 
generation  (see  Article  IV.E). 


C4  Case  Grammars  255 

Systems  using  case  at  the  deepest  level,  on  the  other  hand,  may 
represent  the  meaning  of  sentences  in  a  way  that  collapses  buy  and  sell, 
for  example,  into  a  single  predicate  (Norman  and  Rumelhart,  1975; 
Schank,  1975a).  A  typical  problem  attacked  by  these  systems  is  para- 
phrasing, in  which  identifying  sentences  with  the  same  deep  structure  is 
the  goal.  Schank  also  requires  that  all  cases  be  filled,  even  if  the 
information  required  was  not  explicitly  given  in  the  input  sentences  (see 
Article  IV.F5).  Charniak  (1975)  suggests  that  the  appropriate  use  of  case 
at  this  level  of  representation  is  in  drawing  inferences:  The  "meaning" 
of  a  case  would  then  be  the  set  of  inferences  one  could  draw  about  an 
entity  knowing  only  its  case.  In  the  view  of  some  writers,  however,  the 
function  of  case  in  natural  language  understanding  systems  is  usually 
only  as  a  convenient  notation  (see  Charniak,  1975;  Welin,  1975). 

References 

Fillmore  (1968)  is  the  classic  reference  on  case  grammars.  Bruce 
(1975)  is  a  thorough  review  of  different  approaches  to  case  grammar. 

Also  see  Charniak  (1975),  Fillmore  (1971a,  1971b),  Norman  and 
Rumelhart  (1975),  Samlowski  (1976),  Schank  (1973b,  1975a),  Schank  and 
Abelson  (1977),  Simmons  (1973),  Taylor  and  Rosenberg  (1975),  Welin 
(1975),  and  Wilks  (1976). 


D.    PARSING 
Dl.     Overview  of  Parsing  Techniques 

Parsing  is  the  "delinearization"  of  linguistic  input,  that  is,  the  use  of 
syntax  and  other  sources  of  knowledge  to  determine  the  functions  of  the 
words  in  the  input  sentence  in  order  to  create  a  data  structure,  like  a 
derivation  tree,  that  can  be  used  to  get  at  the  "meaning"  of  the  sen- 
tence. A  parser  can  be  viewed  as  a  recursive  pattern  matcher  seeking 
to  map  a  string  of  words  onto  a  set  of  meaningful  syntactic  patterns. 
For  example,  the  sentence  John  kissed  Mary  could  be  matched  to  the 
pattern: 

SENTENCE 

/   \ 

SUBJECT  PREDICATE 

/     \ 

VERB         OBJECT 

The  set  of  syntactic  patterns  used  is  determined  by  the  grammar  of  the 
input  language.  (Several  types  of  grammars  are  described  in  the  articles 
in  Sec.  rv.C.)  In  theory,  by  applying  a  comprehensive  grammar,  a 
parser  can  decide  what  is  and  what  is  not  a  grammatical  sentence  and 
can  build  up  a  data  structure  corresponding  to  the  syntactic  structure  of 
any  grammatical  sentence  it  finds.  All  natural-language-processing  com- 
puter systems  contain  a  parsing  component  of  some  sort,  but  the 
practical  application  of  grammars  to  natural  language  processing  has 
proved  difficult. 

The  design  of  a  parser  is  a  complex  problem,  in  both  theory  and 
implementation.  The  first  part  of  the  design  concerns  the  specification 
of  the  grammar  to  be  employed.  The  rest  of  the  parsing  system  is  con- 
cerned with  the  method  of  use  of  the  grammar,  that  is,  the  manner  in 
which  strings  of  words  are  matched  against  patterns  of  the  grammar. 
These  considerations  run  into  many  of  the  general  questions  of  computer 
science  and  Artificial  Intelligence  concerning  process  control  and  manip- 
ulation of  knowledge. 


Dl  Overview  of  Parsing  Techniques  257 

General  Issues  in  Parser  Design 

The  design  considerations  discussed  below  overlap;  that  is,  a  decision 
in  one  dimension  affects  other  design  decisions.  Taken  together,  they 
present  a  picture  of  the  variety  of  issues  involved  in  parsing  natural  lan- 
guage. 

Uniformity.  Parsers  may  represent  their  knowledge  about  word 
meanings,  grammar,  and  so  forth,  with  a  single  scheme  or  with  special- 
ized structures  for  specific  tasks.  The  representation  scheme  affects  the 
complexity  of  the  system  and  the  application  of  that  knowledge  during 
parsing.  If  rules  and  processes  are  based  on  specialized  knowledge  of 
what  the  input  to  the  parser  will  contain,  it  is  possible  to  do  things 
more  quickly  and  efficiently.  On  the  other  hand,  if  one  has  a  simple, 
uniform  set  of  rules  and  a  consistent  algorithm  for  applying  them,  the 
job  of  writing  and  modifying  the  language  understanding  system  is 
greatly  simplified,  since  all  the  knowledge  in  the  system  is  uniformly 
explicated.  In  general,  there  is  a  trade-off  between  efficiency  and  uni- 
formity; an  algorithm  specially  designed  for  only  one  language  can  per- 
form more  efficiently  than  one  that  could  uniformly  handle  any 
language. 

Multiple  sources  of  knowledge.  Parsing,  as  originally  developed  (and 
still  used  in  compilers  for  programming  languages),  was  based  purely  on 
syntactic  knowledge — knowledge  about  the  form  of  sentences  allowed  in 
the  language.  However,  it  is  possible  to  design  systems  in  which 
syntax-based  parsing  is  intermixed  with  other  levels  of  processing,  such 
as  word  recognition  and  use  of  word  meanings.  Such  methods  can 
alleviate  many  of  the  problems  of  language  complexity  by  bringing  more 
information  to  bear.  Present  systems  tend  toward  such  intermixed 
structures,  both  for  effective  performance  and  for  more  psychologically 
valid  modeling  of  human  language  understanding  (see,  e.g.,  Article  IV.F4 
on  SHRDLU;  the  extensive  discussion  of  multiple  sources  of  knowledge  in 
Article  DCC3,  in  Vol.  n,  on  the  SOPHIE  system;  and  the  blackboard 
model  described  in  Chap.  v). 

Precision.  Another  major  trade-off  in  parser  design  is  precision  ver- 
sus flexibility.  Humans  are  capable  of  understanding  sentences  that  are 
not  quite  grammatical;  even  if  a  person  knows  that  a  sentence  is 
"wrong"  syntactically,  he  can  often  understand  it,  that  is,  assign  a 
meaning  to  it.  Some  natural  language  processing  systems,  such  as 
PARRY  (Colby,  Weber,  and  Hilf,  1971)  and  ELIZA  (Article  iV.Fi),  have 


258  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

been  designed  to  incorporate  this  kind  of  flexibility.  By  looking  for  key 
words  and  applying  loose  grammatical  criteria,  these  systems  can  accept 
far  more  sentences  than  would  a  precise  parser.  However,  these 
"knowledge-poor,"  flexible  parsers  lose  many  benefits  of  the  more 
complete  analysis  possible  with  a  precise  system,  since  they  rely  on 
vaguer  notions  of  sentence  meaning  than  a  precise  system  does.  While 
they  reject  less  often,  flexible  systems  tend  to  misinterpret  more  often. 
Many  systems  attempt  to  apply  additional  knowledge  sources,  especially 
domain- specific  knowledge,  to  increase  flexibility  while  retaining  precision. 

Type  of  structure  returned.  As  mentioned,  parsing  is  the  process  of 
assigning  structures  to  sentences.  The  form  of  the  structure  can  vary, 
from  a  representation  that  closely  resembles  the  surface  structure  of  the 
sentence  to  a  deeper  representation  in  which  the  surface  structure  has 
been  extensively  modified.  Which  form  is  chosen  depends  on  the  use  to 
which  the  parse  structure  will  be  put.  Currently,  most  work  in  natural 
language  favors  the  deep  structure  approach. 

These  four  issues — uniformity,  multiple  knowledge  sources,  precision, 
and  level  of  representation — are  very  general  questions  and  are  dealt 
with  in  different  ways  by  different  systems.  In  implementing  a  parser, 
after  settling  such  general  design  questions,  natural-language  program- 
mers run  up  against  another  set  of  problems  involving  specific  parsing 
strategies. 

Parsing  Strategies 

Backtracking  versus  parallel  processing.  Unfortunately  for  computa- 
tional linguists,  the  elements  of  natural  languages  do  not  always  have 
unique  meanings.  For  example,  in  going  through  a  sentence,  the  parser 
might  find  a  word  that  could  be  either  a  noun  or  a  verb,  like  can,  or 
pick  up  a  prepositional  phrase  that  might  be  modifying  any  of  a 
number  of  the  other  parts  of  the  sentence.  These  and  many  other 
ambiguities  in  natural  languages  force  the  parser  to  make  choices 
between  multiple  alternatives  as  it  proceeds  through  a  sentence. 
Alternatives  may  be  dealt  with  all  at  the  same  time,  through  parallel 
processing,  or  one  at  a  time,  using  a  form  of  backtracking — backing  up 
to  a  previous  choice-point  in  the  computation  and  trying  again.  Both 
of  these  methods  require  a  significant  amount  of  bookkeeping  to  keep 
track  of  the  multiple  possibilities:  all  the  ones  being  tried,  in  the  case 
of  parallel  processing,  or  all  the  ones  not  yet  tried,  in  the  case  of 
backtracking.  Neither  strategy  can  be  said  to  be  intrinsically  superior, 
though    the    number    of    alternatives    that    are    actually    tried    can    be 


Dl  Overview  of  Parsing  Techniques  259 

significantly  reduced  when  backtracking  is  guided  by  "knowledge"  about 
which  of  the  choices  are  more  likely  to  be  correct — called  heuristic 
knowledge  (see  Article  n.A). 

Top-down  versus  bottom-up  processing.  In  deriving  a  syntactic  struc- 
ture, a  parser  can  operate  from  the  goals,  that  is,  the  set  of  possible 
sentence  structures  (top-down  processing),  or  from  the  words  actually  in 
the  sentence  (bottom-up  processing).  A  strictly  top-down  parser  begins 
by  looking  at  the  rules  for  the  desired  top-level  structure  (sentence, 
clause,  etc.);  it  then  looks  up  rules  for  the  constituents  of  the  top-level 
structure  and  progresses  until  a  complete  sentence  structure  is  built  up. 
If  this  sentence  matches  the  input  data,  the  parse  is  successfully  com- 
pleted; otherwise,  it  starts  back  at  the  top  again,  generating  another 
sentence  structure.  A  bottom-up  parser  looks  first  for  rules  in  the 
grammar  to  combine  the  words  of  the  input  sentence  into  constituents 
of  larger  structures  (phrases  and  clauses)  and  continues  to  try  to 
recombine  these  to  show  how  all  the  input  words  form  a  legal  sentence 
in  the  grammar.  Theoretically,  both  of  these  strategies  arrive  at  the 
same  final  analysis,  but  the  kind  of  work  required  and  the  working 
structures  employed  are  quite  different.  The  interaction  of  top-down 
and  bottom-up  process  control  is  a  common  theme  in  AI  research  (see, 
e.g.,  the  extended  discussion  in  Article  V.b). 

Choosing  how  to  expand  or  combine.  With  either  a  top-down  or  a 
bottom-up  technique,  it  is  necessary  to  decide  how  words  and  constit- 
uents will  be  combined  (bottom- up)  or  expanded  (top-down).  The  two 
basic  methods  are  to  proceed  systematically  in  one  direction  (normally 
left  to  right)  or  to  start  anywhere  and  systematically  look  at  neigh- 
boring chunks  of  increasing  size  (this  method  is  sometimes  called  island 
driving).  Both  these  methods  will  eventually  look  at  all  possibilities,  but 
the  choice  of  how  to  proceed  at  this  level  can  have  a  significant  effect 
on  the  efficiency  of  the  parser.  This  particular  feature  is  especially 
relevant  to  language  processing  in  the  presence  of  input  uncertainty,  as 
occurs,  for  example,  in  the  speech  understanding  systems. 

Multiple  knowledge  sources.  As  mentioned  above,  another  important 
design  decision  that  was  especially  conspicuous  in  the  speech  under- 
standing systems  was  the  effective  use  of  multiple  sources  of  knowledge. 
Given  that  there  are  a  number  of  possibly  relevant  sets  of  facts  to  be 
used  by  the  parser  (phonemic,  lexical,  syntactic,  semantic,  etc.),  which 
does  one  use  when? 

The  issues  discussed  here  under  parsing  strategies  are  all  questions  of 
efficiency.  They  will  not  in  general  affect  the  final  result  if  com- 
putational resources  are  unlimited,  but  they  will  affect  the  amount  of 
resources  expended  to  reach  it. 


260  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

Actual  Parsing  Systems 

Every  natural  language  processing  program  deals  with  these  seven 
issues  in  its  own  fashion.  Several  types  of  parsers  have  developed  as 
experience  with  natural  language  systems  increases. 

Template  matching.  Most  of  the  early  NL  programs  (e.g.,  SIR, 
STUDENT,  ELIZA)  performed  parsing  by  matching  their  input  against  a 
series  of  predefined  templates — binding  the  variables  of  the  template  to 
corresponding  pieces  of  the  input  string  (see  Article  rv.Fi).  This  ap- 
proach was  successful,  up  to  a  point.  Given  a  very  limited  topic  of  dis- 
cussion, the  form  of  many  of  the  input  sentences  could  be  anticipated 
by  the  system's  designer,  who  then  incorporated  appropriate  templates. 
However,  the  method  was  inextensible,  and  template  matching  was  soon 
abandoned  in  favor  of  more  sophisticated  methods. 

Simple  phrase- structure  grammar  parsers.  These  parsers  make  use  of 
a  type  of  context-free  grammar  with  various  combinations  of  the  parsing 
techniques  mentioned  above.  The  advantage  of  a  phrase- structure  gram- 
mar is  that  the  structures  derived  correspond  directly  to  the  grammar 
rules;  thus,  the  subsequent  semantic  processing  is  simplified.  By  using 
large  grammars  and  skirting  linguistic  issues  that  are  outside  their 
limitations  (such  as  some  types  of  agreement,  see  Article  IV. C2),  a 
phrase- structure  grammar  parser  can  deal  with  a  moderately  large  subset 
of  English.  Phrase- structure  grammars  are  used  primarily  to  produce 
systems  with  useful  performance  on  a  limited  domain,  rather  than  to 
explore  more  difficult  language-processing  issues  (see,  e.g.,  the  early 
SAD-SAM  system,  Article  iv.Fi). 

Transformational  grammar  parsers.  These  parsers  attempt  to  extend 
the  notions  of  transformational  grammar  into  a  parsing  system.  Trans- 
formational grammar  is  a  much  more  comprehensive  system  than  phrase- 
structure  grammar,  but  it  loses  phrase  structure's  direct,  rule- to- structure 
correspondence.  Moreover,  methods  that  have  been  tried,  such  as  anal- 
ysis by  synthesis  (building  up  all  possible  sentences  until  one  matches 
the  input)  and  inverse  transformations  (looking  for  transformation  rules 
that  might  have  produced  the  input),  have  often  failed  because  of 
combinatorial  explosion — the  proliferation  of  alternatives  the  system  must 
examine — and  other  difficulties  with  reversing  transformations.  One  of 
the  major  attempts  to  implement  a  transformational  parser  was  that  by 
Petrick  (1973). 

Extended  grammar  parsers.  One  of  the  most  successful  AI  ap- 
proaches to  parsing  yet  developed  has  been  to  extend  the  concept  of 
phrase-structure  rules  and  derivations  by  adding  mechanisms  for  more 
complex  representations  and  manipulations  of  sentences.     Methods  such 


Dl  Overview  of  Parsing  Techniques  261 

as  augmented  transition  net  grammars  (ATNs)  and  charts  provide  addi- 
tional resources  for  the  parser  to  draw  on  beyond  the  simple  phrase- 
structure  approach  (Articles  IV.D2  and  IV.D3,  respectively).  Some  of 
these  mechanisms  have  validity  with  respect  to  some  linguistic  theory, 
while  others  are  merely  computationally  expedient.  The  very  successful 
NL  systems  of  Woods  (1973a),  Winograd  (1972),  and  Kaplan  (1973),  as 
described  in  the  articles  in  Section  IV.F,  use  extended  grammar  parsers. 

Semantic  grammar  parsers.  Another  very  successful  modification  to 
the  traditional  phrase- structure-grammar  approach  involves  changing  the 
conception  of  grammatical  classes  from  the  traditional  <NOUN>, 
<VERB>,  and  so  forth,  to  classes  that  are  motivated  by  concepts  in 
the  domain  being  discussed.  For  instance,  such  a  semantic  grammar  for 
a  system  that  talks  about  airline  reservations  might  have  grammatical 
classes  like  < DESTINATION;^  <FLIGHT>,  <FLIGHT-TIME>,  and  so 
on.  The  rewrite  rules  used  by  the  parser  would  describe  phrases  and 
clauses  in  terms  of  these  semantic  categories  (see  Article  V.B  for  a  more 
complete  discussion).  The  LIFER  and  SOPHIE  systems  (Articles  IV.F7 
and  DC.C3  [Vol.  n],  respectively)  use  semantic-grammar-based  parsers. 

Grammarless  parsers.  Some  NL  system  designers  have  abandoned 
totally  the  traditional  use  of  grammars  for  linguistic  analysis.  Such  sys- 
tems are  sometimes  referred  to  as  ad  hoc,  although  they  are  typically 
based  on  some  loose  theory  that  happens  to  fall  outside  the  scope  of 
standard  linguistics.  These  "grammarless"  parsers  opt  for  flexibility  in 
the  above-mentioned  trade-off  between  precision  and  flexibility.  They 
are  based  on  special  procedures  (often  centered  on  individual  words 
rather  than  syntactic  elements)  that  use  semantics-based  techniques  to 
build  up  structures  relevant  to  meaning,  and  these  structures  bear  little 
resemblance  to  the  normal  structures  that  result  from  syntactic  parsing. 
A  good  example  of  this  approach  can  be  found  in  the  work  of  Riesbeck 
(1975;  see  Article  IV.F5). 

Conclusion 

Recent  research  in  parsing  has  been  directed  primarily  towards  two 
kinds  of  simplification:  simplified  systems  for  dealing  with  less  than  full 
English  and  simplified  underlying  mechanisms  that  bring  the  computer 
parsing  techniques  closer  to  being  a  theory  of  syntax.  Systems  such  as 
LIFER  (Article  IV.F7)  have  been  developed  that  use  the  basic  mech- 
anisms of  augmented  grammars  in  a  clean  and  easily  programmable  way. 
Although  they  cannot  deal  with  the  more  difficult  problems  of  syntax, 
systems  of  this  sort  can  be  used  to  assemble  specialized  parsers 
relatively  quickly  and  easily  and  are  likely  to  be  the  basis  for  natural 
language  "front  ends"  for  simple  applications. 


262  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

At  the  same  time,  there  has  been  a  ree valuation  of  the  fundamental 
notions  of  parsing  and  syntactic  structure,  viewed  from  the  perspective 
of  programs  that  understand  natural  language.  Systems  like  PARSIFAL 
(Marcus,  1980)  attempt  to  capture  in  their  design  the  same  kinds  of 
generalizations  that  linguists  and  psycholinguists  posit  as  theories  of 
language  structure  and  language  use.  Attention  is  being  directed  toward 
the  interaction  between  the  structural  facts  about  syntax  and  the  con- 
trol structures  for  implementing  the  parsing  process.  The  current  trend 
is  away  from  simple  methods  of  applying  grammars  (as  with  phrase- 
structure  grammars),  toward  more  integrated  approaches.  In  particular, 
the  grammar- strategy  dualism  mentioned  earlier  in  this  article  has  been 
progressively  weakened  by  the  work  of  Winograd  (1972)  and  Riesbeck 
(1975).  It  appears  that  any  successful  attempt  to  parse  natural  lan- 
guage must  be  based  upon  some  more  powerful  approach  than  tradi- 
tional syntactic  analysis.  Also,  parsers  are  being  called  upon  to  handle 
more  "natural"  text,  including  discourse,  conversation,  and  sentence 
fragments.  These  involve  aspects  of  language  that  cannot  be  easily 
described  in  the  conventional,  grammar-based  models. 

References 

Again,  much  of  this  discussion  is  based  on  Winograd  (in  press). 
Other  general  surveys  include  Charniak  and  Wilks  (1976)  and  Grishman 
(1976).  For  examples  of  recent  work,  the  proceedings  of  the  TINLAP 
conferences  (1975,  1978)  are  recommended. 


D2.    Augmented  Transition  Networks 

Augmented  transition  networks  (ATNs)  were  first  developed  by 
William  Woods  (1970)  as  a  versatile  representation  of  grammars  for  nat- 
ural languages.  The  concept  of  an  ATN  evolved  from  that  of  a  finite  - 
state  transition  diagram,  with  the  addition  of  tests  and  "side  effect" 
actions  to  each  arc,  as  described  below.  These  additions  resulted  in  the 
power  needed  for  handling  features  of  English  like  embedding  and 
agreement  that  could  not  be  conveniently  captured  by  regular  (or  even 
context-free)  grammars.  An  ATN  can  thus  be  viewed  as  either  a  gram- 
mar formalism  or  a  machine. 

Many  current  language  processors  use  an  ATN-like  grammar;  in  some 
ways,  it  may  be  considered  state  of  the  art,  at  least  for  actual  working 
systems. 

Preliminary  Theoretical  Concepts 

A  finite-state  transition  diagram  (FSTD)  is  a  simple  theoretical  de- 
vice consisting  of  a  set  of  states  (nodes)  with  arcs  leading  from  one 
state  to  another.  One  state  is  designated  the  START  state.  The  arcs 
of  the  FSTD  are  labeled  with  the  terminals  of  the  grammar  (i.e.,  words 
of  the  language),  indicating  which  words  must  be  found  in  the  input  to 
allow  the  specified  transition.  A  subset  of  the  states  is  identified  as 
FINAL;  the  device  is  said  to  accept  a  sequence  of  words  if,  starting 
from  the  START  state  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence,  it  can  reach  a 
FINAL  state  at  the  end  of  the  input. 

FSTDs  can  recognize  only  regular  (type  3)  languages  (see  the  dis- 
cussion of  formal  languages  in  Article  rv.Ci).  To  recognize  a  language,  a 
machine  must  be  able  to  tell  whether  an  arbitrary  sentence  is  part  of 
the  language  or  not.  Regular  grammars  (those  whose  rewrite  rules  are 
restricted  to  the  form  Y  — >  aX  or  Y  — ►  a)  are  the  simplest,  and  FSTDs 
are  only  powerful  enough  to  recognize  these  languages.  In  other  words, 
it  is  impossible  to  build  an  FSTD  that  can  dependably  distinguish  the 
sentences  in  even  a  context-free  language. 

For  example,  the  following  FSTD,  in  which  the  start  state  is  the 
left-most  node  and  the  final  state  is  labeled  **,  will  accept  any  sentence 
that  begins  with  the,  ends  with  a  noun,  and  has  an  arbitrary  number  of 
adjectives  in  between  (Fig.  D2-1). 


264  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 


<adjecti  ve> 


the 


\     / 


<noun> 


** 


Figure  D2-1.    A  finite-state  transition  diagram. 

Let's  follow  through  the  net  with  the  input  phrase  the  pretty 
picture.  We  start  in  the  START  state  and  proceed  along  the  arc 
labeled  the,  because  that  is  the  left-most  word  in  the  input  string.  This 
leaves  us  in  the  middle  box,  with  pretty  picture  left  as  our  string  to  be 
parsed.  After  one  loop  around  the  adjective  arc,  we  are  again  at 
middle  node,  but  this  time  with  the  string  picture  remaining.  Since  this 
word  is  a  noun,  we  proceed  to  the  FINAL  node,  **,  and  arrive  there 
with  no  words  remaining  to  be  processed.  Thus,  the  parse  is  successful; 
in  other  words,  our  sample  FSTD  accepts  this  string. 

However,  regular  grammars  are  inadequate  for  dealing  with  the  com- 
plexity of  natural  language,  as  discussed  in  Article  IV. C2.  A  natural 
extension  to  FSTDs,  then,  is  to  provide  a  recursion  mechanism  that 
increases  their  recognition  power  to  handle  the  more  inclusive  set  of 
context-free  languages.  These  extended  FSTDs  are  called  recursive 
transition  networks  (RTNs).  An  RTN  is  a  finite- state  transition  diagram 
in  which  labels  of  an  arc  may  include  not  only  terminal  symbols  but 
also  nonterminal  symbols  that  denote  the  name  of  another  subnetwork 
to  be  given  temporary  control  of  the  parsing  process. 

An  RTN  operates  similarly  to  an  FSTD.  If  the  label  on  an  arc  is  a 
terminal  (word  or  word  class),  the  arc  may  be  taken,  as  in  FSTDs,  if 
the  word  being  scanned  matches  the  label.  For  example,  the  word  ball 
would  match  an  arc  labeled  <noun>  but  not  one  labeled  <adjective>. 
Otherwise,  if  the  arc  is  labeled  with  a  nonterminal  symbol,  representing 
a  syntactic  construct  (e.g.,  PREPOSITIONAL  PHRASE)  that  corresponds 
to  the  name  of  another  network,  the  current  state  of  the  parse  is  put 
on  a  stack  and  control  is  transferred  to  the  corresponding  named  sub- 
network, which  continues  to  process  the  sentence,  returning  control  when 
it  finishes  or  fails. 

Whenever  an  accepting  state  is  reached,  control  is  transferred  to  the 
node  obtained  by  "popping  the  stack"  (i.e.,  returning  to  the  point  from 
which  the  subnetwork  was  entered).  If  an  attempt  is  made  to  pop  an 
empty  stack,  and  if  the  last  input  word  was  the  cause  of  this  attempt, 


D2 


Augmented  Transition  Networks 


265 


the  input  string  is  accepted  by  the  RTN;  otherwise,  it  is  rejected.  The 
effect  of  arcs  labeled  with  names  of  syntactic  constructs  is  that  an  arc 
is  followed  only  if  a  construction  of  the  corresponding  type  follows  as  a 
phrase  in  the  input  string.  Consider  the  following  example  of  an  RTN 
(Fig.  D2-2): 


pp 


S: 


MP 


<verb> 


MP 


■ 

\     / 


** 


<adj> 


PP 


MP: 


MP 


<det> 


\     I 


<noun> 


\     / 


** 


PP: 


PP 


<prep> 


MP 


** 


Figure  D2-2.    A  recursive  transition  network. 

Here  NP  denotes  a  noun  phrase;  PP,  a  prepositional  phrase;  det,  a  deter- 
miner; prep,  a  preposition;  and  adj,  an  adjective.  Accepting  nodes  are 
labeled  **.  If  the  input  string  is  The  little  boy  in  the  swimsuit  kicked 
the  red  ball,  the  above  network  would  parse  it  into  the  following 
phrases: 


MP 

The  little  boy  in  the  swimsuit 

PP 

in  the  swimsuit 

MP 

the  swimsuit 

Verb 

k  i  eked 

MP 

the  red  ba  1  1 

Notice  that  any  subnetwork  of  an  RTN  may  call  any  other  sub- 
network, including  itself;  in  the  example  above,  for  instance,  the  prepo- 
sitional phrase  contains  a  noun  phrase.  Also  notice  that  an  RTN  may 
be  nondeterministic  in  nature;  that  is,  there  may  be  more  than  one 
possible  arc  to  be  followed  at  a  given  point  in  a  parse.  Parsing  algo- 
rithms   handle    nondeterminism    by    parallel    processing    of    the    various 


266  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

alternatives  or  by  trying  one  and  then  backtracking  if  it  fails.  These 
general  parsing  issues  are  discussed  in  Article  rv.Di. 

Context-free  grammars,  however,  are  still  insufficient  to  handle  nat- 
ural language.  The  RTNs,  then,  must  be  extended,  to  provide  even  more 
parsing  power. 

ATNs 

An  augmented  transition  network  (ATN)  is  an  RTN  that  has  been 
extended  in  three  ways: 

1.  A  set  of  registers  has  been  added;  these  can  be  used  to  store 
information,  such  as  partially  formed  derivation  trees,  between 
jumps  to  different  subnetworks. 

2.  Arcs,  aside  from  being  labeled  by  word  classes  or  syntactic  con- 
structs, can  have  arbitrary  tests  associated  with  them  that  must 
be  satisfied  before  the  arc  is  taken. 

3.  Certain  actions  may  be  "attached"  to  an  arc,  to  be  executed 
whenever  it  is  taken  (usually  to  modify  the  data  structure  re- 
turned). 

This  addition  of  registers,  tests,  and  actions  to  the  RTNs  extends  their 
power  to  that  of  Turing  machines,  thus  making  ATNs  theoretically 
powerful  enough  to  recognize  any  language  that  might  be  recognized  by 
a  computer.  ATNs  offer  a  degree  of  expressiveness  and  naturalness  not 
found  in  the  Turing  machine  formalism  and  are  a  useful  tool  to  apply 
to  the  analysis  of  natural  language. 

The  operation  of  the  ATN  is  similar  to  that  of  the  RTN  except  that 
if  an  arc  has  a  test,  then  the  test  is  performed  first  and  the  arc  is 
taken  only  if  the  test  is  successful.  Also,  if  an  arc  has  actions  asso- 
ciated with  it,  then  these  operations  are  performed  after  following  the 
arc.  In  this  way,  by  permitting  the  parsing  to  be  guided  by  the  parse 
history  (through  tests  on  the  registers)  and  by  allowing  for  a  re- 
arrangement of  the  structure  of  the  sentence  during  the  parse  (through 
the  actions  on  the  registers),  ATNs  are  capable  of  building  deep  struc- 
ture descriptions  of  a  sentence  in  an  efficient  manner.  For  a  well- 
developed  and  clear  example,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Woods  (1970). 

Evaluation  of  A  TNs  and  Results 

ATNs  serve  as  a  computationally  implementable  and  efficient  solu- 
tion to  some  of  the  problems  of  recognizing  and  generating  natural 
language.  Their  computational  power  provides  the  capability  of  embed- 
ding different  kinds  of  grammars,  making  them  an  effective  testbed  for 


D2  Augmented  Transition  Networks  267 

new  ideas  (Woods,  1970,  p.  602).  Two  of  the  features  of  ATNs,  the 
test  and  the  actions  on  the  arcs,  make  them  especially  well  suited  to 
handling  transformational  grammars.  The  ability  to  place  arbitrary  con- 
ditions on  the  arcs  provides  context  sensitivity,  equivalent  to  the  precon- 
ditions for  applying  transformational  rules.  The  capability  of  rearranging 
the  parse  structure,  by  copying,  adding,  and  deleting  components, 
provides  the  full  power  of  transformations  (see  Article  IV.C2). 

The  ATN  paradigm  has  been  successfully  applied  to  question  answer- 
ing in  limited  (closed)  domains,  such  as  the  LUNAR  program,  which  is 
described  in  Article  rv.F3.  Also,  ATNs  have  been  used  effectively  in  a 
number  of  text  generation  systems  (Article  rv.E).  In  addition,  the  BBN 
speech  understanding  system,  HWIM,  used  an  ATN  control  structure  (see 
Article  V.C3). 

There  are  limitations  to  the  ATN  approach;  one,  in  particular,  is 
that  the  heavy  dependence  on  syntax  restricts  the  ability  to  handle  un- 
grammatical  (although  meaningful)  utterances. 

References 

The  principal  references  here  are,  of  course,  Woods  (1970),  Woods 
and  Kaplan  (1971),  and  Woods  (1973a).  Also  see  Bobrow  and  Fraser 
(1969),  Conway  (1963),  Matuzceck  (1972),  and  Winograd  (1976). 


D3.     The  General  Syntactic  Processor 

Ronald  Kaplan's  (1973)  General  Syntactic  Processor  (GSP)  is  a  ver- 
satile system  for  the  parsing  and  generation  of  strings  in  natural 
language.  Its  data  structures  are  intuitive  and  the  control  structures  are 
conceptually  straightforward  and  relatively  easy  to  implement.  Yet,  by 
adjusting  certain  control  parameters,  GSP  can  directly  emulate  several 
other  syntactic  processors,  including  Woods's  ATN  grammar  (Article 
IV.D2),  Kay's  MIND  parser  (Kay,  1973),  and  Friedman's  text  generation 
system  (Article  IV. e). 

GSP  represents  an  effort  both  to  synthesize  the  formal  characteristics 
of  different  parsing  methods  and  to  construct  a  unifying  framework 
within  which  to  compare  them.  In  this  respect,  GSP  is  a  meta-system — 
it  is  not  in  itself  an  approach  to  language  processing,  but  rather  it  is  a 
system  in  which  various  approaches  can  be  described. 

Data  Structure:     Charts 

GSP  gains  much  of  its  power  through  the  use  of  a  single,  basic  data 
structure — the  chart — to  represent  both  the  grammar  and  the  input  sen- 
tence. A  chart  can  be  described  as  a  modified  tree,  which,  in  turn,  is 
usually  defined  as  a  set  of  nodes  that  can  be  partitioned  into  a  root 
and  a  set  of  disjoint  subtrees.  A  tree  encodes  two  sorts  of  relations 
between  nodes:  DOMINANCE,  the  relation  between  a  parent  and 
daughter  node,  and  PRECEDENCE,  the  relation  between  a  node  and  its 
right-hand  sister  node.  Figure  D3-1  shows  a  tree  representing  a 
particular  noun  phrase. 

NP 


DET   ADJ 

the   ta I  I   man 

Figure  D3-1.    A  tree  for  a  noun  phrase. 

A  chart  is  basically  a  tree  that  has  been  modified  in  two  ways: 

1.  The  arcs  of  the  tree  have  been  rearranged  to  produce  a  binary 
tree,    that    is,    a    tree    in    which    each    node    has    at    most    two 


D3 


The  General  Syntactic  Processor 


269 


dangling  nodes  (this  rearrangement  is  described  by  Knuth  [1973, 
p.  333]  as  the  "natural  correspondence"  between  trees  and  bi- 
nary trees). 

2.  The  nodes  and   arcs  have  been  interchanged;  what  were  previ- 
ously nodes  are  now  arcs,  and  vice  versa. 

For   example,   Figure  D3-2   is   the   chart   representation   for   the   tree   of 
Figure  D3-1: 

NP 


-*■ 


DET  ADJ 

O >Q ►&- 


the 


ta  I  I        man 


-►o- 


Figure  D3-2.    A  chart  for  a  noun  phrase. 

The  chart  representation  has  a  number  of  advantages,  including  ease 
of  access  for  certain  purposes.  For  example,  in  Figure  D3-1  there  is  no 
direct  connection  from  DET  to  ADJ.  In  Figure  D3-2  this  connection  has 
been  made;  that  is,  the  PRECEDENCE  relations  have  been  made 
explicit,  and  the  DOMINANCE  ones  have  been  removed.  This  explicit 
encoding  of  precedence  can  be  helpful  in  language  processing,  where  the 
concept  of  one  element  following  another  is  a  basic  relation. 

Also,  the  chart  can  be  used  to  represent  a  "string  of  trees"  or 
"forest" — that  is,  a  set  of  disjoint  trees.  For  example,  Figure  D3-3a 
shows  a  string  of  two  disjoint  trees,  headed  by  NP  and  V.  Note  that 
these  trees  cannot  be  connected,  except  with  a  dummy  parent  node 
(labeled  ?).  In  Figure  D3-3b,  the  equivalent  chart  representation  is 
shown. 


MP 


NP  V 

/    \ 

DET  M 

I        I 

the  man        walked 


Figure  D3-3a.  Two  disjoint  trees.        Figure  D3-3b.  The  equivalent  chart. 


270 


Understanding  Natural  Language 


IV 


Finally,  the  chart  provides  a  representation  for  multiple  inter- 
pretations of  a  given  word  or  phrase,  through  the  use  of  multiple  edges. 
The  arcs  in  a  chart  are  called  edges  and  are  labeled  with  the  names  of 
words  or  grammatical  constructs.  For  example,  Figure  D3-4  represents 
the  set  of  trees  for  I  saw  the  log,  including  the  two  interpretations  for 
the  word  saw.  The  chart  allows  explicit  representation  of  ambiguous 
phrases  and  clauses,  as  well  as  of  words. 


PRO  V 

o ►<> 


see    (past  t.) 


Figure  D3-4.    A  chart  showing  multiple  interpretations. 

Note  that  ambiguity  could  also  be  represented  by  distinct  trees, 
one  for  every  possible  interpretation  of  the  sentence.  However,  this 
approach  is  inefficient,  as  it  ignores  the  possibility  that  certain  subparts 
may  have  the  same  meaning  in  all  cases.  With  the  chart  represen- 
tation, these  common  subparts  can  be  merged. 

As  mentioned  above,  the  arcs  in  a  chart  are  called  edges  and  are 
labeled  with  the  names  of  words  or  grammatical  constructs.  The  nodes 
are  called  vertexes.  The  chart  can  be  accessed  through  various  func- 
tions, which  permit  one  to  retrieve  specific  edges,  sets  of  edges,  or  ver- 
texes. 

At  any  given  moment  during  the  processing  of  a  sentence,  the  at- 
tention of  the  system  is  directed  to  a  particular  point  in  the  chart 
called  the  CHART  FOCUS.  The  focus  is  described  by  a  set  of  global 
variables:  EDGE  (the  current  edge),  VERTEX  (the  name  of  the  node 
from  which  EDGE  leaves),  and  CHART  (the  current  subchart  being  con- 
sidered by  the  processing  strategy).  GSP's  attention  is  redirected  by 
changing  the  values  of  these  variables. 

When  the  chart  is  initialized,  each  word  in  the  sentence  is  rep- 
resented by  an  edge  in  the  chart  for  each  category  of  speech  the  word 
can  take.  Figure  D3-4  was  an  example  of  an  initial  chart  configuration, 
preparatory  to  parsing.  Each  analysis  procedure  that  shares  the  chart  is 
restricted  to  adding  edges,  which  makes  it  possible  in  later  analyses  to 
modify  or  ignore  earlier  possibilities  without  constraining  future  inter- 
pretations. In  this  way,  the  individual  syntactic  programs  remain 
relatively  independent  while  building  on  each  other's  work  in  a  generally 
bottom-up  way. 


D3  The  General  Syntactic  Processor  271 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  chart  is  just  a  data  structure  and 
is  not  directly  related  to  the  grammar.  It  merely  serves  as  the  global 
blackboard  upon  which  the  various  pieces  of  the  grammar  operate.  We 
still  must  specify  the  sorts  of  operations  that  use  the  chart — that  is,  the 
form  of  the  grammar  itself. 

Data  Structure:     Grammatical  Rules 

Grammars  for  syntactic  processing  of  language  can  be  understood  in 
terms  of  a  network  model  like  Woods's  ATN  grammar.  That  is,  a  gram- 
mar is  viewed  as  a  series  of  states,  with  transitions  between  the  states 
accomplished  by  following  arcs  (see  Article  IV.D2). 

The  grammars  encoded  by  GSP  fit  this  description.  What  gives  GSP 
its  power,  however,  is  that  a  grammar  can  be  represented  in  the  same 
way  as  a  chart.  That  is,  we  can  use  the  chart  manipulation  mech- 
anisms, already  developed,  to  operate  upon  the  grammar  itself.  There  is 
a  difference,  of  course.  The  chart  is  merely  a  passive  data  store;  the 
grammar  contains  instructions  for  (a)  acting  on  the  chart — adding  pieces 
and  shifting  attention — and  (b)  acting  on  the  grammar — shifting  atten- 
tion (i.e.,  moving  from  one  grammar  state  to  another). 

Control  Structure 

To  handle  the  full  complexity  of  grammars,  GSP  has  some  extra 
features.     These  include: 

1.  REGISTERS.  As  in  ATNs,  these  are  used  as  pointers  to  struc- 
tures. 

2.  LEVELSTACK.  This  is  a  stack  used  to  implement  recursion. 
The  chart  focus,  grammar  focus  (state),  and  register  list  are 
saved  before  a  recursive  call. 

3.  NDLIST  (nondeterminism  list).  This  is  a  list  of  choice  points  in 
the  grammar.  Whenever  a  choice  is  made,  the  user  can  op- 
tionally save  the  current  configuration  on  NDLIST,  to  allow  for 
backtracking. 

4.  PROCSTACK.  This  is  a  list  of  suspended  processes.  GSP  allows 
a  co-routining  facility,  under  which  processes  can  be  suspended 
and  resumed  (ATNs  have  no  equivalent  to  this). 

Features  like  recursion,  backtracking,  and  movement  of  the  pointer 
through  the  input  sentence  must  all  be  implemented  by  the  user  within 
the  general  framework  provided.  This  approach  can  be  beneficial,  par- 
ticularly with  features  such  as  backtracking:  Automatic  backtracking 
can  be  a  less  than  desirable  feature  in  a  grammar  (see  the  discussion  in 
Chap,  vi,  Vol.  n). 


272  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

Using  GSP 

Note  one  facet  of  the  approach  outlined:  All  operations  on  the 
grammar  and  chart  must  be  explicitly  stated.  Thus,  GSP  has  placed 
much  power  in  the  hands  of  the  grammar  designer,  with  a  corresponding 
cost  in  complexity. 

GSP  appears  to  be  similar  to  an  ATN,  with  three  extensions: 

1.  The  data  structure  used  is  a  chart,  instead  of  simply  a  string  of 
word  8. 

2.  The    grammar   is    encoded   in   the    same    manner   as   the   chart; 
thus,  it  is  accessible  to  the  system. 

3.  Processes  can  be  suspended  and  resumed. 

ATNs  do  not  fully  demonstrate  the  power  of  GSP.  Kaplan  also  used 
GSP  to  implement  Kay's  MIND  parser  (a  context-free,  bottom-up  system) 
and  Friedman's  transformational-grammar  text-generation  system.  The 
last  two  made  more  extensive  use  of  GSP's  capabilities,  in  particular: 
(a)  the  possibilities  of  multiple  levels  in  the  chart,  (b)  the  ability  to 
suspend  and  restart  processes,  and  (c)  the  ability  to  rearrange  the  chart, 
changing  it  as  necessary.  The  Kay  algorithm,  in  particular,  made  exten- 
sive use  of  the  ability  to  modify  the  chart  "on  the  fly,"  adding  sections 
as  required. 

Conclusions  and  Observations 

GSP  provides  a  simple  framework  within  which  many  language  pro- 
cessing systems  can  be  described.  It  is  not  intended  to  be  a  high-level 
system  that  will  do  many  things  for  the  user;  rather,  it  provides  a 
"machine  language"  for  the  user  to  specify  whatever  operations  he 
wants.  GSP's  small  set  of  primitive  operations  appears  to  be  sufficient 
for  representing  most  of  the  desirable  features  of  syntax-based  parsing. 
The  clean,  uniform  structure  allows  GSP  to  be  used  as  a  tool  for  com- 
parison (and  possibly  evaluation)  of  different  systems. 

The  chart  seems  to  be  an  effective  data  structure  for  representing 
the  syntax  of  natural  language  sentences.  It  provides  convenient  merg- 
ing of  common  subparts  (i.e.,  to  prevent  scanning  known  components 
again),  while  permitting  representation  of  various  forms  of  ambiguity. 
As  Kay  explained,  the  function  of  the  chart  is  to  "record  hypotheses 
about  the  phraseological  status  of  parts  of  the  sentence  so  that  they  will 
be  available  for  use  in  constructing  hypotheses  about  larger  parts  at 
some  later  time"  (Kay,  1973,  p.  167). 

References 

Kaplan  (1973)  is  the  principal  reference. 


E.     TEXT  GENERATION 

Computer  text  generation  is  the  process  of  constructing  text 
(phrases,  sentences,  paragraphs)  in  a  natural  language — in  a  sense,  it  is 
the  opposite  of  natural  language  understanding  by  machine.  Although 
this  problem  has  been  investigated  for  15  years,  few  coherent  principles 
have  emerged,  and  the  approaches  have  varied  widely.  Attempts  at  gen- 
erating text  have  been  made  with  two  general  research  goals:  (a) 
generating  random  sentences  to  test  a  grammar  or  grammatical  theory 
and  (b)  converting  information  from  an  internal  representation  into  a 
natural  language. 

Random  Generation 

This  approach,  the  random  generation  of  text  constrained  by  the 
rules  of  a  test  grammar,  is  of  limited  interest  to  workers  in  Artificial 
Intelligence,  since  it  is  oriented  more  toward  theoretical  linguistics  than 
toward  functional  natural-language-processing  systems.  The  objective  of 
implementing  a  generation  system  of  this  sort  is  to  test  the  descriptive 
adequacy  of  the  test  grammar,  as  illustrated  by  the  following  two 
systems. 

Victor  Yngve  (1962)  was  one  of  the  first  researchers  to  attempt 
English  text  generation;  the  work  was  seen  as  preliminary  to  a  full 
program  for  machine  translation  (see  Article  iv.b).  Yngve  used  a  gen- 
erative context-free  grammar  and  a  random-number  generator  to  produce 
"grammatical"  sentences:  The  system  randomly  selected  one  production 
from  among  those  that  were  applicable  at  each  point  in  the  generation 
process,  starting  from  those  productions  that  "produced"  <  SENTENCE > 
and  finally  randomly  selecting  words  to  fill  in  the  <NOUN>,  <VERB>, 
and  other  like  positions.  This  is  an  example  of  the  text  produced  by 
the  system: 

The  water  under  the  wheels  in  oiled  whistles  and  its  polished  shiny 
big  and  big  trains  is  black. 

Joyce  Friedman's  (1969,  1971)  system  was  designed  to  test  the  ef- 
fectiveness of  transformational  grammars  (Article  IV. C2).  It  operated  by 
generating  phrase  markers  (derivation  trees)  and  by  performing  transfor- 
mations on  them  until  a  surface  structure  was  generated.  The  generation 
was  random,  but  the  user  could  specify  an  input  phrase  marker  and 
semantic  restrictions  between  various  terminals  in  order  to  test  specific 
rules  for  grammatical  validity. 


274  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

These  two  systems,  while  relevant  to  work  in  linguistics,  are  only 
peripherally  related  to  recent  work  in  Artificial  Intelligence.  The  funda- 
mental emphasis  in  AI  text-generation  work  has  been  on  the  meaning, 
as  opposed  to  the  syntactic  form,  of  language. 

Surface  Realization  of  Meaning 

The  general  goal  of  text-generation  programs  in  the  AI  paradigm  is 
to  take  some  internal  representation  of  the  "meaning"  of  a  sentence  and 
convert  it  to  surface- structure  form,  that  is,  into  an  appropriate  string 
of  words.  There  has  been  considerable  variety  among  such  systems,  re- 
flecting differences  both  in  the  type  of  internal  representation  used  and 
in  the  overall  purpose  for  which  the  text  is  generated.  Representation 
schemes  have  included  largely  syntactic  dependency  trees,  stored  gener- 
ation patterns  of  different  degrees  of  complexity,  and  several  versions  of 
semantic  nets  (see  Chap.  m).  Purposes  have  included  automatic  para- 
phrasing or  machine  translation  of  an  input  text,  providing  natural- 
sounding  communication  with  the  user  of  an  interactive  program,  and 
simply  testing  the  adequacy  of  the  internal  representation. 

Sheldon  Klein  (1965)  made  a  first  step  beyond  the  random  gener- 
ation of  sentences,  by  means  of  a  program  that  attempted  to  generate  a 
paraphrase  of  a  paragraph  of  text  through  an  internal  representation  of 
that  text  (see  also  Klein  and  Simmons,  1963).  The  program  used  a  type 
of  grammar  called  dependency  grammar,  a  context-free  grammar  with 
word-dependency  information  attached  to  each  production.  That  is,  the 
right-hand  side  of  each  rule  in  the  grammar  has  a  "distinguished 
symbol";  the  "head"  of  the  phrase  associated  with  that  rule  is  the  head 
of  the  phrase  that  is  associated  with  the  distinguished  symbol.  All 
other  words  that  are  part  of  the  phrase  associated  with  the  production 
are  said  to  depend  on  this  head. 

For  instance,  given  the  following  simple  dependency  grammar  and 
the  sentence  The  fierce  tigers  in  India  eat  meat,  Klein's  parser  would 
produce  both  an  ordinary  phrase-structure  derivation  tree  (see  Article 
iV.Ci)  and  also  the  dependency  tree  shown  below  (Fig.  E-l): 

TIGERS 


S  «-  NP*  +  MP 

IMP  <-  DET  +  ADJ  +  l\l*  +  PP 

PP  «-  PREP*  +  NOUN 

VP  <-  V*  +  OBJ 

MDIA  NEAT 

Figure  E-l.  A  dependency  tree. 


E  Text  Generation  275 

The  symbols  followed  by  *  are  the  distinguished  symbols  in  the 
productions.  The  dependency  trees  from  the  individual  sentences  of  the 
input  paragraph  were  bound  together  with  "two-way  dependency"  links 
between  similar  nouns.    For  example,  the  input  paragraph 

The  man  rides  a  bicycle.   The  man  is  tall.   A  bicycle 
is  a  vehicle  with  wheels. 

would  yield  the  dependency  structure  shown  in  Figure  E-2.  One 
paraphrase  generated  from  the  given  paragraph  was  The  tall  man  rides 
a  vehicle  with  wheels. 

MAM  < ►  MAM 

THE  RIDES  THE  IS 

1  i 

BICYCLE  < ►  BICYCLE  TALL 

A  A    IS 

I 
VEHICLE 

I   I 
A   WITH 

I 
WHEELS 

Figure  E-2.    Multiple  dependency  trees. 

The  grammar  used  in  generating  the  paraphrases  was  similar  to  the 
one  used  for  analysis.  Rule  selection  was  random  (as  in  Yngve's  method) 
but  with  the  added  constraint  that  all  dependencies  among  the  words 
that  were  generated  must  be  derivable  from  the  initial  dependency  trees. 
In  the  example  above,  vehicle  could  be  generated  as  the  object  of  rides 
because  vehicle  depends  on  is,  is  on  bicycle,  and  bicycle  on  rides.  Two 
restrictions  were  imposed  on  the  transitivity  of  dependency  relations: 
Dependency  did  not  cross  verbs  other  than  be  or  prepositions  other  than 
of.    Thus,   The  man  rides  wheels  could  not  be  generated. 

The  use  of  dependency  trees  was  expected  to  ensure  that  the  output 
sentences  would  "reflect  the  meaning  of  the  source  text"  (Klein,  1965, 
p.  74).  A  difficulty,  however,  was  that  the  trees  encoded  only  the 
crudest  of  the  semantic  relations  present  in  the  paragraph.  In  fact,  the 
dependency  relation  between  words  only  indicates  that  some  semantic 
relation  exists  between  them  without  really  specifying  the  nature  of  the 
relation. 

Ross  Quillian  (1968),  in  contrast,  emphasized  the  expression  of  se- 
mantic  relationships   almost   to   the   exclusion   of  concern   for   syntactic 


276  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

well-formedness.  Quillian  did  pioneering  work  in  the  representation  of 
knowledge  (see  Chap,  m)  and  was  also  one  of  the  first  to  deal  with  the 
problems  of  text  generation.  His  system  employed  a  semantic  net  to 
represent  the  relations  between  words,  which  can  be  interpreted  as  their 
meaning.  The  task  the  system  was  then  to  perform  was  to  compare 
two  words,  that  is,  find  some  semantic  relation  between  them,  and  then 
to  express  the  comparison  in  "understandable,  though  not  necessarily 
grammatically  perfect,  sentences"  (p.  247).    For  example: 

Compare:   Plant,  Live 

Answer:    PLANT  IS  A  LIVE  STRUCTURE. 

This  relation  between  the  two  words  was  discovered  as  a  path  in  the 
net  between  the  nodes  that  represented  the  words.  Although  this  was  a 
primitive  semantic  net  scheme,  many  fundamental  issues  were  first  raised 
by  Quillian 's  system. 

One  important  point  was  that  paths  in  the  semantic  net  did  not 
necessarily  correspond  to  input  sentences.  Instead,  the  discovery  of  paths 
between  two  nodes  amounted  to  making  inferences  on  the  knowledge  in 
memory.  For  example,  another  relation  the  system  found  between  plant 
and  live  was: 

PLANT  IS  STRUCTURE  WHICH  GET-FOOD  FROM  AIR.   THIS  FOOD 

IS  THING  WHICH  BEING  HAS-TO  TAKE  INTO  ITSELF  TO  KEEP  LIVE. 

In  order  to  have  found  this  connection,  the  system  had  to  discover  a 
connection  between  PLANT  and  LIVE,  by  way  of  FOOD,  that  was  not 
directly  input. 

Although  Quillian 's  semantic  net  system  was  limited,  it  strongly  in- 
fluenced much  of  the  later  work  in  NL  and  the  representation  of  knowl- 
edge in  AI.  This  influence  reflected  Quillian 's  stress  on  the  importance 
of  the  semantic  versus  the  surface  components  of  language: 

As  a  theory,  the  program  implies  that  a  person  first  has  something 
to  say,  expressed  somehow  in  his  own  conceptual  terms  (which  is 
what  a  "path"  is  to  the  program),  and  that  all  his  decisions  about 
the  syntactic  form  that  a  generated  sentence  is  to  take  are  then 
made  in  the  service  of  this  intention.     (Quillian,  1968,  p.  255) 

This  is  a  strong  statement  about  language,  and  this  view,  of  a  cognitive 
process  manipulating  an  internal  representation,  is  perhaps  the  essence  of 
the  AI  perspective. 

Terry  Winograd's  blocks  world  program,  SHRDLU  (1972),  contained 
several  text- generation  devices.  Their  function  was  to  allow  the  sys- 
tem, which  is  described  in  Article  IV.F4,  to  answer  questions  about  the 
state  of  its  table  top  domain  and  certain  of  the  system's  internal  states. 


E  Text  Generation  277 

The  basic  text-generation  techniques  used  were  "fill  in  the  blank" 
and  stored  response  patterns.  For  example,  if  an  unfamiliar  word  was 
used,  SHRDLU  responded,  "I  don't  know  the  word  ..."  More  complex 
responses  were  called  for  by  questions  asking  why  or  how  an  action  had 
been  done.  For  why,  the  system  answered  with  "because  <  event  >"  or 
"in  order  to  <event>,"  where  <  event  >  referred  to  a  goal  that  the 
program  had  had  when  the  action  was  taken.  For  example,  "Why  did 
you  clear  off  that  cube?"  might  be  answered  by  "To  put  it  on  a  large 
green  cube."  The  program  retrieved  the  appropriate  event  from  its  his- 
tory list  and  then  used  a  generation  pattern  associated  with  events  of 
that  type.  For  an  event  of  the  type  "(PUTON  OBJ1  OBJ2),"  the  pat- 
tern would  be: 

(<correct  form  of   to  puty,    <I\IP  for  0BJ1>,    ON,    <NP  for  0BJ2>) 

Noun  phrases  in  the  pattern  were  generated  by  associating  an  English 
word  with  every  known  object;  adjectives  and  relative  clauses  were 
added  until  a  unique  object  (within  the  domain  of  discourse)  was  de- 
scribed. 

The  stilted  text  generated  by  this  scheme  was  moderated  by  the 
(heuristic)  use  of  pronouns  for  noun  phrases.  For  example,  if  the 
referent  of  a  noun  phrase  had  been  mentioned  in  the  same  answer  or  in 
the  previous  one,  an  appropriate  pronoun  could  be  selected  for  it. 
SHRDLU' s  limited  domain  of  discourse  allowed  it  to  exhibit  surprisingly 
natural  dialogue  with  such  simple  techniques. 

Simmons  and  Slocum  (1972)  developed  a  natural  language  system 
that  generated  sentences  from  a  semantic  network  representation  of 
knowledge,  based  on  a  case  grammar  (see  Article  IV. C4).  The  program 
produced  surface  structure  from  the  network  by  means  of  an  augmented 
transition  net  (ATN),  adapted  for  the  purpose  of  generation  rather  than 
parsing  (see  Article  IV.D2).  The  object  of  the  work  was  to  substantiate 
the  claim  that  "the  semantic  network  adequately  represents  some  impor- 
tant aspect  of  the  meaning  of  discourse";  if  the  claim  were  true,  then 
"the  very  least  requirement"  was  that  "the  nets  be  able  to  preserve 
enough  information  to  allow  regeneration  of  the  sentences — and  some  of 
their  syntactic  paraphrases — from  which  the  nets  were  derived"  (p.  903). 

An  illustration  of  the  capabilities  of  the  system  is  given  by  the 
paragraph  below,  which  was  initially  hand-coded  into  semantic  network 
notation.  (For  a  later  version  of  the  program  in  which  the  parsing  was 
done  automatically,  see  Simmons,  1973.) 

John  saw  Mary  wrestling  with  a  bottle  at  the  liquor  bar.  He  went 
over  to  help  her  with  it.  He  drew  the  cork  and  they  drank 
champagne  together. 


278 


Understanding  Natural  Language 


IV 


The  network  notation,  in  simplified  form,  is  indicated  by  the  following 
representation  of  John  saw  Mary  wrestling: 


ci 


C2 


TOKEN 

(see) 

C3 

TOKEN 

(wrest  1  e) 

TINE 

PAST 

TIME 

PROGRESSIVE  PAST 

DATIVE 

C2 

AGENT 

C4 

OBJECT 

C3 

TOKEN 

(John) 

C4 

TOKEN 

(Mary) 

NUMBER 

SINGULAR 

NUMBER 

SINGULAR 

Here  CI,  C2,  C3,  and  C4  are  nodes  in  the  network  representing  concepts 
that  are  tokens  of  meanings  of  see,  wrestle,  John,  and  Mary.  PAST 
and  SINGULAR  are  also  nodes.  TOKEN,  TIME,  OBJECT,  and  the  like 
are  types  of  arcs,  or  relations. 

The  representation  shown  was  augmented  by  other  relations,  at- 
tached to  verb  nodes,  such  as  MOOD  (indicative  or  interrogative), 
VOICE  (active  or  passive),  and  information  about  the  relative  times  of 
events.  Using  this  representation,  the  system  was  able  to  reconstruct 
several  versions  of  the  original  paragraph.    One  read: 

John  saw  Mary  wrestling  with  a  bottle  at  the  liquor  bar.  John 
went  over  to  help  her  with  it  before  he  drew  the  cork.  John  and 
Mary  together  drank  the  champagne. 

The  actual  generation  was  accomplished  by  an  ATN  in  which  the 
arcs  were  labeled  with  the  names  of  relations  that  might  occur  in  the 
semantic  net.  The  actual  path  followed  through  the  ATN — and  thus  the 
exact  text  generated — depended  both  on  which  relations  were  actually 
present  and  on  which  node  or  nodes  were  chosen  as  a  starting  point. 

Wong  (1975)  has  extended  this  approach,  incorporating  features  to 
handle  extended  discourse. 

Neil  Goldman's  (1975)  program  generates  surface  structure  from  a 
database  of  conceptual  dependency  networks,  as  the  text-generation  part 
of  the  MARGIE  system,  described  in  Article  IV.F5.  The  conceptual  de- 
pendency (CD)  knowledge  representation  scheme  is  based  on  language- 
independent  semantic  primitives,  so  the  actual  word  selection  for  output 
must  be  performed  by  Goldman's  text-generation  subsystem,  called 
BABEL.  This  is  accomplished  by  means  of  a  discrimination  net  (a  kind 
of  binary  decision  tree — see  Article  XI.D,  in  Vol.  m)  that  operates  on  a 
CD  network  that  is  to  be  verbalized.  This  discrimination  net  is  used  to 
select  an  appropriate  verb  sense  to  represent  the  event  specified  by  the 
CD.  (A  verb  sense  is  a  meaning  of  the  verb — DRINK,  for  example,  has 
two  senses,  to  drink  a  fluid  and  to  drink  alcohol.)  Essentially,  there  are 


E 


Text  Generation 


279 


only  a  few  verbs  that  can  represent  the  event,  and  a  set  of  predicates 
determines  which  one  to  use.  For  instance,  the  primitive  INGEST  can 
be  expressed  as  eat,  drink,  or  breathe,  depending  on  the  nature  of  the 
substance  ingested: 


(EQ  (ACTION)  INGEST) 
(PROP  (OBJECT)  FLUID) 


drink 


(PROP  (OBJECT)  GAS) 


breathe 


eat 


Figure  1.    A  sample  discrimination  net  from  MARGIE. 
(Goldman,  1975,  p.  331) 

Once  a  verb  sense  has  been  selected,  an  associated  framework  is 
used  to  generate  a  case-oriented  syntax  net,  which  is  a  structure  similar 
to  the  semantic  net  of  Simmons  and  Slocum.  These  frameworks  include 
information  concerning  the  form  of  the  net  and  where  in  the  concep- 
tualization the  necessary  information  is  located.  After  the  framework 
has  been  filled  out,  other  language-specific  functions  operate  on  the 
syntax  net  to  complete  it  syntactically  with  respect  to  such  things  as 
tense,  form,  mood,  and  voice.  Finally,  an  ATN  is  used  to  generate  the 
surface  structure,  as  in  the  Simmons  and  Slocum  program. 

Yorick  Wilks  (1973)  has  developed  a  program  that  generates  French 
from  a  semantic  base  of  templates  and  paraplates.  This  is  part  of  his 
machine  translation  system  described  in  Article  IV.F2. 

Discussion 

In  computer  text  generation,  as  the  richness  and  completeness  of  the 
underlying  semantic  representation  of  the  information  has  increased,  the 
quality  of  the  resulting  paraphrase  has  improved.  Like  other  areas  of 
AI,  the  basic  problem  is  to  determine  exactly  what  the  salient  points  to 
be  discussed  are  and  to  obtain  a  good  representation  of  them.  Future 
work  in  text  generation  will  also  have  to  address  areas  such  as  extended 
discourse  and  stylistics.  In  this  direction,  Clippinger  (1975)  has  looked 
at  psychological  mechanisms  underlying  discourse  production,  and  Cohen 


280  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

(1978)   has   studied   the   planning   of   speech  acts  for   communication  in 
context. 

References 

Recent   research   in   text   generation   is   described   by  Appelt   (1980), 
McDonald  (1980),  McKeown  (1980),  and  Mann  and  Moore  (1980). 


F.     NATURAL  LANGUAGE  PROCESSING  SYSTEMS 
Fl.     Early  Natural  Language  Systems 

Early  work  on  machine  processing  of  natural  language  assumed  that 
the  syntactic  information  in  the  sentence,  along  with  the  meaning  of  a 
finite  set  of  words,  was  sufficient  to  perform  certain  language  tasks — in 
particular,  to  answer  questions  posed  in  English.  Several  of  these  early 
natural  language  programs  are  reviewed  here — their  techniques,  their  suc- 
cesses, and  their  shortcomings.  These  programs  were  limited  to  dialogues 
about  restricted  domains  in  simple  English  and  ignored  the  difficult 
grammatical  problems  of  complex  constructions  found  in  unrestricted 
English.  Through  work  with  programs  of  this  genre,  it  became  apparent 
that  people  constantly  apply  extensive  world-knowledge  in  processing 
language  and  that  a  computer  could  not  hope  to  be  a  competent  lan- 
guage user  without  "understanding."  These  programs  bridge  the  gap 
between  the  early  machine  translation  attempts  of  the  1950s  and  cur- 
rent, semantics-based  natural  language  systems  (see  Article  iv.a). 

SAD-SAM 

SAD-SAM  (Syntactic  Appraiser  and  Diagrammer — Semantic  Analyzing 
Machine)  was  programmed  by  Robert  Lindsay  (1963a)  at  Carnegie  Insti- 
tute of  Technology  in  the  IPL-V  list-processing  language.  The  program 
accepts  English  sentences  about  kinship  relations,  builds  a  database,  and 
answers  questions  about  the  facts  it  has  stored. 

It  accepts  a  vocabulary  of  Basic  English  (about  1,700  words)  and 
follows  a  simple  context-free  grammar.  The  SAD  module  parses  the  input 
from  left  to  right,  builds  a  derivation  tree  structure,  and  passes  this 
structure  on  to  SAM,  which  extracts  the  semantically  relevant  (kinship- 
related)  information  to  build  the  family  trees  and  find  answers  to 
questions. 

Though  the  subset  of  English  processed  by  SAD  is  quite  impressive 
in  extent  and  in  complexity  of  structure,  only  kinship  relations  are  con- 
sidered by  SAM;  all  other  semantic  information  is  ignored.  SAM  does 
not  depend  on  the  order  of  the  input  for  building  the  family  trees;  if  a 
first  input  assigns  offspring  B  and  C  to  X,  and  offspring  D  and  E  to  Y, 
two  "family  units"  will  be  constructed,  but  they  will  be  collapsed  into 
one  if  we  learn  later  that  E  and  C  are  siblings.     (Multiple  marriages  are 


282  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

illegal.)  However,  SAM  cannot  handle  certain  ambiguities;  the  sentence 
Joe  plays  in  his  Aunt  Jane's  yard  indicates  that  Jane  is  either  the  sister 
or  sister-in-law  of  Joe's  father,  but  SAM  assigns  one  and  only  one  con- 
nection at  a  time  and  therefore  cannot  use  the  ambiguous  information: 
The  structure  of  the  model  permits  storing  definite  links  but  not 
possible  inferences. 

BASEBALL 

Also  in  the  early  1960s,  Bert  Green  and  his  colleagues  at  Lincoln 
Laboratories  wrote  a  program  called  BASEBALL  (Green  et  al.,  1963), 
again  using  the  IPL-V  programming  language.  BASEBALL  is  essentially 
an  information  retrieval  program,  since  its  database  of  facts  about  all  of 
the  American  League  games  during  one  year  is  not  modified  by  the  pro- 
gram. Acceptable  input  questions  from  the  user  must  have  only  one 
clause,  no  logical  connectives  (and,  or,  not),  no  comparatives  (higher, 
longer),  and  no  facts  about  sequences  of  events;  also,  most  words  must 
be  recognized  by  the  extensive  dictionary. 

The  parsing  system  uses  14  categories  of  parts  of  speech  and  right 
to  left  scanning  to  structure  the  input  question  into  functional  phrases. 
Using  this  structure  and  the  keywords  found  in  the  question,  the  input 
is  transformed  into  a  specification  list  that  is  the  canonical  expression 
for  the  meaning  of  the  question.  For  example,  the  question  How  many 
games  did  the  Yankees  play  in  July?    becomes: 

TEAM  =     YANKEES 

MONTH  =  JULY 

GAMES  (number  of)  =  ? 

The  answer  is  found  by  searching  the  database  for  data  items  matching 
the  specification  list,  storing  them  on  a  "found"  list,  and  eventually 
processing  and  outputting  them. 

The  size  of  the  dictionary  and  the  heuristics  for  resolving  syntactic 
ambiguities  (score  can  be  a  verb  or  a  noun;  Boston,  a  place  or  the 
name  of  a  team)  make  it  possible  for  BASEBALL  to  answer  most  rea- 
sonable English  questions  about  the  games  stored  in  the  database.  How- 
ever, BASEBALL  does  not  return  to  the  user  for  clarification  of  semantic 
ambiguities.  It  simply  fails  to  parse  the  sentence  and  asks  for  a  re- 
phrasing of  the  question.  Though  the  database  is  not  modified  by  the 
program,  BASEBALL  exhibits  deductive  abilities  in  parsing  questions  and 
processing  the  found-list. 


Fl  Early  Natural  Language  Systems  283 

SIR 

SIR  (Semantic  Information  Retrieval)  was  written  in  LISP  by 
Bertram  Raphael  (1968)  as  part  of  his  thesis  research  at  M.I.T.  It  is  a 
prototype  "understanding"  machine,  since  it  can  accumulate  facts  and 
then  make  deductions  about  them  in  order  to  answer  questions. 

SIR  accepts  a  restricted  subset  of  English.  It  matches  sentences 
against  24  matching  patterns  of  the  following  sort: 


*  IS 

* 

*  is 

part  of 

* 

Is  * 

*  ? 

How  many  *  d 

oes  * 

have 

? 

What 

is  the 

*  of 

*  ? 

where  the  elements  matched  against  *  are  nouns,  possibly  modified  by  a 
"quantifier"  such  as  a,  the,  every,  each,  or  a  number.  The  match  with 
a  pattern  triggers  the  appropriate  action  in  the  program.  A  sample  con- 
versation might  look  like  this: 

Every  boy  is  a  person 
I  UNDERSTAND 

A  finger  is  part  of  a  hand 
I  UNDERSTAND 

There  are  two  hands  on  each  person 
I  UNDERSTAND 

How  many  fingers  does  John  have  ? 

THE  ABOVE  SENTENCE  IS  AMBIGUOUS  BUT  I  ASSUME  (has)  MEANS 
(has  as  parts) 

I  DON'T  KNOW  WHETHER  FINGER  IS  PART  OF  JOHN 

John  is  a  boy 
I  UNDERSTAND 

How  many  fingers  does  John  have  ? 

THE  ABOVE  SENTENCE  IS  AMBIGUOUS  BUT  I  ASSUME  (has)  MEANS 

(has  as  parts) 
HOW  MANY  FINGERS  PER  HAND  ? 

Every  hand  has  5  fingers 

THE  ABOVE  SENTENCE  IS  AMBIGUOUS  BUT  I  ASSUME  (has)  MEANS 

(has  as  parts) 
THE  ANSWER  IS  10 

Who  is  President  of  the  United  States  ? 
STATEMENT  FORM  NOT  RECOGNIZED 


284  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

SIR's  world  is  concerned  with  only  a  small  group  of  relations  be- 
tween objects,  as  specified  by  the  24  matching  patterns.  Declarative 
input  statements  are  used  to  build  the  model,  and  the  patterns  have 
been  chosen  to  express  concepts  that  commonly  occur  in  human  conver- 
sation: set  inclusion,  spatial  relationship,  and  the  like.  The  program 
has  certain  built-in  knowledge  (like  transitivity  of  set  inclusion)  that 
allows  it  to  answer  questions  about  some  facts  not  explicitly  stated 
during  input.  SIR  can  also  interact  with  the  user  to  gather  more  infor- 
mation or  to  resolve  ambiguities. 

STUDENT 

STUDENT  is  another  pattern-matching  natural  language  program, 
written  by  Daniel  Bobrow  (1968)  as  his  doctoral  research  project  at 
M.I.T.  STUDENT  can  read  and  solve  high- school-level  algebra  story 
problems  like  the  following: 

If  the  number  of  customers  Tom  gets  is  twice  the  square  of  20  per 
cent  of  the  number  of  advertisements  he  runs,  and  the  number  of 
advertisements  he  runs  is  45,  what  is  the  number  of  customers 
Tom  gets? 

The  entire  subset  of  English  recognized  by  STUDENT  is  derived 
from  the  following  set  of  basic  patterns: 

(WHAT  ARE  *  AMD  *)  (FIND  *  AND  *) 

(WHAT  IS  *)  (*  IS  MULTIPLIED  BY  *) 

(HOW  MANY  *1  IS  *)  (*  IS  DIVIDED  BY  *) 

(HOW  MANY  *  DO  *  HAVE)  (*  IS  *) 

(HOW  MANY  *  DOES  *  HAVE)  (*  (*1/VERB)  *1  *) 

(FIND  *) 

(*  (*1/VERB)  *  AS  MANY  *  AS  *  (+1/VERB)  *) 

The  *  sign  indicates  a  string  of  words  of  any  length,  *1  indicates  one 
word,  and  (*1/VERB)  means  the  matching  element  must  be  recognized 
as  a  verb  by  the  dictionary. 

To  construct  the  algebraic  equations  that  will  lead  to  the  solution, 
the  problem  statement  is  scanned,  first  for  linguistic  forms  associated 
with  the  equality  relation  (such  as  [*  IS  *]),  then  for  algebraic  oper- 
ators. STUDENT  then  builds  a  list  of  the  answers  required,  the  units 
involved  in  the  problem,  and  a  list  of  all  the  variables  in  the  equations. 
Then  STUDENT  invokes  the  SOLVE  module  with  the  set  of  equations 
and  the  desired  unknowns. 

If  SOLVE  fails,  STUDENT  applies  heuristics  such  as  expanding  idi- 
oms, identifying  two  previously  "slightly  different"  variables,  or  invoking 
the  REMEMBER  module  that  contains  special  facts  like: 


Fl  Early  Natural  Language  Systems  285 

(FEET  IS  THE  PLURAL  OF  FOOT) 

(ONE  HALF  ALWAYS  MEANS  .5) 

(SUCCESSFUL  CANDIDATES  SOMETIMES  MEANS  STUDENTS  WHO 

PASSED  THE  ADMISSIONS  TEST) 
(DISTANCE  EQUALS  SPEED  TIMES  TIME) 
(ONE  FOOT  EQUALS  12  INCHES) 

If  all  else  fails,  STUDENT  can  request  more  information  from  the  user. 

Each  time  a  heuristic  succeeds  in  finding  a  new  equation,  the  aug- 
mented set  is  sent  to  SOLVE.  STUDENT  finally  prints  the  solution 
(using  the  pattern  "variable  IS  value")  or  reports  its  inability  to  solve 
the  problem.     In  this  example,  STUDENT  would  print 

(THE  NUMBER  OF  CUSTOMERS  TOM  GETS  IS  162) 

STUDENT'S  simple  pattern-matching  scheme,  combined  with  its  small 
set  of  well-chosen  heuristics,  does  an  impressive  job  of  parsing  typical 
high-school-algebra  word  problems.  The  program  can  be  tricked  easily 
(Bill  has  3  apples,  2  pears,  and  one  dog  would  be  parsed  into  two 
clauses);  but  as  implemented,  it  solved  the  problems  submitted  as  fast 
as  humans  could  (in  one  case,  several  times  faster  than  an  M.LT.  grad- 
uate student  who  was  not  using  the  special  "age  problem"  heuristics). 
A  slightly  modified  version  was  found  to  be  a  good  model  for  human 
problem  solving,  in  a  study  conducted  by  Paige  and  Simon  (1966). 

ELIZA 

Perhaps  the  most  famous  of  these  "pattern-matching"  natural  lan- 
guage programs  was  ELIZA,  written  by  Joseph  Weizenbaum  (1966)  at 
M.LT.  This  program  assumes  the  role  of  a  Rogerian,  or  "nondirective," 
therapist  in  its  dialogue  with  the  user.  Although  ELIZA's  dialogue  with 
the  user  appears  surprisingly  realistic,  the  program  uses  no  more  intel- 
ligent mechanisms  than  those  described  above.  Rather,  the  nature  of 
therapist-patient  dialogue  lends  itself  to  simulation  in  this  manner.  A 
sample  dialogue  might  look  like  this  (with  ELIZA's  response  in  caps): 

Men  are  all  a  I  ike. 
IN  WHAT  WAYS 

They  re  always  bugging  us  about  something  or  other. 
CAN  YOU  THINK  OF  A  SPECIFIC  EXAMPLE 

Well,  my  boyfriend  made  me  come  here. 
YOUR  BOYFRIEND  MADE  YOU  COME  HERE 

He  says  I'm  depressed  much  of  the  time. 
I  AM  SORRY  TO  HEAR  THAT  YOU  ARE  DEPRESSED 


286  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

It's  true.   I'm  unhappy. 

DO  YOU  THINK  CONING  HERE  WILL  HELP  YOU  NOT  TO  BE  UNHAPPY 

I  need  some  help,  that  much  seems  certain. 
WHAT  WOULD  IT  MEAN  TO  YOU  IF  YOU  GOT  SOME  HELP 

Perhaps  I  could  learn  to  get  along  with  my  mother. 
TELL  ME  MORE  ABOUT  YOUR  FAMILY 

WHAT  ELSE  COMES  TO  MIND  WHEN  YOU  THINK  OF  YOUR  FATHER 

Bu  II  i  es . 

DOES  THAT  HAVE  ANYTHING  TO  DO  WITH  THE  FACT  THAT  YOUR 
BOYFRIEND  MADE  YOU  COME  HERE 


ELIZA  is  programmed  in  the  SLIP  language  (Symmetric  List  Proces- 
sor), developed  by  Weizenbaum  (1963).  An  off-line  script  composed  of 
key  lists  specifies  the  nature  of  the  input  language  by  specifying  for 
each  keyword  a  set  of  patterns  to  look  for  and  the  possible  transforma- 
tions associated  with  each  pattern.  For  example,  assuming  the  keyword 
is  me,  a  pattern  used  for  matching  might  be 

(0  YOU  0  ME) 

and  one  of  the  transformation  rules  associated  with  this  pattern  might 
be 

(WHAT  MAKES  YOU  THINK  I  3  YOU) 

where  0  in  the  pattern  matches  any  string  of  words,  and  3  in  the 
transformation  rule  designates  the  third  element  matched  (in  this  case, 
everything  between  YOU  and  ME).  The  input  is  scanned  from  left  to 
right  for  a  keyword;  a  systematic  hashing  procedure  very  quickly  elim- 
inates words  that  cannot  be  keywords.  ELIZA  deletes  the  part  of  text 
preceding  a  punctuation  delimiter  if  no  keyword  has  been  found;  other- 
wise, the  part  following  it  (ensuring  thus  that  the  transformation  will  be 
applied  to  one  single  phrase  or  sentence).  If  several  keywords  are 
found,  they  are  stored  in  turn  in  a  "key  stack"  according  to  the  rank 
of  precedence  associated  with  each  of  them;  then  the  input  is  matched 
against  each  decomposition  rule  in  turn.  These  patterns  can  be  ordered 
in  the  key  list  so  that  the  more  complex  ones  are  tried  first;  for 
example,  the  pattern 

(0  10  DEPRESSED  0) 


Fl  Early  Natural  Language  Systems  287 

for  the  keyword  /  is  hard  to  match,  but  if  a  match  is  achieved,  the 
answer  can  be  more  spectacular  than  the  transformations  for  the  "gen- 
eral match"  pattern  for  /, 

(oio)  . 

When  a  match  is  found,  ELIZA  generates  a  response,  cyclically  using  the 
reassembly  rules  associated  with  the  appropriate  decomposition  rule.  If 
no  decomposition  rule  matches  for  a  given  keyword,  the  key  stack  is 
popped  and  the  pattern-matching  procedure  is  repeated  for  the  new 
keyword.  If  the  key  stack  is  empty,  a  response  like  "Please  go  on,"  "I 
see,"  or  "Very  interesting"  will  always  do. 

Several  other  tricks — like  substituting  for  keywords  in  its  response, 
associating  keywords  with  a  class  or  situation  (Mother  implies  family), 
and  remembering  these  keyword  affiliates  over  the  course  of  the  conver- 
sation— help  enhance  the  illusion  of  intelligent  dialogue. 

Conclusions 

None  of  these  early  natural  language  systems  dealt  with  the  syntax 
of  language  in  any  sophisticated  way.  In  these  programs,  the  semantic 
knowledge  needed  to  respond  to  the  user  was  implicit  in  the  patterns 
and  the  ad  hoc  rules  used  for  parsing.  More  recent  natural  language 
programs  maintain  large  databases  of  explicit  world-knowledge  that  they 
use  to  assist  in  parsing  the  sentence  as  well  as  in  interpreting  it. 

References 

For  general  reference,  see  Boden  (1977),  in  which  there  are  lucid 
discussions  of  several  of  these  systems;  see  also  Simmons  (1965,  1970) 
and  Winograd  (1974).  The  collections  edited  by  Feigenbaum  and  Feld- 
man  (1963)  and  by  Minsky  (1968)  contain  much  of  the  original  material. 


F2.    Wilks's  Machine  Translation  System 

Current  work  in  machine  translation  of  languages  is  exemplified  by 
Yorick  Wilks's  system  (1973),  which  can  produce  good  French  from 
small  English  paragraphs.  The  system  stresses  semantics-based  proces- 
sing over  conventional  syntactic  analysis  in  both  the  analysis  and  the 
generation  stages.  The  input  English  text  is  first  converted  to  a 
semantic  representation  and  then  to  the  final  translated  text.  (The  use 
of  an  intermediate  representation  bears  some  similarity  to  Weaver's  idea 
of  interlingua,  discussed  in  Article  IV.B.)  Wilks  stresses  that  his  se- 
mantic representation  is  designed  for  machine  translation  and  may  not 
be  appropriate  for  other  NL  tasks  like  question  answering.  The  ra- 
tionale for  this  is  that  an  explicit  representation  of  all  of  the  logical 
implications  of  a  sentence,  which  is  necessary  for  some  tasks,  may  be 
mostly  unnecessary  for  translation:  If  the  two  languages  are  similar,  an 
appropriate  target  sentence  with  the  same  implications  can  often  be 
found  in  a  more  straightforward  way. 

Wilks's  system  first  fragments  the  input  text  into  substrings  of 
words;  it  then  replaces  each  word  in  the  text  fragments  with  the  in- 
ternal formulas  representing  the  word's  meanings  and  matches  the 
resulting  string  of  formulas  against  a  set  of  standard  forms  called  bare 
templates.  The  output  of  this  stage  is  a  first  approximation  to  a  seman- 
tic representation  of  each  of  these  fragments.  The  system  then  tries  to 
tie  together  these  representations  to  produce  a  more  densely  connected 
representation  for  the  complete  text.  When  this  process  has  been  com- 
pleted, the  generation  of  the  output  text  is  accomplished  by  unwinding 
the  interlingual  representation  using  functions  that  interpret  it  in  the 
target  language. 

The  interlingual  representation  is  based  on  semantic  primitives  that 
Wilks  calls  elements.  Elements  express  the  basic  entities,  states,  qual- 
ities, and  actions  about  which  humans  communicate.  In  the  system  as 
reported  in  Wilks  (1973),  there  were  60  of  these  elements,  which  fell 
into  five  classes.  For  example,  the  class  ENTITIES  contains  elements 
like  MAN  and  STUFF,  and  the  class  ACTIONS  includes  CAUSE  and 
FLOW.  (See  Article  m.C6  for  a  thorough  dicussion  of  the  status  of 
semantic  primitives  in  Wilks's  research.) 

The  elements  are  used  to  build  up  formulas — each  formula  represents 
the  sense  of  a  word  and  is  composed  of  elements  combined  into  a 
binarily  bracketed  list-data  structure.  For  example,  the  sense  of  the 
word  drink  when  used  as  a  verb  is  represented  by  the  following  formula: 


F2  Wilks's  Machine  Translation  System  289 

((♦AMI  SUBJ) 
(((FLOW  STUFF)    OBJE) 
((*ANI   IN)    (((THIS    (*AI\II    (THRU   PART)))    TO)    (BE  CAUSE))))) 

In  other  words,  the  word  drink  is  an  action,  (BE  CAUSE),  done  by  ani- 
mate subjects,  (*ANI  SUBJ),  to  liquids,  ((FLOW  STUFF)  OBJE).  It  causes 
the  liquid  to  be  in  the  animate  object,  (*ANI  IN),  through  a  particular 
aperture  of  the  animate  object,  ((THIS  (*ANI  (THRU  PART)))  TO). 

Wilks  and  Herskovits  (1973)  point  out  that  the  formulas  represent 
information  about  a  word,  or  one  sense  of  a  word,  not  knowledge  about 
the  thing  that  the  word  stands  for.  In  particular,  the  formulas  rep- 
resent the  preferences  a  word  has  for  being  used  in  sentences  with  cer- 
tain other  kinds  of  words.  For  example,  in  analyzing  the  sentence  John 
drank  a  whole  pitcher,  it  is  the  preference  of  drink  for  a  liquid  object 
that  would  help  select  the  formula  representing  the  container- of- liquid 
sense  of  pitcher  rather  than  the  baseball-player  sense.  And  these  are 
preferences,  not  requirements,  since  in  understanding  the  metaphorical 
sentence  My  car  drinks  gasoline,  the  preference  of  drink  for  an  animate 
subject  must  be  overlooked. 

The  system's  dictionary  contains  formulas  for  all  the  word  senses 
paired  with  stereotypes  for  producing  the  translated  words  in  the  target 
language.  The  following  is  an  example  of  two  stereotypes  for  the  word 
advise  (into  French): 

(ADVISE  (CONSEILLER  A  (FN1  FOLK  NAN)) 

(CONSEILLER  (FN2  ACT  STATE  STUFF))) 

The  two  functions  FN1  and  FN2  are  used  to  distinguish  the  two 
possible  constructions  in  French  for  the  object  of  conseiller:  conseiller 
a  .  .  .  and  simply  conseiller  .  .  .  The  first  would  be  used  in  translating 
I  advise  John  to  have  patience;  the  second,  for  /  advise  patience. 
Functions  like  these  in  stereotypes  are  evaluated  by  the  generation 
routines.  Each  function  evaluates  either  to  NIL,  in  which  case  the 
stereotype  fails,  or  to  words  that  will  appear  in  the  output  text.  The 
stereotypes  serve  the  purpose  of  a  text  generation  grammar,  providing 
complex,  context-sensitive  rules  for  overriding  defaults  where  required, 
without  search  of  a  large  store  of  such  rules.  This  is  an  example  of 
procedural  representation  of  knowledge  (see  Article  m.C2). 

Analysis  of  an  English  sentence  by  the  system  proceeds  in  several 
stages.  First,  as  mentioned  above,  the  text  is  broken  into  fragments  (at 
punctuation  marks,  conjunctions,  prepositions,  etc.),  and  each  fragment 
is  replaced  by  a  sequence  of  formulas,  one  formula  for  each  word  in  the 


290  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

fragment.  Now,  the  dictionary  may  contain  several  formulas  for  a 
word,  representing  its  different  senses,  so  there  may  be  several  alter- 
native sequences  of  formulas  that  could  represent  a  given  fragment. 

To  select  the  right  formula  sequence,  each  sequence  is  reduced  to 
the  sequence  of  elements  that  form  the  heads  of  its  formulas.  For  ex- 
ample, the  sentence  Small  men  sometimes  father  big  sons  would  produce 
the  following  head-element  sequences: 

(KIND  MAW  HOW  MAN  KIND  MAN) 
(KIND  MAN  HOW  CAUSE  KIND  MAN) 

which  reflect  the  two  senses  of  father,  noun  and  verb,  respectively. 
These  sequences  of  head  elements  are  matched  against  the  bare  tem- 
plates, a  built-in  set  of  element  triples  in  actor-action-object  format. 
Examples  of  such  triples  are  MAN-CAUSE-MAN  (which  happens  to 
match  the  second  interpretation  above)  and  MAN-DO- THING.  The 
system  interprets  a  sentence  fragment  on  the  basis  of  one  of  the  bare 
templates  that  matches  one  of  the  alternative  sequences  of  formula 
headers.  It  is  assumed  that  it  is  possible  to  build  up  a  finite  inventory 
of  bare  templates  that  would  be  adequate  for  the  analysis  of  ordinary 
language.  The  inventory  for  the  system  has  been  determined  empirically 
and  is  easily  modified.  Special  forms  of  templates  are  available  to 
match  fragments  like  prepositional  phrases. 

At  the  initial  stage  of  bare-template  matching,  some  senses  of  the 
words  in  the  fragment  can  be  rejected  because  they  produce  head- 
element  sequences  that  fail  to  match  any  bare  template  (as  does  the 
first  interpretation  of  father  above).  However,  more  than  one  candidate 
template  may  remain.  For  example,  if  the  fragment  is  The  policeman 
interrogated  the  crook,  there  will  still  be  two  possible  bare  templates, 
MAN-FORCE-MAN  and  MAN-FORCE-THING,  that  match  the  fragment 
when  crook  is  taken  to  be  a  person  and  a  shepherd's  staff,  respectively. 
At  the  next  stage  of  the  analysis,  called  expansion,  a  more  detailed 
matching  algorithm  is  used.  The  principle  followed  is  that  the  final  tem- 
plate representation  chosen  for  a  fragment  is  the  one  in  which  the  most 
preferences  are  satisfied.  In  this  example,  the  preference  of  interrogate 
for  a  human  object  is  decisive.  The  result  of  this  stage  is  a  full  tem- 
plate— a  network  of  formulas — for  each  fragment,  in  which  semantic 
dependencies  among  the  formulas  (indicating  satisfied  preferences)  have 
been  noted.  The  overall  goal  of  semantic  density — that  is,  of  maximizing 
the  interdependence  of  formulas — is  one  of  the  key  ideas  in  Wilks's 
work  and  produces  a  good  solution  to  many  problems  of  ambiguity. 

In  the  succeeding  stage  of  analysis,  the  templates  for  individual  frag- 
ments   are    tied    together   with    higher    level    dependencies,    expressed   in 


F2  Wilks's  Machine  Translation  System  291 

terms  of  paraplates,  or  patterns  that  span  two  templates.  The  use  of 
paraplates  is  to  resolve  prepositional  or  case  ambiguities  (see  Article 
IV.C4).  For  example,  the  fragments  he  ran  the  mile  and  in  four  minutes 
would  be  tied  together  by  a  paraplate  for  the  TIMELOCATION  case; 
had  the  second  fragment  been  in  a  plastic  bag,  a  CONTAINMENT  case 
paraplate  would  have  matched  instead.  A  similar  technique  is  used  to 
resolve  simple  problems  of  pronoun  reference,  as  in  /  bought  the  wine, 
sat  on  a  rock,  and  drank  it.  In  both  cases,  the  chief  preference  of  the 
system  is  for  semantic  density. 

Finally,  the  system  applies  some  commonsense  inference  rules  to 
deal  with  situations  in  which,  to  resolve  pronoun  references,  more  ex- 
plicit world-knowledge  is  required  than  formulas,  templates,  and  para- 
plates provide.  At  the  completion  of  this  analysis,  the  input  text  has 
been  replaced  by  an  interlingual  representation  with  suitable  markers, 
and  other  information  is  used  by  the  text  generation  routines  in  a  rel- 
atively straightforward  manner  to  produce  the  final  output  text. 

References 

This  description  of  Wilks's  work  is  based  primarily  on  Wilks  (1973) 
and  Wilks  and  Herskovits  (1973).  Other  descriptions  include  Wilks 
(1975a,  1975b,  1975c,  1977b,  1978). 

Also  of  interest:    Charniak  and  Wilks  (1976)  and  Schank  (1975a). 


F3.     LUNAR 

LUNAR  is  an  experimental,  natural-language,  information  retrieval 
system  designed  by  William  Woods  at  BBN  (Woods,  Kaplan,  and  Nash- 
Webber,  1972;  Woods,  1973b)  to  help  geologists  access,  compare,  and 
evaluate  chemical- analysis  data  on  moon  rock  and  soil  composition  ob- 
tained from  the  Apollo-11  mission.  The  primary  goal  of  the  designers 
was  research  on  the  problems  involved  in  building  a  man-machine 
interface  that  would  allow  communication  in  ordinary  English.  A  "real 
world"  application  was  chosen  for  two  reasons:  First,  it  tends  to  focus 
effort  on  the  problems  really  in  need  of  solution  (sometimes  this  is 
implicitly  avoided  in  "toy"  problems)  and,  second,  the  possibility  of 
producing  a  system  capable  of  performing  a  worthwhile  task  lends  addi- 
tional impetus  to  the  work. 

LUNAR  operates  by  translating  a  question  entered  in  English  into  an 
expression  in  a  formal  query  language  (Codd,  1974).  The  translation  is 
done  with  an  augmented  transition  network  (ATN)  parser  coupled  with  a 
rule-driven  semantic  interpretation  procedure,  which  guides  the  analysis 
of  the  question.  The  "query"  that  results  from  this  analysis  is  then  ap- 
plied to  the  database  to  produce  the  answer  to  the  request.  The  query 
language  is  a  generalization  of  the  predicate  calculus  (Article  m.Ci).  Its 
central  feature  is  a  quantifier  function  that  is  able  to  express,  in  a 
simple  manner,  the  restrictions  placed  on  a  database-retrieval  request  by 
the  user.  This  function  is  used  in  concert  with  special  enumeration 
functions  for  classes  of  database  objects,  freeing  the  quantifier  function 
from  explicit  dependence  on  the  structure  of  the  database.  LUNAR  also 
served  as  a  foundation  for  the  early  work  on  speech  understanding  at 
BBN  (see  Article  V.C3). 

Detailed  Description 

The  following  list  of  requests  is  indicative  of  the  kinds  of  English 
constructions  that  can  be  handled  by  LUNAR  (shown  as  they  would 
actually  be  presented  to  the  system): 

1.  (WHAT  IS  THE  AVERAGE  CONCENTRATION  OF  ALUMINUM  IN 

HIGH  ALKALI  ROCKS?) 

2.  (WHAT  SAMPLES  CONTAIN  P205?) 

3.  (GIVE  ME  THE  MODAL  ANALYSES  OF  P205  IN  THOSE  SAMPLES) 

4.  (GIVE  ME  EU  DETERMINATIONS  IN  SAMPLES  WHICH  CONTAIN  ILM) 

LUNAR  processes  these  requests  in  the  following  three  steps: 


F3  LUNAR  293 


Syntactic  analysis  using  an  augmented  transition  network  parser  and 
heuristic  information  (including  semantics)  to  produce  the  most 
likely  derivation  tree  for  the  request; 

Semantic  interpretation  to  produce  a  representation  of  the  meaning 
of  the  request  in  a  formal  query  language; 

Execution  of  the  query  language  expression  on  the  database  to  pro- 
duce the  answer  to  the  request. 

LUNAR 's  language  processor  contains  an  ATN  grammar  for  a  large 
subset  of  English,  the  semantic  rules  for  interpreting  database  requests, 
and  a  dictionary  of  approximately  3,500  words.  As  an  indication  of  the 
capabilities  of  the  processor,  it  is  able  to  deal  with  tense  and  modality, 
some  anaphoric  references  and  comparatives,  restrictive  relative  clauses, 
certain  adjective  modifiers  (some  of  which  alter  the  range  of  quan- 
tification or  interpretation  of  a  noun  phrase),  and  embedded  complement 
constructions.  Some  problems  do  arise  in  parsing  conjunctive  construc- 
tions and  in  resolving  ambiguity  in  the  scope  of  quantifiers.  Emphasis 
has  been  placed  on  the  types  of  English  constructions  actually  used  by 
geologists,  so  that  the  system  knows  how  geologists  habitually  refer  to 
the  objects  in  its  database. 

The  Query  Language 

The  formal  query  language  contains  three  types  of  objects:  desig- 
nators, which  name  classes  of  objects  in  the  database  (including  func- 
tionally defined  objects);  propositions,  which  are  formed  from  predicates 
with  designators  as  arguments;  and  commands,  which  initiate  actions. 
Thus,  if  SI 0046  is  a  designator  for  a  particular  sample,  OLIV  is  a 
designator  for  the  mineral  olivine,  CONTAIN  is  a  predicate,  and  TEST  is 
a  truth-value-testing  command,  then  "(TOST  (CONTAIN  S10046  OLIV))" 
is  a  sample  expression  in  the  query  language.  The  primary  function  in 
the  language  is  the  quantifier  function  FOR,  which  is  used  in  expressions 
of  the  following  type: 

(   FOR     QUANT     X   /  CLASS    :      PX      ;    QX   ) 

where  QUANT  is  a  quantifier  like  each  or  every,  or  a  numerical  or  com- 
parative quantifier,  X  is  a  variable  of  quantification,  CLASS  determines 
the  class  of  objects  over  which  the  quantification  is  to  range,  PX  spec- 
ifies a  restriction  on  the  range,  and  QX  is  the  proposition  or  command 
being  quantified.  FOR  is  used  with  enumeration  functions  that  can 
access  the  database.  Thus,  FOR  itself  is  independent  of  the  database 
structure.  As  an  example  (taken  from  Woods,  1973b),  if  SEQ  is  an 
enumeration    function    for    enumerating    a    precomputed    list,     and    if 


294  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

PRINTOUT  is  a  command  that  prints  a  representation  for  the  designator 
given  as  its  argument,  then 

(  FOR  EVERY  XI  /  (SEQ  TYPECS)  :  T  ;  (PRINTOUT  XI)  ) 

prints  the  sample  numbers  for  all  type  C  samples.    In  this  case,  there  is 
no  restriction  on  the  range  of  quantification  in  that  PX  =  T. 

A  fuller  example  of  the  operation  of  LUNAR  (simplified  slightly  from 
the  same  source)  is  shown  below. 

Request: 

(DO  ANY  SAMPLES  HAVE  GREATER  THAN  13  PERCENT  ALUMINUM) 

Query  Language  Translation  (after  parsing): 

(TEST  (FOR  SOME  XI  /  (SEQ  SAMPLES)  :  T  ;  (CONTAIN  XI 

(NPR*  X2  /  'AL203)  (GREATERTHAN  13  PCT)))) 

Response: 

YES 

LUNAR  is  perhaps  the  best  operational  example  of  a  finely  tuned 
ATN  parsing  system  applied  to  a  real-world  problem.  Since  the  system 
does  have  limited  performance  goals  (in  that  facilitating  database  inquiry 
is  not  as  demanding  as,  say,  holding  an  interesting  conversation),  some 
of  the  complications  inherent  in  understanding  natural  language  dia- 
logues are  avoided. 

References 

See  Woods  (1973b),  Woods  and  Kaplan  (1971),  and  Woods,  Kaplan, 
and  Nash-Webber  (1972). 


F4.     SHRDLU 

The  natural  language  processing  system  SHRDLU  was  written  by 
Terry  Winograd  (1972)  as  his  doctoral  research  project  at  M.I.T.  It  was 
written  in  LISP  and  MICRO-PLANNER,  a  LISP-based  programming  lan- 
guage. The  design  of  the  system  was  based  on  the  belief  that  to 
understand  language,  a  program  must  deal  in  an  integrated  way  with 
syntax,  semantics,  and  reasoning.  The  basic  viewpoint  guiding  its  imple- 
mentation was  that  meanings  (of  words,  phrases,  and  sentences)  can  be 
embodied  in  procedural  structures  and  that  language  is  a  way  of  acti- 
vating appropriate  procedures  within  the  hearer.  Thus,  instead  of  repre- 
senting knowledge  about  syntax  and  meaning  as  rules  in  a  grammar  or 
as  patterns  to  be  matched  against  the  input,  Winograd  embodied  the 
knowledge  in  SHRDLU  in  pieces  of  executable  computer  code.  For 
example,  the  context-free  rule  saying  that  a  sentence  is  composed  of  a 
noun  phrase  and  a  verb  phrase, 

S  ->  NP  VP  , 

is  embodied  in  the  MICRO-PLANNER  procedure: 

(PDEFINE  SENTENCE 

(((PARSE  NP)  NIL  FAIL) 
((PARSE  VP)  FAIL  FAIL  RETURN))) 

When  called,  this  program,  named  SENTENCE,  uses  independent  pro- 
cedures for  parsing  a  noun  phrase  followed  by  a  verb  phrase.  These,  in 
turn,  can  call  other  procedures.  The  process  FAILs  if  the  required  con- 
stituents are  not  found.  With  such  special  procedural  representations 
for  syntactic,  semantic,  and  reasoning  knowledge,  SHRDLU  was  able  to 
achieve  unprecedented  performance  levels. 

SHRDLU  operates  within  a  small  "toy"  domain  so  that  it  can  have 
an  extensive  model  of  the  structures  and  processes  allowed  in  the  do- 
main. The  program  simulates  the  operation  of  a  robot  arm  that  manip- 
ulates toy  blocks  on  a  table.  The  system  maintains  an  interactive 
dialogue  with  the  user:  It  can  accept  statements  and  commands  as  well 
as  answer  questions  about  the  state  of  its  world  and  the  reasons  for  its 
actions.  The  implemented  system  consists  of  four  basic  elements:  a 
parser,  a  recognition  grammar  for  English,  programs  for  semantic  anal- 
ysis (to  change  a  sentence  into  a  sequence  of  commands  to  the  robot  or 
into  a  query  of  the  database),  and  a  problem  solver  (which  knows  about 
how  to  accomplish  tasks  in  the  blocks  world). 


296  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

Each  procedure  can  make  any  checks  on  the  sentence  being  parsed, 
perform  any  actions,  or  call  on  other  procedures  that  may  be  required 
to  accomplish  its  goal.  For  example,  the  VERB  PHRASE  procedure 
called  above  contains  calls  to  functions  that  establish  verb- subject  agree- 
ment by  searching  through  the  entire  derivation  tree  for  other  constit- 
uents while  still  in  the  middle  of  parsing  the  VP.  SHRDLU's  knowledge 
base  includes  a  detailed  model  of  the  blocks  world  it  manipulates,  as 
well  as  a  simple  model  of  its  own  reasoning  processes,  so  that  it  can 
explain  its  actions. 

Reasoning  in  SHRDLU 

SHRDLU's  model  of  the  world  and  reasoning  about  it  are  done  in 
the  MICRO-PLANNER  programming  language,  which  facilitates  the  rep- 
resentation of  problem- solving  procedures,  allowing  the  user  to  specify 
his  own  heuristics  and  strategies  for  a  particular  domain.  (The  philos- 
ophy and  implementation  of  PLANNER  are  described  in  Article  VI. C2,  in 
Vol.  n — the  brief  discussion  here  will  illustrate  its  use  in  SHRDLU.) 
Knowledge  about  the  state  of  the  world  is  translated  into  MICRO- 
PLANNER  assertions,  and  manipulative  and  reasoning  knowledge  is  em- 
bodied in  MICRO-PLANNER  programs.  For  example,  the  input  sentence 
The  pyramid  is  on  the  table  might  be  translated  into  an  assertion  of  the 
form: 

(ON  PYRAMID  TABLE) 

SHRDLU's  problem  solver  consists  of  a  group  of  "theorems"  about 
the  robot's  environment  and  actions,  represented  as  MICRO-PLANNER 
procedures.  In  operation,  the  theorem  prover  manipulates  the  state  of 
the  domain  by  running  MICRO-PLANNER  programs  that  perform  the 
actions  requested  by  the  user. 

The  main  idea  of  PLANNER  is  to  solve  problems  by  means  of  spe- 
cific procedures  built  into  the  problem  statements  themselves,  as  well  as 
by  applying  general  problem- solving  rules.  The  advantage  of  these 
problem- specific  rules,  or  heuristics,  is  that  they  can  radically  increase 
the  efficiency  of  the  process.  Furthermore,  the  problem  statements  are 
programs  and  thus  can  carry  out  actions  in  the  problem- solving  process. 
Thus,  to  put  one  block  on  another,  there  might  be  a  MICRO-PLANNER 
program  of  the  form: 

(THGOAL  (ON  ?X  ?Y) 

(OR  (ON-TOP  ?X  ?Y) 

(AND  (CLEAR-TOP  ?X) 
(CLEAR-TOP  ?Y) 
(PUT-ON  ?X  ?Y)))) 


F4  SHRDLU  297 

This  means  that,  if  X  is  not  already  on  Y,  such  a  state  can  be 
achieved  by  clearing  off  everything  that  is  stacked  on  top  of  X  (so  that 
the  robot  can  move  X),  clearing  off  Y  (so  that  X  can  be  placed  on  top 
of  Y),  and  then  putting  X  on  Y.  The  procedure  resembles  a  predicate 
calculus  theorem,  but  there  are  important  differences.  The  PLANNER 
procedure  is  a  program,  and  its  operators  carry  out  actions.  The 
THGOAL  procedure  finds  an  assertion  in  the  database  or  proves  it  with 
other  procedures.  AND  and  OR  are  logical  connectives.  The  crucial 
element  is  that  though  PLANNER  may  end  up  doing  a  proof,  it  does  so 
only  after  checking  some  conditions  that  may  make  the  proof  trivial,  or 
impossible,  and  it  only  performs  the  proof  on  relevant  arguments,  rather 
than  checking  all  entities  in  the  database  as  a  blind  theorem  prover 
might.  Moreover,  no  sharp  distinction  is  drawn  between  proof  by 
showing  that  a  desired  assertion  is  already  true  and  proof  by  finding  a 
sequence  of  actions  (manipulating  blocks)  that  will  make  the  assertion 
true. 

Grammar,  Syntax,  and  Semantics 

SHRDLU's  grammar  is  based  on  the  notion  of  systemic  grammar,  a 
system  of  choice  networks  that  specifies  the  features  of  a  syntactic  unit, 
how  the  unit  functions,  and  how  it  influences  other  units  (as  described 
in  Article  IV.C3).  Thus,  a  systemic  grammar  contains  not  only  the  con- 
stituent elements  of  a  syntactic  group  but  also  higher  level  features  such 
as  mood,  tense,  and  voice. 

To  facilitate  the  analysis,  the  parsing  process  looks  for  syntactic 
units  that  play  a  major  role  in  meaning,  and  the  semantic  programs  are 
organized  into  groups  of  procedures  that  are  applicable  to  a  certain  type 
of  syntactic  unit.  In  addition,  the  database  definitions  contain  semantic 
markers  that  can  be  used  by  the  syntactic  programs  to  rule  out  gram- 
matical but  semantically  incorrect  sentences  such  as  The  table  picks  up 
blocks.  These  markers  are  calls  to  semantic  procedures  that  check  for 
restrictions,  for  example,  that  only  animate  objects  pick  up  things. 
These  semantic  programs  can  also  examine  the  context  of  discourse  to 
clarify  meanings,  establish  pronoun  referents,  and  initiate  other 
semantically  guided  parsing  functions. 

Parsing 

To  write  SHRDLU's  parser,  Winograd  first  wrote  a  programming  lan- 
guage, embedded  in  LISP,  which  he  called  PROGRAMMAR.  This 
language  supplies  primitive  functions  for  building  systemically  described 
syntactic    structures.      The    theory    behind    the    language    is    that    basic 


298  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

programming  methods,  such  as  procedures,  iteration,  and  recursion,  are 
also  basic  to  the  cognitive  process.  Thus,  a  grammar  can  be  imple- 
mented without  additional  programming  paraphernalia;  special  syntactic 
items  (such  as  conjunctions)  are  dealt  with  through  calls  to  special 
procedures.  PROGRAMMER  operates  basically  in  a  top-down,  left-to- 
right  fashion  but  uses  neither  a  parallel  processing  nor  a  backtracking 
strategy  in  dealing  with  multiple  alternatives  (see  Article  rv.Di).  It  finds 
one  parsing  rather  directly,  since  decisions  at  choice  points  are  guided 
by  the  semantic  procedures.  By  functionally  integrating  its  knowledge  of 
syntax  and  semantics,  SHRDLU  can  avoid  exploring  alternative  choices 
in  an  ambiguous  situation.  If  the  choice  does  fail,  PROGRAMMAR  has 
primitives  for  returning  to  the  choice  point  with  the  reasons  for  the 
failure  and  informing  the  parser  of  the  next  best  choice  based  on  these 
reasons.  This  "directed  backup"  is  far  different  from  PLANNER'S 
automatic  backtracking  in  that  the  design  philosophy  of  the  parser  is 
oriented  toward  making  an  original  correct  choice  rather  than  es- 
tablishing exhaustive  backtracking. 

The  key  to  the  system's  successful  operation  is  the  interaction  of 
PLANNER  reasoning  procedures,  semantic  analysis,  and  PROGRAMMAR. 
All  three  of  these  elements  examine  the  input  and  help  direct  the 
parsing  process.  By  making  use  of  this  multiple-source  knowledge  and 
programmed-in  "hints"  (heuristics),  SHRDLU  successfully  dealt  with  lan- 
guage issues  such  as  pronouns  and  referents.  The  reader  is  referred  to 
Winograd's  Understanding  Natural  Language  (1972),  pages  8-15,  for  an 
illustrative  sample  dialogue  with  SHRDLU. 

Discussion 

SHRDLU  constituted  a  significant  step  forward  in  natural  language 
processing  research  because  of  its  attempts  to  combine  models  of  human 
linguistic  and  reasoning  methods  in  the  language  understanding  process. 
Before  SHRDLU,  most  AI  language  programs  were  linguistically  simple; 
they  used  keyword  and  pattern-oriented  grammars.  Furthermore,  even 
the  more  powerful  grammar  models  used  by  linguists  made  little  use  of 
inference  methods  and  semantic  knowledge  in  the  analysis  of  sentence 
structure.  A  union  of  these  two  techniques  gives  SHRDLU  impressive 
results  and  makes  it  a  more  viable  theoretical  model  of  human  language 
processing. 

SHRDLU  does  have  its  problems,  however.  Like  most  existing  nat- 
ural language  systems,  SHRDLU  cannot  handle  many  of  the  more  com- 
plex features  of  English.  Some  of  the  problem  areas  are  agreement, 
dealing  with  hypotheses,  and  handling  words  like  the  and  and. 


F4  SHRDLU  299 

Wilks  (1974)  has  argued  that  SHRDLU's  power  does  not  come  from 
linguistic  analysis  but  from  the  use  of  problem- solving  methods  in  a  sim- 
ple, logical,  and  closed  domain  (blocks  world),  thus  eliminating  the  need 
to  face  some  of  the  more  difficult  language  issues.  It  seems  doubtful 
that  if  SHRDLU  were  extended  to  a  larger  domain,  it  would  be  able  to 
deal  with  these  problems.  Further,  the  level  at  which  SHRDLU  seeks  to 
simulate  the  intermixing  of  knowledge  sources  typical  of  human  rea- 
soning is  embedded  in  its  processes  rather  than  made  explicit  in  its 
control  structure,  where  it  would  be  most  powerful.  Lastly,  its  problem 
solving  is  still  highly  oriented  toward  predicate  calculus  and  limited  in 
its  use  of  inferential  and  heuristic  data  (Winograd,  1974,  pp.  46-48). 

References 

Winograd  (1972)  is  the  principal  reference  on  SHRDLU.  A  conve- 
nient summary  is  given  in  Winograd  (1973).  Boden  (1977)  also  presents 
a  clear  and  concise  discussion  of  the  system.  Winograd  (1980b)  reviews 
SHRDLU  and  subsequent  directions  of  his  research  into  understanding 
language. 

Also  of  interest  are  the  MICRO-PLANNER  manual  (Sussman,  Wino- 
grad, and  Charniak,  1970)  and  Wilks  (1974),  Winograd  (1974),  and 
Winograd  (in  press). 


F5.    MARGIE 

MARGIE  (Meaning  Analysis,  Response  Generation,  and  Inference  on 
English)  was  a  program  developed  by  Roger  Schank  and  his  students  at 
the  Stanford  AI  Laboratory  (see  Schank,  1975a).  Its  intent  was  to  pro- 
vide an  intuitive  model  of  the  process  of  natural  language  understand- 
ing. More  recent  work  by  Schank  and  his  colleagues  at  Yale  University 
on  script-based  story  understanding  in  their  SAM  and  PAM  systems  is 
described  in  Article  IV.F6. 

Conceptual  Dependency  Theory 

Schank  (1973b)  developed  conceptual  dependency  (CD)  as  a  represen- 
tation for  the  meaning  of  phrases  and  sentences.  The  "basic  axiom"  of 
conceptual  dependency  theory  is: 

For  any  two  sentences  that  are  identical  in  meaning,  regardless  of 
language,  there  should  be  only  one  representation  of  that  meaning 
in  CD.     (Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  p.  11) 

Schank  thus  allies  himself  with  the  early  machine  translation  concept  of 
interlingua,  or  intermediate  language  (see  Article  IV.B),  and  has  in  fact 
done  some  machine  translation  research  in  conjunction  with  the  story 
understanding  project,  SAM. 

A  second  important  idea  is  that  conceptual  dependency  representa- 
tions are  made  up  of  a  very  small  number  of  semantic  primitives,  which 
include  primitive  acts  and  primitive  states  (with  associated  attribute 
values).     Examples  of  primitive  acts  are: 

PTRANS  The  transfer  of  the  physical  location  of  an 

object.   For  one  to  "go"  is  to  PTRANS  oneself. 
"Putting"  an  object  somewhere  is  to  PTRANS  it 
to  that  place. 

PROPEL  The  application  of  physical  force  to  an  object. 

ATRANS  The  transfer  of  an  abstract  relationship.   To 

"give"  is  to  ATRANS  the  relationship  of  possession 
or  ownership. 

NTRANS  The  transfer  of  mental  information  between  people 

or  within  a  person.   "Telling"  is  an  NTRANS  between 
people;  "seeing"  is  an  NTRANS  within  a  person. 

NBUILD  The  construction  of  new  information  from  old. 

"Imagining,"  "inferring,"  and  "deciding"  are  NBUILDs. 


F5  MARGIE  301 

In  the  most  recent  version  of  CD  theory  (1977),  Schank  and  Abelson 
included  11  of  these  primitive  acts.  Relations  among  concepts  are  called 
dependencies,  and  there  is  a  fixed  number  of  these,  each  represented 
graphically  by  a  special  kind  of  arrow.  For  example,  the  canonical 
representation  of  the  sentence  John  gives  Mary  a  book  is  the  graph: 

o        R  | ►  Mary 

John  <===>  ATRANS  < book  < 

«-  John 


where  John,  book,  and  Mary  are  concept  nodes,  and  the  ATRANS  node 
represents  one  of  the  primitive  acts.  The  complicated,  three-pointed 
arrow  labeled  "R"  indicates  a  recipient-donor  dependency  between  Mary 
and  John  and  the  book,  since  Mary  got  the  book  from  John.  The 
arrow  labeled  "o"  indicates  an  "objective"  dependency;  that  is,  the  book 
is  the  object  of  the  ATRANS,  since  it  is  the  thing  being  given.  Depen- 
dency links  may  link  concepts  or  other  conceptual  dependency  networks. 
Examples  of  primitive  states  in  conceptual  dependency  theory  in- 
clude: 

STATES : 

Nary  HEALTH (-10)  Nary  is  dead. 

John  MENTAL  STATE(+10)  John  is  ecstatic. 

Vase  PHYSICAL  STATE(-IO)  The  vase  is  broken. 

The  number  of  primitive  states  is  much  larger  than  the  number  of 
primitive  actions.  States  and  actions  can  be  combined;  for  example,  the 
sentence  John  told  Mary  that  Bill  was  happy  can  be  represented  (in  a 
newer,  arrowless  representation)  as 

John  MTRANS  (Bill  BE  MENTAL-STATE (5))  to  Mary. 

An  important  class  of  sentences  involves  causal  chains,  and  Schank 
and  Abelson  and  their  colleagues  have  worked  out  some  rules  about  cau- 
sality that  apply  to  conceptual  dependency  theory.  Five  important  rules 
are: 

1.  Actions  can  result  in  state  changes. 

2.  States  can  enable  actions. 

3.  States  can  disable  actions. 

4.  States  (or  acts)  can  initiate  mental  events. 

5.  Mental  events  can  be  reasons  for  actions. 

These  are  fundamental  pieces  of  knowledge  about  the  world,  and  CD 
includes  a  shorthand  representation  of  each  (and  combinations  of  some) 
called  causal  links. 


302 


Understanding  Natural  Language 


IV 


The  third  important  idea  in  conceptual  dependency  theory  is: 

Any  information  in  a  sentence  that  is  implicit  must  be  made 
explicit  in  the  representation  of  the  meaning  of  that  sentence. 
(Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  p.  11) 

This  idea  is  the  basis  for  much  of  the  sophisticated  inferential  ability  of 
MARGIE  and  the  later  systems.  It  can  be  illustrated  by  the  CD  repre- 
sentation of  the  sentence  John  eats  the  ice  cream  with  a  spoon: 


o  D 

John  <===>  INGEST  < ice  cream  < — 


ice  cream 

A 

< 

v 
CONTAIN  (spoon) 


-►  John    I   John 
« 


-<-  spoon 


MOVE 


-►  spoon 
D 


ice  cream 


mouth 


where  the  D  and  /  arrows  indicate  direction  and  instrument  depen- 
dencies, respectively.  Note  that  in  this  example,  mouth  has  entered  the 
diagram  as  part  of  the  conceptualization,  even  though  it  was  not  in  the 
original  sentence.  This  is  a  fundamental  difference  between  conceptual 
dependency  networks  and  the  derivation  tree  that  is  produced  in  parsing 
a  sentence.  John's  mouth  as  the  recipient  of  the  ice  cream  is  inherent 
in  the  meaning  of  the  sentence,  whether  it  is  expressed  or  not.  In  fact, 
the  diagram  can  never  be  finished,  because  we  could  add  such  details  as 
"John  INGESTed  the  ice  cream  by  TRANSing  the  ice  cream  on  a  spoon 
to  his  mouth,  by  TRANSing  the  spoon  to  the  ice  cream,  by  GRASPing 
the  spoon,  by  MOVing  his  hand  to  the  spoon,  by  MOVing  his  hand 
muscles,"  and  so  on.  Such  an  analysis  is  known  to  both  the  speaker 
and  the  hearer  of  the  sentence  and  normally  would  not  need  to  be  ex- 
panded. 

For  some  tasks,  like  paraphrasing  and  question  answering,  CD  rep- 
resentation has  a  number  of  advantages  over  more  surface-oriented  sys- 
tems.    In  particular,  sentences  like 


Shakespeare  wrote  Hamlet 


and 


The  author  of  Hamlet  was  Shakespeare. 


F5  MARGIE  303 

which  in  some  sense  have  the  same  meaning,  map  into  the  same 
CD  structure.  Another  important  aspect  of  conceptual  dependency 
theory  is  its  independence  from  syntax;  in  contrast  with  earlier  work  in 
the  paradigms  of  transformational  grammar  or  phrase-structure  grammar, 
a  "parse"  of  a  sentence  in  conceptual  dependency  bears  little  relation  to 
the  syntactic  structure.  Schank  (1975a)  also  claims  that  conceptual 
dependency  has  a  certain  amount  of  psychological  validity,  in  that  it 
reflects  intuitive  notions  of  human  cognition.  The  status  of  semantic 
primitives  in  conceptual  dependency  theory  is  discussed  further  in  Article 
m.C6. 

MARGIE 

The  MARGIE  system,  programmed  in  LISP  1.6,  was  divided  into 
three  components.  The  first,  written  by  Christopher  Riesbeck,  was  a 
conceptual  analyzer,  which  took  English  sentences  and  converted  them 
into  an  internal  conceptual-dependency  representation.  This  was  done 
through  a  system  of  "requests,"  which  are  similar  to  demons  or  pro- 
ductions (see  Article  m.C4).  A  request  is  essentially  a  piece  of  code  that 
looks  for  some  surface  linguistic  construct  and  takes  a  specific  action  if 
it  is  found.  It  consists  of  a  test  condition,  to  be  searched  for  in  the 
input,  and  an  action,  to  be  executed  if  the  test  is  successful.  The  test 
might  be  as  specific  as  a  particular  word  or  as  general  as  an  entire 
conceptualization.  The  action  might  contain  information  about  (a)  what 
to  look  for  next  in  the  input,  (b)  what  to  do  with  the  input  just  found, 
and  (c)  how  to  organize  the  representation.  The  flexibility  of  this 
formalism  allows  the  system  to  function  without  depending  heavily  on 
syntax,  although  it  is  otherwise  quite  similar  to  the  tests  and  actions 
that  make  ATNs  such  a  powerful  parsing  mechanism. 

The  middle  phase  of  the  system,  written  by  Charles  Rieger,  was  an 
inferencer  designed  to  accept  a  proposition  (stated  in  conceptual  depen- 
dency) and  deduce  a  large  number  of  facts  from  the  proposition  in  the 
current  context  of  the  system's  memory.  The  reason  behind  this  com- 
ponent was  the  assumption  that  humans  understand  far  more  from  a 
sentence  than  is  actually  stated.  Sixteen  types  of  inferences  were  iden- 
tified, including  cause,  effect,  specification,  and  function.  The  inference 
knowledge  was  represented  in  memory  in  a  modified  semantic  net. 
Inferences  were  organized  into  "molecules,"  for  the  purpose  of  applying 
them.    An  example  of  this  process  might  be: 

John   hit  Mary . 

from  which  the  system  might  infer  (among  many  other  things): 


304  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

John  was  angry  with  Nary. 
Nary  might  hit  John  back. 
Nary  might  get  hurt. 

The    module    does    relatively    unrestricted    forward    inferencing,    which 
tended  to  produce  large  numbers  of  inferences  for  any  given  input. 

The  last  part  of  the  system  was  a  text  generation  module  written 
by  Neil  Goldman.  This  took  an  internal  conceptual-dependency  represen- 
tation and  converted  it  into  English-like  output,  in  a  two-part  process: 

1.  A  discrimination  net  was  used  to  distinguish  between  different 
word-senses.  This  permitted  the  system  to  use  English-specific 
contextual  criteria  for  selecting  words  (especially  verbs)  to 
"name"  conceptual  patterns. 

2.  An  ATN  was  used  to  linearize  the  conceptual  dependency  rep- 
resentation into  a  surface-like  structure. 

The  text  generation  module  is  also  discussed  in  Article  IV.E, 

MARGIE  ran  in  two  modes:  inference  mode  and  paraphrase  mode. 
In  inference  mode,  it  would  accept  a  sentence  and  attempt  to  make  in- 
ferences from  that  sentence,  as  described  above.  In  paraphrase  mode,  it 
would  attempt  to  restate  the  sentence  in  as  many  equivalent  ways  as 
possible.    For  example,  given  the  input 

John  killed  Nary  by  choking  her. 

it  might  produce  the  paraphrases 

John  strangled  Nary. 

John  choked  Nary  and  she  died  because  she  was  unable  to  breathe. 


Discussion 

Of  particular  interest  in  MARGIE,  an  experimental  system  that  pro- 
vided a  foundation  for  Schank's  further  work  in  computational  lin- 
guistics, was  the  use  of  conceptual  dependency  as  an  interlingua,  a 
language-independent  representation  scheme  for  encoding  the  meaning  of 
sentences.  Once  the  sentence  was  processed,  the  surface  structure  was 
dropped  and  all  further  work  was  done  using  the  conceptual  dependency 
notation.  The  existence  of  a  canonical  representation  for  all  sentences 
with  the  same  meaning  facilitates  tasks  like  paraphrasing  and  question 
answering. 


F5  MARGIE  305 

References 

Conceptual  dependency  theory  and  all  three  parts  of  the  MARGIE 
system  are  described  in  detail  in  Schank  (1975a).  Since  then,  the  theory 
has  evolved  considerably,  and  several  new  systems  have  been  built  using 
the  CD  formalisms,  all  described  very  well  in  Schank  and  Abelson 
(1977).  Other  references  for  MARGIE  include  Schank  (1973b)  and 
Schank  et  al.  (1973).  The  review  article  by  Schank  (1980)  is  a  very 
interesting  discussion  of  the  development  of  his  ideas  about  natural  lan- 
guage. 


F6.     SAM  and  PAM 


Story  Understanding 

SAM  (Script  Applier  Mechanism)  and  PAM  (Plan  Applier  Mechanism) 
are  computer  programs  developed  by  Roger  Schank,  Robert  Abelson, 
and  their  students  at  Yale  University  to  demonstrate  the  use  of  scripts 
and  plans  in  understanding  simple  stories  (Schank  et  al.,  1975;  Schank 
and  Abelson,  1977).  Most  work  in  natural  language  understanding  prior 
to  1973  involved  parsing  individual  sentences  in  isolation;  it  was  thought 
that  text  composed  of  paragraphs  could  be  understood  simply  as  col- 
lections of  sentences.  But  just  as  sentences  are  not  unconstrained  collec- 
tions of  words,  so  paragraphs  and  stories  are  not  without  structure. 
The  structures  of  stories  have  been  analyzed  (Propp,  1968;  Rumelhart, 
1975;  Thorndyke,  1977),  and  it  is  clear  that  the  context  provided  by 
these  structures  facilitates  sentence  comprehension,  just  as  the  context 
provided  by  sentence  structure  facilitates  word  comprehension.  For  ex- 
ample, if  we  have  been  told  in  a  story  that  John  is  very  poor,  we  can 
expect  later  sentences  to  deal  with  the  consequences  of  John's  poverty 
or  with  the  steps  he  takes  to  alleviate  it. 

Different  researchers  have  very  different  ideas  about  what  constitutes 
the  structure  of  a  story.  Some  story  grammars  are  rather  syntactic; 
that  is,  they  describe  a  story  as  a  collection  of  parts  like  setting,  char- 
acters, goal  introduction,  and  plans,  determined  by  their  sequential  posi- 
tion in  the  story  rather  than  by  their  meaning.  The  work  of  Schank 
and  Abelson  reported  here  has  a  more  semantic  orientation.  They 
propose  an  underlying  representation  of  each  phrase  in  a  story  that  is 
based  on  a  knowledge  representation  formalism  called  conceptual  depen- 
dency theory  (CD;  described  in  Article  IV.F5).  Conceptual  dependency, 
which  creates,  from  a  set  of  semantic  primitives,  unique  representations 
for  all  sentences  with  the  same  meaning,  is  the  theoretical  basis  for 
more  complex  story  structures  such  as  scripts,  plans,  goals,  and  themes. 
The  SAM  and  PAM  programs  understand  stories  using  these  higher  level 
structures. 

Conceptual  dependency  representation  is,  then,  the  interlingua  that 
is  produced  when  SAM  or  PAM  parses  sentences.  The  parser  for  these 
programs  is  an  extension  of  the  one  developed  by  Christopher  Riesbeck 
(1975)  for  the  MARGIE  system  (Article  IV.F5).  Further  processing  in 
SAM  and  PAM  involves  the  manipulation  of  CD  structures  and  of  higher 
level  structures  built  on  them — scripts,  plans,  goals,  and  themes. 


F6  SAM  and  PAM  307 

Scripts 

A  script  is  a  standardized  sequence  of  events  that  describes  some 
stereotypical  human  activity,  such  as  going  to  a  restaurant  or  visiting  a 
doctor.  Schank  and  Abelson's  assumption  is  that  people  know  many 
such  scripts  and  use  them  to  establish  the  context  of  events.  A  script 
is  functionally  similar  to  a  frame  (Minsky,  1975)  or  a  schema  (Bartlett, 
1932;  Rumelhart,  1975),  in  the  sense  that  it  can  be  used  to  anticipate 
aspects  of  the  events  it  represents.  For  example,  the  RESTAURANT 
script  (see  Fig.  F6-1)  involves  going  to  a  restaurant,  being  seated, 
consulting  the  menu,  and  so  on.  People  who  are  presented  with  an 
abbreviated  description  of  this  activity,  for  example,  the  sentence  John 
went  out  to  dinner,  infer  from  their  own  knowledge  about  restaurants 
that  John  ordered,  ate,  and  paid  for  food.  Moreover,  they  anticipate 
from  a  sentence  that  fills  part  of  the  script  (e.g.,  John  was  given  a 
menu)  what  sort  of  sentences  are  likely  to  follow  (e.g.,  John  ordered  the 
lamb).  Scripts  attempt  to  capture  the  kind  of  knowledge  that  people 
apply  to  make  these  inferences.  (Article  m.C7  discusses  scripts,  frames, 
and  representation  schemes.) 


Players:      customer,  server,  cashier 

Props:       restaurant,  table,  menu,  food,  check,  payment,  tip 


Events: 


1.  customer  goes  to  restaurant 

2.  customer  goes  to  table 

3.  server  brings  menu 

4.  customer  orders  food 

5.  server  brings  food 

6.  customer  eats  food 

7.  server  brings  check 

8.  customer  leaves  tip  for  server 

9.  customer  gives  payment  to  cashier 
10.  customer  leaves  restaurant 


Header:       event  1 
Main  concept:  event  6 


Figure  F6-1.    Restaurant  script. 

Two  components  of  scripts  are  of  special  importance.  We  will  dis- 
cuss later  how  the  first  component,  the  script  header,  is  used  by  SAM 
to  match  scripts  to  parsed  sentences.     The  second  important  component 


308  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

is  the  main  concept,  or  goal,  of  the  script.  In  the  restaurant  script,  the 
goal  is  to  eat  food. 

The  scripts  in  SAM  grew  out  of  Abelson's  (1973)  notion  of  scripts  as 
networks  of  causal  connections.  However,  they  do  not  depend  on  ex- 
plicit causal  connections  between  their  events.  In  hearing  or  observing 
events  that  fit  a  standard  script,  one  need  not  analyze  the  sequence  of 
events  in  terms  of  causes,  since  they  can  be  anticipated  just  on  the 
basis  of  knowing  what  typically  happens  in  situations  in  which  the 
script  applies.  The  identification  of  events  as  filling  their  slots  in  the 
script  gives  us  the  intuition  of  "understanding  what  happened." 

Scripts  describe  everyday  events,  but  frequently  these  events  (or  our 
relating  of  them)  do  not  run  to  completion.     For  example: 

I  went  to  the  restaurant.   I  had  a  hamburger. 
Then  I  bought  some  groceries. 

This  story  presents  several  problems  for  a  system  like  SAM  that  matches 
scripts  to  input  sentences.  One  problem  is  that  the  restaurant  script  is 
"left  dangling"  by  the  introduction  of  the  last  sentence.  It  is  not  clear 
to  the  system  whether  the  restaurant  script  (a)  has  terminated  and  a 
new  (grocery  shopping)  script  has  started,  (b)  has  been  distracted  by  a 
"fleeting"  (one  sentence)  grocery  script,  or  (c)  is  interacting  with  a  new 
grocery  script  (e.g.,  buying  groceries  in  the  restaurant).  Another  thing 
that  can  happen  to  everyday  scripts  is  that  they  can  be  thwarted,  as  in: 

I  went  to  the  gas  station  to  fill  up  my  car. 
But  the  owner  said  he  was  out  of  gas. 

This  is  called  an  obstacle. 

Scripts  describe  rather  specific  events,  and  although  it  is  assumed 
that  adults  know  thousands  of  them,  story  comprehension  cannot  be 
simply  a  matter  of  finding  a  script  to  match  a  story.  There  are  just 
too  many  possible  stories.  Moreover,  there  are  clear  cases  in  which 
people  comprehend  a  story  even  though  it  does  not  give  enough  in- 
formation to  cause  a  program  to  invoke  a  script,  as  in 

John  needed  money.   He  got  a  gun  and  went  to  a  liquor  store. 

Schank  and  Abelson  point  out  that  even  if  the  program  had  a  script  for 
Robbery,  this  story  offers  no  basis  for  invoking  it.  Nonetheless,  people 
understand  John's  goals  and  his  intended  actions. 


F6  SAM  and  PAM  309 


There  must  be  relevant  knowledge  available  to  tie  together  sen- 
tences that  otherwise  have  no  obvious  connection.  .  .  .  The 
problem  is  that  there  are  a  great  many  stories  where  the 
connection  cannot  be  made  by  the  techniques  of  causal  chaining 
nor  by  reference  to  a  script.  Yet  they  are  obviously  connectable. 
Their  connectability  comes  from  these  stories'  implicit  reference  to 
plans.     (Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  p.  75) 

Plans 

Schank  and  Abelson  introduce  plans  as  the  means  by  which  goals 
are  accomplished,  and  they  state  that  understanding  plan-based  stories 
involves  discerning  the  goals  of  the  actor  and  the  methods  by  which  the 
actor  chooses  to  fulfill  those  goals.  The  distinction  between  script-based 
and  plan-based  stories  is  very  simple:  In  a  script-based  story,  parts  or 
all  of  the  story  correspond  to  one  or  more  scripts  available  to  the  story 
understander;  in  a  plan-based  story,  the  understander  must  discern  the 
goals  of  the  main  actor  and  the  actions  that  accomplish  those  goals. 
An  understander  might  process  the  same  story  by  matching  it  with  a 
script  or  scripts  or  by  figuring  out  the  plans  that  are  represented  in  the 
story.  The  difference  is  that  the  first  method  is  very  specialized  since  a 
script  refers  to  a  specific  sequence  of  actions,  while  plans  can  be  very 
general  since  the  goals  they  accomplish  are  general.    For  example,  in 

John  wanted  to  go  to  a  movie.   He  walked  to  the  bus  stop. 

we  understand  that  John's  immediate  goal  (called  a  delta  goal  or  D-goal 
because  it  brings  about  a  change  necessary  for  accomplishment  of  the 
ultimate  goal)  is  to  get  to  the  movie  theater.  Going  somewhere  is  a 
very  general  goal  and  does  not  apply  just  to  going  to  the  movies.  In 
Schank  and  Abelson's  theory,  this  goal  has  associated  with  it  a  set  of 
plan  boxes,  which  are  standard  ways  of  accomplishing  the  goal.  Plan 
boxes  for  going  somewhere  include  riding  an  animal,  taking  public 
transportation,  driving  a  car,  and  so  forth. 

Obviously,  a  story  understander  might  have  a  "Go  to  the  movies" 
script  in  its  repertoire,  so  that  analysis  of  John's  goals  would  be 
unnecessary — the  system  would  just  "recognize"  the  situation  and  re- 
trieve the  script.  This  script  can  be  thought  of  as  the  standardized 
intersection  of  a  number  of  more  or  less  general  goals  and  their  asso- 
ciated plan  boxes.  It  would  be  a  "routinized  plan"  made  up  of  a  set  of 
general  subplans:  Go  to  somewhere  (the  theater),  Purchase  something  (a 
ticket),  Purchase  something  (some  popcorn),  and  so  forth. 


310  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

A  routinized  plan  can  become  a  script,  at  least  from  the  planner's 
personal  point  of  view. 

Thus,  plans  are  where  scripts  come  from.  They  compete  for 
the  same  role  in  the  understanding  process,  namely  as  explanations 
of  sequences  of  actions  that  are  intended  to  achieve  a  goal. 
(Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  p.  72) 

The  process  of  understanding  plan-based  stories  involves  determining 
the  actor's  goal,  establishing  the  subgoals  (D-goals)  that  will  lead  to  the 
main  goal,  and  matching  the  actor's  actions  with  plan  boxes  associated 
with  the  D-goals.    For  example,  in 

John  was  very  thirsty.   He  hunted  for  a  glass. 

we  recognize  the  D-goal  of  PTRANSing  liquid  and  the  lower  level  goal 
(specified  in  the  plan  box  for  PTRANSing  liquid)  of  finding  a  container 
to  do  it  with. 

Goals  and  Themes 

In  story  comprehension,  goals  and  subgoals  may  arise  from  a  number 
of  sources.    For  example,  they  may  be  stated  explicitly,  as  in 

John  wanted  to  eat. 

they  may  be  nested  in  a  plan  box,  or  they  may  arise  from  themes.  For 
example,  if  a  LOVE  theme  holds  between  John  and  Mary,  it  is  rea- 
sonable to  expect  the  implicit,  mutual  goal  of  protecting  each  other 
from  harm:  "Themes,  in  other  words,  contain  the  background  infor- 
mation upon  which  we  base  our  predictions  that  an  individual  will  have 
a  certain  goal"  (Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  p.  132). 

Themes  are  rather  like  production  systems  in  their  situation-action 
nature.  A  theme  specifies  a  set  of  actors,  the  situations  they  may  be 
in,  and  the  actions  that  will  resolve  the  situation  in  a  way  consistent 
with  the  theme.  The  goals  of  a  theme  are  to  accomplish  these  actions. 
Schank  and  Abelson  have  proposed  seven  types  of  goals;  we  have  al- 
ready considered  D-goals.     Other  examples  are: 

A-  or  Achievement-goals:      To  desire  wealth  is  to  have  an 

A-Noney  goa I . 
P-  or  Preservation-goal:      To  protect  someone  may  be  a  P-Health 

or  P-Nenta I  State  goal. 
C-  or  Crisis-goal:  A  special  case  of  P-goals,  when  action 

is  immediately  necessary. 

The  LOVE  theme  can  be  stated  in  terms  of  some  of  these  goals: 


F6  SAM  and  PAM  311 

X  is  the  lover;  Y  is  the  loved  one;  Z  is  another  person. 

SITUATION  ACTIOM 

Z  cause  Y  harm  A-Health(Y)  and  possibly 

cause  Z  harm 
or    C-Health(Y) 

not-Love(Y,X)  A-Love(Y,X) 

General  goals:  A-Respect(Y) 

A-Narry(Y) 
A-Approval  (Y) 

To  summarize  the  knowledge  structures  we  have  discussed,  we  note 
their  interrelationships: 

1.  Themes  give  rise  to  goals. 

2.  A  plan  is  understood  when  its  goals  are  identified  and  its  ac- 
tions are  consistent  with  the  accomplishment  of  those  goals. 

3.  Scripts  are  standardized  models  of  events. 

4.  Scripts  are  specific;  plans  are  general. 

5.  Plans  originate  from  scripts. 

6.  Plans  are  ways  of  representing  a  person's  goals.  These  goals  are 
implicit  in  scripts,  which  represent  only  the  actions. 

7.  A  script  has  a  header,  which  is  pattern-matched  to  an  input 
sentence.  Plans  do  not  have  headers,  but  each  plan  is  sub- 
sumed under  a  goal. 

SAM 

Both  SAM  and  PAM  accept  stories  as  input;  both  use  an  English-to- 
CD  parser  to  produce  an  internal  representation  of  the  story  (in  con- 
ceptual dependency).  Both  can  paraphrase  the  story  and  make  intelligent 
inferences  from  it.  They  differ  with  respect  to  the  processing  that  goes 
on  after  the  CD  representation  has  been  built. 

SAM  understands  stories  by  fitting  them  into  one  or  more  scripts. 
After  this  match  is  completed,  it  makes  summaries  of  the  stories.  The 
process  of  fitting  a  story  into  a  script  has  three  parts — a  PARSER,  a 
memory  module  (MEMTOK),  and  the  script  applier  (APPLY).  These 
modules  work  together:  The  parser  generates  a  CD  representation  of 
each  sentence,  but  APPLY  gives  it  a  set  of  Verb-senses  to  use  once  a 
script  has  been  identified.     For  example,  once  the  restaurant  script  has 


312  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

been  established,  APPLY  tells  the  parser  that  the  appropriate  sense  of 
the  verb  to  serve  is  to  serve  food  rather  than,  for  example,  to  serve  in 
the  army. 

The  parser  does  not  make  many  inferences;  thus,  it  does  not  realize 
that  it  refers  to  the  hot  dog  in  The  hot  dog  was  burned.  It  tasted  awful. 
This  task  is  left  to  MEMTOK.  This  module  takes  references  to  people, 
places,  things,  and  so  forth  and  fills  in  information  about  them.  It 
recognizes  that  the  it  in  the  sentence  above  refers  to  the  hot  dog,  and 
"instantiates"  the  it  node  in  the  CD  representation  of  the  second  sen- 
tence with  the  "hot  dog"  node  from  the  first  sentence.  Similarly,  in  a 
story  about  John,  MEMTOK  would  replace  he  with  John  where  appro- 
priate, and  would  continually  update  the  John  data  structure  as  more 
information  became  available  about  him. 

The  APPLY  module  has  three  functions.  First,  it  takes  a  sentence 
from  the  parser  and  checks  whether  it  matches  the  current  script,  a 
concurrent  (interacting)  script,  or  any  script  in  the  database.  If  this 
matching  is  successful,  it  makes  a  set  of  predictions  about  likely  inputs 
to  follow.  Its  third  task  is  to  instantiate  any  steps  in  the  current  script 
that  were  "skipped  over"  in  the  story.  For  example,  if  the  first 
sentence  of  a  story  is  John  went  to  a  restaurant,  APPLY  finds  a  match 
with  the  script  header  of  the  restaurant  script  in  its  database  (refer 
back  to  Fig.  F6-1).  APPLY  then  sets  up  predictions  for  seeing  the 
other  events  listed  in  the  restaurant  script  in  the  input.  If  the  next 
sentence  is  John  had  a  hamburger,  then  APPLY  successfully  matches  this 
sentence  to  the  restaurant  script  (event  6).  It  then  assumes  that 
events  2-5  happened,  and  instantiates  structures  in  its  CD  representation 
of  the  story  to  this  effect.    Events  7-10  remain  as  predictions. 

When  the  whole  story  has  been  mapped  into  a  CD  representation  in 
this  manner,  the  SAM  program  can  produce  a  summary  of  the  story  or 
answer  questions  about  it.  (See  Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  pp.  190-204, 
for  an  annotated  sample  protocol.)  Consistent  with  the  idea  of  an 
interlingua,  SAM  can  produce  summaries  in  English,  Chinese,  Russian, 
Dutch,  and  Spanish.  An  example  of  a  SAM  paraphrase  follows;  note 
the  powerful  inferences  made  by  instantiating  intermediate  script  steps: 

ORIGINAL:       John  went  to  a  restaurant.   He  sat  down.   He  got  mad. 
He  left. 

PARAPHRASE:     JOHN  WAS  HUNGRY.   HE  DECIDED  TO  GO  TO  A  RESTAURANT. 
HE  WENT  TO  ONE.   HE  SAT  DOWN  IN  A  CHAIR.   A  WAITER 
DID  NOT  GO  TO  THE  TABLE.   JOHN  BECAME  UPSET.   HE 
DECIDED  HE  WAS  GOING  TO  LEAVE  THE  RESTAURANT.   HE 
LEFT  IT. 


F6  SAM  and  PAM  313 

SAM  inferred  that  John  left  the  restaurant  because  he  did  not  get  any 
service.  The  basis  for  this  inference  is  that  in  the  restaurant  script, 
event  3  represents  the  waiter  coming  over  to  the  table  after  the  main 
actor  has  been  seated.  SAM  knows  that  people  can  get  mad  if  their 
expectations  are  not  fulfilled  and  infers  that  John's  anger  results  from 
the  nonoccurrence  of  event  3. 

PAM 

Wilensky's  (1978a)  PAM  system  understands  stories  by  determining 
the  goals  that  are  to  be  achieved  in  the  story  and  attempting  to  match 
the  actions  of  the  story  with  the  methods  that  it  knows  will  achieve  the 
goals.     More  formally: 

The  process  of  understanding  plan-based  stories  is  as  follows: 

a)  Determine  the  goal, 

b)  Determine  the  D-goals  that  will  satisfy  that  goal, 

c)  Analyze  input  conceptualizations  for  their  potential  realization  of 
one  of  the  planboxes  that  are  called  by  one  of  the  determined 
D-goals.     (Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  p.  75) 

PAM  utilizes  two  kinds  of  knowledge  structures  in  understanding  goals: 
named  plans  and  themes.  A  named  plan  is  a  set  of  actions  and  sub- 
goals  for  accomplishing  a  main  goal.  It  is  not  very  different  from  a 
script,  although  the  emphasis  in  named  plans  is  on  goals  and  the  means 
to  accomplish  them.  For  example,  a  script  for  rescuing  a  person  from  a 
dragon  would  involve  riding  to  the  dragon's  lair  and  slaying  it — a 
sequence  of  actions — but  a  named  plan  would  be  a  list  of  subgoals  (find 
some  way  of  getting  to  the  lair,  find  some  way  of  killing  the  dragon, 
etc.)  and  their  associated  plan  boxes.  When  PAM  encounters  a  goal  in 
a  story  for  which  it  has  a  named  plan,  it  can  make  predictions  about 
the  D-goals  and  the  actions  that  will  follow.  It  will  look  for  these  D- 
goals  and  actions  in  subsequent  inputs.  Finding  them  is  equivalent  to 
understanding  the  story. 

Themes  provide  another  source  of  goals  for  PAM.  Consider  the 
sentences: 

1.  John  wanted  to  rescue  Nary  from  the  dragon. 

2.  John  loves  Nary.   Nary  was  stolen  away  by  a  dragon. 

In  both  of  these  cases,  PAM  will  expect  John  to  take  actions  that  are 
consistent  with  the  goal  of  rescuing  Mary  from  the  dragon,  even  though 
this  goal  was  not  explicitly  mentioned  in  sentence  2.  The  source  of  this 
goal  in  sentence  2  is,   of  course,   the  LOVE  theme  mentioned  above — if 


314  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

another  actor  tries  to  cause  harm  to  a  loved  one,  the  main  actor  sets 
up  the  goal  of  Achieving-Health  of  the  loved  one  and  possibly  harming 
the  evil  party.  (It  is  assumed  that  the  dragon  stole  Mary  in  order  to 
hurt  her.) 

PAM  determines  the  goals  of  an  actor  by  (a)  noting  their  explicit 
mention  in  the  text  of  the  story,  (b)  establishing  them  as  D-goals  for 
some  known  goal,  or  (c)  inferring  them  from  a  theme  mentioned  in  the 
story.  To  understand  a  story  is  to  "keep  track  of  the  goals  of  each  of 
the  characters  in  a  story  and  to  interpret  their  actions  as  means  of 
achieving  those  goals"  (Schank  and  Abelson,  1977,  p.  217).  The  pro- 
gram begins  with  written  English  text,  converts  it  into  CD  represen- 
tation, and  then  interprets  each  sentence  in  terms  of  goals  (predicting  D- 
goals  and  actions  to  accomplish  them)  or  actions  themselves  (marking 
the  D-goals  as  accomplished).  When  this  process  is  completed,  PAM  can 
summarize  the  story  and  answer  questions  about  the  goals  and  actions 
of  the  characters. 

Summary 

Scripts,  plans,  goals,  and  themes  are  knowledge  structures  built  upon 
conceptual  dependency  theory.  SAM  is  a  program  for  understanding 
script-based  stories.  It  matches  the  input  sentences  of  a  story  to  events 
in  one  or  more  of  the  scripts  in  its  database.  As  such,  it  processes 
input  based  on  expectations  it  has  built  up  from  the  scripts.  PAM  un- 
derstands plan-based  stories  by  determining  the  goals  of  the  characters 
of  the  story  and  by  interpreting  subsequent  actions  in  terms  of  those 
goals  or  subgoals  that  will  achieve  them.  A  great  deal  of  inference  can 
be  required  of  PAM  simply  to  establish  the  goals  and  subgoals  of  the 
story  from  the  input  text. 

Schank  and  Abelson  argue  that  human  story-understanding  is  a 
mixture  of  applying  known  scripts  and  inferring  goals  (where  no  script 
is  available  or  of  obvious  applicability).  They  are  experimenting  with 
interactions  of  SAM  and  PAM,  particularly  with  using  SAM  to  handle 
script-based  substories  under  the  control  of  PAM. 

References 

The  recent  book  by  Schank  and  Abelson  (1977)  is  the  most  com- 
plete and  readable  source  on  both  of  these  systems  and  on  the  current 
state  of  conceptual  dependency  theory.  For  a  thorough  treatment  of 
PAM,  see  the  doctoral  dissertation  by  Wilensky  (1978a).  Schank  (1980) 
reviews  the  development  of  his  ideas  about  natural  language  processing 
and  his  work  on  these  NL  systems. 


F6  SAM  and  PAM  315 

Also  of  interest:  Abelson  (1973),  Bartlett  (1932),  Minsky  (1975), 
Propp  (1968),  Riesbeck  (1975),  Rumelhart  (1975),  Schank  (1973b), 
Schank  et  al.  (1975),  Thorndyke  (1977),  and  Wilensky  (1978b). 


F7.    LIFER 


The  natural  language  systems  described  in  the  preceding  articles  fall 
into  two  categories:  those  built  to  study  natural  language  processing 
issues  in  general  and  those  built  with  a  particular  task  domain  in  mind. 
In  contrast,  LIFER,  built  by  Gary  Hendrix  (1977a)  as  part  of  the  inter- 
nal research  and  development  program  of  SRI  International,  is  designed 
to  be  an  off-the-shelf  utility  for  building  "natural  language  front-ends" 
for  applications  in  any  domain.  In  other  words,  LIFER  can  be  used  by 
systems  designers  to  create  a  program  that  interprets  English  input  and 
produces  the  appropriate  sequence  of  commands  for  their  system — for 
example,  formal  queries  for  an  information  retrieval  system.  The  front- 
end  designers  can  augment  LIFER  to  fit  their  particular  applications, 
and  even  the  eventual  users  can  tailor  the  LIFER- supported  front-end  to 
meet  their  individual  styles  and  needs. 

Language  Specification  and  Parsing 

The  LIFER  system  has  two  major  components:  (a)  a  set  of  inter- 
active functions  for  specifying  a  language  and  (b)  a  parser.  Initially  it 
contains  neither  a  grammar  nor  the  semantics  of  any  language  domain. 
An  interface  builder  uses  the  language  specification  functions  to  define 
an  application  language,  which  is  a  subset  of  English  that  is  appropriate 
for  interacting  with  his  or  her  application  system.  The  LIFER  system 
then  uses  this  language  specification  to  interpret  natural  language  inputs 
as  commands  for  the  application  system. 

The  interface  builder  specifies  the  language  primarily  in  terms  of 
grammatical  rewrite  rules  (see  Article  IV.Ci).  LIFER  automatically  trans- 
lates these  into  transition  trees,  which  are  a  simplified  form  of  aug- 
mented transition  networks  (Article  IV.D2).  Using  the  transition  tree, 
the  parser  interprets  inputs  in  the  application  language.  The  result  is 
an  interpretation  in  terms  of  the  appropriate  routines  from  the 
applications  system,  as  specified  by  the  interface  builder.  The  parser 
attempts  to  parse  an  input  string  from  the  top  down  and  left  to  right 
by  nondeterministically  tracing  down  the  transition  tree  whose  root  node 
is  the  start  symbol  (known  as  <L.T.G.>  for  "LIFER  top  grammar"). 
For  example,  suppose  the  interface  builder  has  specified  the  following 
three  production  rules  as  part  of  the  application  language: 

<L.T.G.>   -►  WHAT  IS  THE  <ATTRIBUTE>  OF   <PERS0I\I>    |    el 
<I_.T.G.>   ->  WHAT   IS   <PERS0N>   <ATTRIBUTE>    |    e2 
<L.T.G.>   -¥   HOW  <ATTRIBUTE>   IS  <PERS0I\I>    I    e3 


F7  LIFER  317 

If  an  input  matches  one  of  these  patterns,  the  corresponding  expres- 
sion (e1?  e2>  or  e3)  *s  evaluated — these  are  the  appropriate  interpretations 
that  the  system  is  to  make  for  the  corresponding  input.  The  transition 
tree  built  by  the  language  specification  functions  would  look  like  this: 

/ — THE-<ATTRIBUTE>  OF  <PERS0f\l>    |    el 
WHAT  IS 

\ — <PERS0M>  <ATTRIBUTE>  I  e2 


<L.T.G.> 


HOW  <ATTRIBUTE>  IS  <PERS0I\J>        e3 


Sentences  such  as: 


What  is  the  age  of  Nary's  sister? 

How  old  is  Nary 's  sister? 

What  is  John's  height? 
How  ta I  I  is  John? 

might  be  parsed  with  this  simple  transition  tree,  depending  on  how 
the  nonterminal  symbols  or  meta-symbols,  <  ATTRIBUTE  >  and 
<PERSON>,  are  defined.  (The  interface  builder  can  supply  a  preproces- 
sing function  that  is  applied  to  the  input  string  before  LIFER  attempts 
to  parse  it.  Typically,  the  preprocessor  strips  trailing  apostrophes  and 
s's,  so  that  LIFER  sees  John's  as  John.) 

During  parsing,  LIFER  starts  at  the  symbol  <L.T.G.>  and  attempts 
to  move  toward  the  expressions  to  be  evaluated  at  the  right.  The  parser 
follows  a  branch  only  if  some  portion  at  the  left  of  the  remaining  input 
string  can  be  matched  to  the  first  symbol  on  the  branch.  Actual  words 
(such  as  what  or  of  in  the  above  example)  can  be  matched  only  by 
themselves.  Meta-symbols  (such  as  <ATTRIBUTE>  or  <PERSON>)  can 
be  matched  in  a  number  of  ways,  depending  on  how  the  interface 
builder  has  defined  them: 

1.  As  a  simple  set  (e.g.,  <PERSON>  =  the  set  {Mary,  John,  Bill}); 

2.  As  a  predicate  that  is  applied  to  the  string  to  test  for  satis- 
faction (e.g.,  some  meta-symbol  used  in  a  piece  of  grammar  to 
recognize  dates  might  test  whether  the  next  string  of  characters 
is  a  string  of  digits,  and  thus  a  number);  or 

3.  By  another  transition  tree  that  has  this  meta-symbol  as  its  root 
node. 

The  above  example  is  typical:  A  large  amount  of  semantic  infor- 
mation is  embedded  in  the  syntactic  description  of  the  application  lan- 
guage.    JOHN  and  HEIGHT   are  not  defined  as  instances  of  the  single 


318  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

meta-symbol  <NOUN>  as  they  would  be  in  a  more  formal  grammar, 
but  rather  are  separated  into  the  semantic  categories  indicated  by  the 
meta-symbols  <PERSON>  and  < ATTRIBUTED  The  technique  of 
embedding  such  semantic  information  in  the  syntax  has  been  referred  to 
as  semantic  grammar  (Burton,  1976),  and  it  greatly  increases  the  per- 
formance of  LIFER's  automatic  spelling  correction,  ellipsis,  and  para- 
phrase facilities,  described  below. 

Applications 

LIFER  has  been  used  to  build  a  number  of  natural  language  inter- 
faces, including  a  medical  database,  a  task  scheduling  and  resource  allo- 
cation system,  and  a  computer-based  expert  system.  The  most  complex 
system  built  with  a  LIFER  interface  involved  a  few  man-months  of 
development  of  the  natural  language  front-end:  The  LADDER  system 
(Language  Access  to  Distributed  Data  with  Error  Recovery)  developed  at 
SRI,  which  provides  real-time  natural  language  access  to  a  very  large 
database  spread  over  many  smaller  databases  in  computers  scattered 
throughout  the  United  States  (Sacerdoti,  1977;  Hendrix  et  al.,  1978). 
Users  of  the  system  need  have  no  knowledge  of  how  the  data  are 
organized  nor  where  they  are  stored.  More  important  from  the  point  of 
view  of  this  article  is  that  users  do  not  need  to  know  a  data  query 
language:  They  use  English,  or  rather  a  subset  that  is  "natural"  for 
the  domain  of  discourse  and  that  is  usually  understood  by  the  LIFER 
front-end.  The  output  of  LIFER  is  a  translation  into  a  general  database 
query  language,  which  the  rest  of  the  LADDER  system  converts  to  a 
query  of  the  appropriate  databases  on  the  appropriate  computers. 

Another  interesting  system  to  use  a  LIFER  front-end  was  the 
HAWKEYE  system  (Barrow  et  al,  1977),  also  developed  at  SRI.  This  is 
an  integrated  interactive  system  for  cartography  or  surveillance,  which 
combines  aerial  photographs  and  generic  descriptions  of  objects  and 
situations  with  the  topographical  and  cultural  information  found  in 
traditional  maps.  The  user  queries  the  database  and  invokes  image- 
processing  tasks  through  a  LIFER  natural  language  interface.  A  unique 
feature  of  this  interface  is  the  combination  of  natural  language  and 
nontextual  forms  of  input.  For  instance,  using  a  cursor  to  point  to 
places  within  an  image,  the  user  can  ask  questions  such  as  "What  is 
this?"  and  "What  is  the  distance  between  here  and  here?"  The  inter- 
pretation of  such  expressions  results  in  requests  for  coordinates  from  the 
subsystem  providing  graphical  input,  which  are  then  handed  to  other 
subsystems  that  have  access  to  the  coordinates- to-object  correspondences. 


F7  LIFER  319 

Human  Engineering 

LIFER  is  intended  as  a  system  that  facilitates,  for  interface  builders, 
the  describing  of  an  appropriate  subset  of  a  language  and  its  inter- 
pretation in  their  system  and  also  helps  nonexpert  users  to  communicate 
with  the  application  system  in  whatever  language  has  been  defined.  For 
this  reason,  close  attention  was  paid  to  the  human  engineering  aspects 
of  LIFER.  Experience  with  the  system  has  shown  that,  for  some 
applications,  users  previously  unfamiliar  with  LIFER  have  been  able  to 
create  usable  natural  language  interfaces  to  their  systems  in  a  few  days. 
The  resulting  systems  have  been  directly  usable  by  people  whose  field  of 
expertise  is  not  computer  science. 

The  interface  builder.  Unlike  Winograd's  PRO  GRAMMAR  language 
(in  SHRDLU,  Article  IV. F4),  there  is  no  compilation  phase  during  which 
the  language  specification  is  converted  into  a  program.  Instead,  changes 
are  made  incrementally  every  time  a  call  to  the  language  specification 
functions  is  made.  Furthermore,  it  is  easy  (by  typing  a  prefix  char- 
acter) to  intermix  statements  to  be  interpreted  by  the  specification  func- 
tions, statements  to  be  parsed  with  the  partially  specified  grammar,  and 
statements  to  be  evaluated  in  the  underlying  implementation  language  of 
LIFER,  namely,  INTERLISP.  Thus,  the  interface  builder  can  define  a 
new  rewrite  rule  for  the  grammar  or  write  a  predicate  for  some  meta- 
symbol  and  test  it  immediately,  which  leads  to  a  highly  interactive  style 
of  language  definition  and  debugging.  A  grammar  editor  facilitates  fix- 
ing mistakes.  The  ability  to  intermix  language  definition  with  parsing 
allows  the  interface  user  to  extend  the  interface  language  to  personal 
needs  or  taste  during  a  session  using  the  application  system.  This 
extension  can  be  done  either  by  directly  invoking  the  language 
specification  functions,  or,  if  the  interface  builder  has  provided  the 
facility,  by  typing  natural  language  sentences  whose  interpretations 
invoke  the  same  language  specification  functions. 

The  interface  user.  LIFER  provides  many  features  to  ease  the  task 
of  the  user  as  he  or  she  types  in  sentences  to  be  understood  by  the 
system.  Interactions  with  the  user  are  numbered,  and  the  user  can  refer 
back  to  a  previous  question  and  specify  some  substitution  to  be  made. 
For  instance: 

12.     Hou/  many  minority  students  took  20  or  more  units  of  credit 
last  quarter? 

PARSED! 

87 


320  Understanding  Natural  Language  IV 

13.     Use  women  for  minority  in  12 
PARSED! 

156 

(Note  the  "PARSED!"  printed  by  LIFER  to  indicate  parsing  success.) 
This  facility  can  be  used  to  save  typing  (and  more  errors),  both  when 
similar  questions  are  being  asked  and  when  errors  in  previous  inputs  are 
being  corrected.  The  user  can  simply  specify  synonyms  to  be  used. 
For  instance: 

28.  Define  Bi  I  I    like  William 

will  cause  LIFER  to  treat  the  word  BILL  the  same  as  WILLIAM.  LIFER 
also  allows  for  easy  inspection  of  the  language  definition,  which  is  useful 
for  both  interface  builders  and  sophisticated  users. 

There  are  three  additional  features  implemented  in  LIFER  to  make 
interactions  easier  for  the  user — the  spelling  correction,  ellipsis,  and 
paraphrase  mechanisms.  Spelling  correction  is  attempted  when  LIFER 
fails  to  parse  an  input.  The  INTERLISP  spelling-correction  facility  is 
used  to  find  candidate  words  that  closely  match  the  spelling  of  the  sus- 
pect word.  The  use  of  a  semantic  grammar  with  its  semantically 
significant  (and  small)  syntactic  categories  (e.g.,  <PERSON>  instead  of 
<NOUN>)  greatly  restricts  the  number  of  alternatives  that  must  be 
checked. 

While  interacting  with  an  applications  system,  the  user  may  want  to 
carry  out  many  similar  tasks  (e.g.,  in  a  database  query  system,  one 
often  asks  several  questions  about  the  same  object).  The  LIFER  system 
automatically  allows  the  user  to  type  incomplete  input  fragments  and 
attempts  to  interpret  them  in  the  context  of  the  previous  input.  For 
instance,  the  following  three  questions  might  be  entered  successively  and 
understood  by  LIFER: 

42.  What  is  the  height  of  John 

43.  the  weight 

44.  age  of  Mary's  sister 

If  an  input  fails  normal  parsing,  and  if  spelling  correction  doesn't  help, 
LIFER  tries  elliptic  processing.  Again,  because  languages  defined  in 
LIFER  tend  to  encode  semantic  information  in  the  syntax  definition, 
similar  syntactic  structures  tend  to  have  similar  semantics.  Therefore 
LIFER  accepts  any  input  string  that  is  syntactically  analogous  to  any 
contiguous  substring  of  words  in  the  last  input  that  parsed  without 
ellipsis.  The  analogies  do  not  have  to  be  in  terms  of  complete  subtrees 
of  the  syntactic  tree,  but  they  do  have  to  correspond  to  contiguous 
words  in  the  previous  input.  The  elliptical  processing  facilitates  quite 
natural  interactions. 


F7  LIFER  321 

The  paraphrase  facility  allows  users  to  define  new  syntactic  struc- 
tures in  terms  of  old  structures.  The  user  gives  an  example  of  the 
structure  and  interpretation  desired,  and  the  system  builds  the  most 
general,  new  syntactic  rule  allowed  by  the  syntactic  rules  already  known. 
The  similarity  between  the  semantics  and  syntax  is  usually  sufficient  to 
ensure  that  a  usable  syntax  rule  is  generated.  The  following  example 
assumes  that  the  interface  builder  has  included  a  rule  to  interpret  the 
construction  shown  to  invoke  a  call  to  the  language  specification  func- 
tion PARAPHRASE  with  appropriately  bound  arguments.    After  typing 

63.  Let  "Describe  John"  be  a  paraphrase  of  "Print  the 
height,  weight  and  age  of  John" 

the  user  could  expect  the  system  to  understand  the  requests 

64.  Descri  be  Nary 

65.  Describe  the  tallest  person 

66.  Describe  Marys  sister 

even  with  a  fairly  simply  designed  LIFER  grammar. 

Conclusions 

Although  grammars  constructed  with  LIFER  may  not  be  as  powerful 
as  specially  constructed  grammars,  LIFER  demonstrates  that  useful  nat- 
ural language  systems  for  a  wide  variety  of  domains  can  be  built  simply 
and  routinely  without  a  large- scale  programming  effort.  Human  engin- 
eering features  and  the  ability  of  the  naive  user  to  extend  the  system's 
capabilities  are  important  issues  in  the  usefulness  of  the  system. 

References 

Hendrix  (1977a),  Hendrix  (1977b),  and  the  LIFER  manual  (Hendrix, 
1977c)  all  describe  the  LIFER  system.  The  LADDER  information 
retrieval  application  is  described  in  Hendrix  et  al.  (1978)  and  Sacerdoti 
(1977).    Barrow  et  al.  (1977)  describe  the  HAWKEYE  system. 


Chapter  V 
Understanding  Spoken  Language 


CHAPTER  V:     UNDERSTANDING  SPOKEN  LANGUAGE 


A.  Overview  /  825 

B.  Systems  Architecture  /  332 

C.  The  ARPA  SUR  Projects  /  848 

1.  HEARSAY  /  348 

2.  HARPY  /  849 

3.  HWIM  /  853 

4.  The  SRI/SDC  Speech  Systems  /  358 


A.     OVERVIEW 

A  MAJOR  OBJECTIVE  of  current  work  in  computer  science  and  engi- 
neering is  to  achieve  more  comfortable,  natural,  and  efficient  interfaces 
between  people  and  their  computers.  Since  speech  is  our  most  natural 
form  of  communication,  using  spoken  language  to  access  computers  has 
become  an  important  research  goal. 

There  are  several  specific  advantages  to  speech  as  an  input  medium. 
With  speech  as  the  means  of  accessing  the  computer,  even  casual  users 
need  relatively  little  training  before  interacting  with  a  complex  system. 
Interactions  in  such  a  case  can  be  quick,  since  speech  is  our  fastest 
mode  of  communication  (about  twice  the  speed  the  average  typist  can 
type),  and  the  computer  user's  hands  are  free  to  point,  manipulate  the 
display,  and  so  forth.  This  capability  is  especially  important  in  environ- 
ments that  place  many  simultaneous  demands  on  the  user,  as  in  aircraft 
or  space  flight  operations  (see  Lea,  1980c). 

The  Problem:     Understanding  Connected  Speech 

Work  on  isolated-word  recognition  systems  in  the  1960s  preceded  the 
development  of  speech  understanding  systems.  The  technique  of  the 
isolated-word  systems  is  to  compare  the  incoming  speech  signal  with  an 
internal  representation  of  the  acoustical  pattern  of  each  word  in  a 
relatively  small  vocabulary  and  to  select  the  best  match,  using  some 
"distance"  metric  (Vincens,  1969).  In  doing  this,  several  troublesome 
characteristics  of  the  speech  signal  must  be  overcome.  One  problem  is 
that  the  microphone  and  background  noise  introduce  interference  into 
the  recording  of  the  spoken  utterance.  Another  is  that  a  given  speaker 
does  not  pronounce  the  same  words  quite  the  same  way  every  time  he 
or  she  speaks,  and  even  if  the  program  is  tuned  to  one  speaker,  the 
matching  process  between  the  acoustical  pattern  of  the  vocabulary  words 
(the  templates)  and  the  actual  utterance  is  inherently  inexact.  If  the 
system  must  recognize  words  spoken  by  more  than  one  speaker,  the  task 
is  that  much  more  difficult: 

Sizable  vocabularies  (more  than  a  hundred  words)  can  be  realis- 
tically utilized  with  speaker-dependent  templates.  Smaller  vocab- 
ularies (on  the  order  of  one  or  two  dozen  words)  can  be  reliably 
utilized  in  talker-independent  systems.  (Flanagan  et  al..  1980, 
p.  442) 


326  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

Until  quite  recently,  these  isolated-word  recognition  systems  cost  in 
the  tens  of  thousands  of  dollars  and  offered  about  95%  accuracy  on  a 
small  vocabulary.  This  methodology  has  recently  been  refined  to  pro- 
duce a  range  of  commercially  available,  isolated-word  recognizers  of 
varying  capabilities  at  prices  from  $200  to  $80,000.  The  top-of-the-line 
systems  are  said  to  recognize  isolated  words  from  vocabularies  of  up  to 
120  words  with  accuracy  as  high  as  99.5%  (Lea,  1980a,  pp.  75-76). 

Unfortunately,  connected  speech  signals — utterances  containing  whole 
phrases  or  sentences — cannot  be  handled  by  simply  matching  each  word 
in  the  signal  against  the  stored  patterns  for  vocabulary  words.  For  one 
thing,  the  pronunciation  of  individual  words  changes  when  the  words  are 
juxtaposed  to  form  a  sentence — sometimes  whole  syllables  are  dropped, 
or  "swallowed,"  at  word  boundaries.  In  fact,  finding  the  boundaries 
between  words  in  a  connected- speech  signal  is  itself  a  difficult  part  of 
the  speech  understanding  process.  In  short,  the  connected  acoustic  sig- 
nal, which  is  the  foundation  for  the  rest  of  the  processing,  does  not  look 
at  all  like  the  concatenation  of  the  signals  of  the  individual  words. 

The  difficulties  introduced  in  attempting  to  recognize  connected 
speech  required  a  new  outlook  on  the  methodology.  Researchers  specu- 
lated that  there  was  more  information  available  to  the  hearer  than  just 
the  acoustic  signal  and  that  expectations  about  the  content  of  the 
utterance  could  be  gleaned  from  additional  knowledge  about  the  allowed 
forms  of  utterances  and  about  the  subject  being  discussed  (see,  e.g., 
Nash-Webber,  1975).  For  example,  in  many  situations  there  are  rules 
about  word  order  (called  the  grammar)  that  can  be  applied  to  predict 
which  words  may  legally  follow  an  already  recognized  word.  The  use  of 
syntactic  and  semantic  knowledge  to  constrain  a  system's  expectations  in 
other  areas  of  AI  research  is  discussed  in  Articles  m.A  and  IV.A. 

This  change  of  perspective  in  speech  research — from  that  of 
matching  acoustic  patterns  to  one  of  interpretation  of  acoustic  signals  in 
light  of  knowledge  about  syllables,  words,  and  sentences,  about  the  rules 
of  conversation,  and  about  the  subject  under  discussion — is  often  re- 
ferred to  as  the  change  from  speech  recognition  to  speech  understand- 
ing. One  of  the  key  focuses  of  recent  AI  research  has  indeed  been  the 
problem  of  organizing  and  manipulating  these  large  and  diverse  sources 
of  knowledge. 

Current  experimental  systems  for  understanding  connected  speech 
can  be  viewed  in  terms  of  a  "bottom  end"  and  a  "top  end"  (Klatt, 
1977).  The  task  of  the  bottom  end  in  such  a  system  is  to  use 
knowledge  about  the  variable  phonetic  composition  of  the  words  in  the 
vocabulary  (lexicon)  to  interpret  pieces  of  the  speech  signal  by 
comparing  the  signal  with  prestored  patterns.     The  top  end,  then,  aids 


A  Overview  327 

in  recognition  by  building  expectations  about  which  words  the  speaker  is 
likely  to  have  said,  applying  syntactic,  semantic,  and  pragmatic  con- 
straints. (See  Article  V.B  on  the  architecture  of  speech  understanding 
systems.)  In  some  systems,  the  top  end  is  also  responsible  for  deciding 
what  the  utterance  means,  once  it  is  recognized,  and  for  responding 
appropriately.  Top-down  processing,  based  on  predicting  what  the 
utterance  must  mean  (from  the  context  and  from  the  words  that  have 
already  been  recognized),  is  an  important  feature  of  some  systems  that 
are  actually  capable  of  responding  without  recognizing  every  word  that 
was  said,  as  people  often  do. 

The  ARPA  Speech  Understanding  Research  Program 

In  the  early  1970s,  the  Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  of  the 
U.S.  Department  of  Defense  (ARPA),  a  major  sponsor  of  AI  research, 
funded  a  five-year  program  in  speech  understanding  research.  At  that 
time,  a  few  isolated-word  recognition  systems  existed,  but  none  that  was 
capable  of  recognizing  continuous  speech.  These  early  systems  worked 
only  with  small  vocabularies  under  ideal  acoustic  conditions.  Knowledge 
about  the  phonemic  and  phonological  structure  of  speech  was  scattered 
through  the  linguistics  literature  and  had  not  been  applied  to  the 
engineering  of  speech  understanding  systems.  There  was  little  or  no 
literature  dealing  with  semantics,  prosodies,  or  pragmatics,  and  the 
parsers  that  were  available  were  not  designed  to  parse  sentences  in 
which  the  component  words  might  have  been  incorrectly  identified. 

A  study  group  met  in  1971  to  set  guidelines  for  the  ARPA  speech 
understanding  research  (SUR)  project,  with  the  goal  of  achieving  a 
breakthrough  in  connected- speech  understanding  capability  (Newell  et  al., 
1973).  This  group  of  scientists  set  specific  performance  criteria  for  each 
dimension  of  system  inputs  and  outputs:  The  systems  to  be  designed 
and  built  were  to  accept  normally  spoken  sentences  (connected  speech) 
in  a  constrained  domain  with  a  1,000-word  vocabulary  and  were  to 
respond  reasonably  fast  with  less  than  10%  error. 

Some  of  the  goals  established  for  the  ARPA  SUR  project  were 
intentionally  flexible.  In  particular,  they  specified  a  lexicon  of  1,000 
words,  but  not  which  words;  they  allowed  for  an  artificial  syntax,  but 
did  not  say  how  simple  or  complicated  the  syntactic  structure  of  the 
language  could  be;  they  specified  a  constraining  task,  but  not  which 
task.  The  various  ARPA  SUR  projects,  therefore,  had  considerable 
freedom  in  the  choice  of  the  semantics,  syntax,  and  lexicon  handled  by 
their  systems,  and,  as  we  shall  see  later,  final  performance  was  difficult 
to  compare. 


328  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

This  was  one  of  the  few  times  that  AI  programs  had  had  any 
design  objectives  specified  before  they  were  developed.  Setting  these 
standards  was  important,  since  they  approximated  the  minimum  per- 
formance requirements  for  a  practical,  connected- speech  understanding 
system  in  a  highly  constrained  domain  (although  producing  a  practical 
system  was  notably  not  a  goal  of  the  ARPA  program). 

ARPA  funded  five  speech  projects  and  several  subcontracts  for  de- 
veloping parts  of  speech- systems.  Some  of  the  major  ARPA  contractors 
produced  multiple  systems  during  the  five-year  period:  Work  at  Bolt, 
Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.  (BBN)  produced  first  SPEECHLIS  and  then 
HWIM  (Hear  What  I  Mean),  building  on  earlier  BBN  research  on  under- 
standing natural  language  (see  Article  IV.F3).  Carnegie-Mellon  University 
(C.M.U.)  produced  the  HEARSAY-I  and  DRAGON  systems  in  the  early 
development  phase  (1971-1973)  and  the  HARPY  and  HEARSAY-E  pro- 
grams by  1976.  SRI  International  also  developed  a  speech  understanding 
program,  partly  in  collaboration  with  Systems  Development  Corporation 
(SDC).  Although  these  systems  were  all  built  for  the  same  purpose,  they 
emphasized  different  problems  in  speech  understanding  research  and 
systems  design. 

The  Status  of  Speech  Understanding  Research 

The  differences  in  emphasis  among  the  experimental  SUR  systems 
complicated  comparison  of  their  performance  at  the  termination  of  the 
ARPA  project  (in  September  1976).  Since  the  systems  operated  in 
different  task  domains,  they  could  not  be  compared  on  a  standard  set  of 
utterances.  These  different  task  domains — document  retrieval  (HARPY, 
HEARSAY-E),  answering  questions  from  a  database  (the  SRI  system  and 
BBN's  HWIM),  and  voice  chess  (HEARSAY-I)— had  considerably  different 
levels  of  difficulty.  If  one  measures  a  task's  difficulty  by  the  average  of 
the  number  of  words  that  might  come  next  after  each  word  in  each 
legal  sentence,  called  the  average  branching  factor  (ABF),  then  HARPY's 
document-retrieval  task  had  a  difficulty  of  only  33  compared  to  an  ABF 
of  196  for  HWIM's  database-retrieval  task.  Furthermore,  little  effort  was 
made  to  exclude  words  from  HWIM's  vocabulary  that  sounded  alike, 
making  recognition  still  harder.  Although  restrictions  on  the  vocabulary 
and  sentences  to  simplify  the  understanding  task  were  within  the  ARPA 
guidelines,  it  has  been  argued  that  they  were  carried  to  extremes  and 
that  the  HARPY  system  in  particular  was  too  restricted: 

This  grammar  .  .  .  characterizes  a  non-habitable,  finite  set  of  sen- 
tences, with  virtually  no  "near-miss"  sentence  pairs  included.  .  .  . 
The  grammar  permits  sentences  of  the  form   "We  wish  to  get  the 


A  Overview  329 

latest  forty  articles  on  < topic >,"  but  one  cannot  say  a  similar 
sentence  with  T'  for  "we,"  "want"  for  "wish,"  "see"  for  "get," 
"a"  for  "the,"  "thirty"  for  "forty,"  or  any  similar  deviation  from 
exactly  the  word  sequence  given  above.  (Wolf  and  Woods,  1980, 
p.  334) 

The  systems  also  varied  in  the  number  of  speakers  and  amount  of  room 
noise  that  could  be  accommodated  and  in  the  amount  of  tuning  required 
for  each  new  speaker. 

Illustrating  the  effect  of  the  task  domain  on  performance,  the 
DRAGON  system,  developed  at  C.M.U.  during  the  first  phase  of  the 
ARP A- sponsored  research,  was  tested  on  different  tasks.  The  system's 
performance  on  recognizing  the  words  ranged  from  63%  to  94%,  and 
varied  from  17%  to  68%  on  recognition  of  complete  utterances.  This 
variation  of  results  across  domains  demonstrates  the  difficulty  of  spec- 
ifying how  well  a  system  performs.  The  number  of  words  in  the  lexicon 
alone  is  an  inadequate  measure  of  the  complexity  of  the  understanding 
task.  For  example,  DRAGON'S  performance  was  better  with  a  particular 
194- word  vocabulary  than  with  another  37- word  vocabulary  (consisting  of 
just  the  alphabet  plus  numbers),  since  the  similiarity  in  phonemic  struc- 
ture of  the  26  letters  gave  the  latter  a  much  higher  average  branching 
factor. 

With  the  proviso  about  comparing  the  performance  of  the  systems, 
HARPY  demonstrated  the  most  convincing  success  at  the  end  of  the 
ARPA  program.  The  performance  requirements  established  by  the  work- 
ing committee  and  the  final  results  of  the  HARPY,  HEARSAY-E,  and 
HWIM  systems  are  compared  in  Figure  A-l.  (HWIM  was  not  quite  com- 
pleted at  the  time  of  the  evaluation.) 

Since  the  ARPA-funded  research  work,  new  systems  have  been 
developed  at  IBM,  Bell  Laboratories,  and  Lincoln  Laboratories,  and  sub- 
systems have  been  designed  at  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley, 
Haskins  Laboratories,  Speech  Communications  Research  Laboratory,  and 
Sperry  Univac  (Lea  and  Shoup,  1980).  The  IBM  system,  which  represents 
the  state  of  the  art  in  connected- speech  understanding,  utilizes  the  dy- 
namic programming  approach  explored  in  the  DRAGON  system  and  is 
the  most  active  speech  understanding  project  since  the  termination  of 
the  ARPA  program  (see  Bahl  et  al.,  1978). 


330 


Understanding  Spoken  Language 


V 


GOAL  (November  1971) 


Accept  connected  speech 


from  many  speakers 


in  a  quiet  room 

using  a  good  microphone 

wi  th  a  few  tra  i  n  i  ng 
sentences  for  each  speaker 

accepting  1,000  words 

using  an  artificial  syntax 


in  a  constraining  task 


y  i  e  Id  i  ng  <  10%  error 

in  a  few  times  real  time 
(on  a  very  fast  computer) 


Figure  A-l.     Comparison  of  ARPA  SUR  systems  (after  Klatt,  1977, 
and  Lea  and  Shoup,  1980). 


HARPY 

HEARSAY-H 

HWIM 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

3  ma  1  e 

1   ma  1  e 

3  ma  1  e 

2   femah 

a 

Compui 

ber  terminal    room 

Close- 

-ta Iking  mi  crophone 

20-30 

60 

no  tra  i  n  i  ng 

1,011 

1,011 

1,097 

f  i  n  i  te- 

-state 

1  anguage 

restricted   ATM 

BF  =  33 

BF  =  33,    46 

BF  =  196 

Document 

Document 

Trave 1 

retri  eva 1 

retri  eva 1 

management 

5% 

9%,    26% 

56% 

Yes 

Yes,    slower 
than   HARPY 

Not  qu  i te 

Summary 

Considerable  progress  toward  practical  speech-understanding  systems 
was  made  in  the  1970s.  In  addition  to  meeting  performance  goals,  the 
ARPA  SUR  projects  developed  important  ideas  in  systems  design  that 
influenced  AI  research  in  natural  language  understanding,  knowledge  rep- 
resentation, search,  vision,  and  control  strategies  (see  the  corresponding 
chapters  of  the  Handbook,  as  well  as  Article  V.b).  At  the  level  of 
phonetics,  all  the  systems  developed  representations  of  words  that 
accounted  for  different  pronunciations,  and  they  all  incorporated 
between- word  juncture  rules  to  account  for  contextual  effects.  Network 
representations  for  phonetic  knowledge  were  developed,  including  SDC's 
spelling  graphs,  HEARSAY'S  pronunciation  graphs,  HWTM's  segmented 
lattices,  and  HARPY's  integrated  network. 


A  Overview  331 

Much  was  learned  during  the  ARPA  SUR  work  about  the  archi- 
tecture and  control  of  large  AI  systems.  One  of  the  most  flexible 
frameworks  to  have  emerged  is  HEARSAY'S  blackboard  organization  for 
representing  hypotheses  at  different  levels,  which  has  been  applied  in 
several  domains  besides  speech.  At  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum, 
HARPY's  precompiled  knowledge  structure  makes  it  hard  to  modify  but 
results  in  very  high  performance. 

The  following  is  the  summary  of  the  conclusions  in  1976  of  the 
same  study  group  that  had  established  the  requirements  for  the  ARPA 
project  five  years  earlier: 

The  gains  go  beyond  empirical  knowledge  and  engineering  tech- 
nique to  basic  scientific  questions  and  analyses.  A  few  examples: 
Network  representations  for  speech  knowledge  at  several  levels  have 
been  created  that  have  substantial  generality.  A  uniform  network 
representation  for  the  recognition  process  has  been  developed. 
Rule  schemes  have  been  created  to  express  certain  phonological 
and  acoustic-phonetic  regularities.  .  .  .  Techniques  have  been  found 
for  measuring  the  difficulty  and  complexity  of  the  recognition  task. 
The  problem  of  parsing  (syntactic  analysis)  with  unreliable  or 
possibly  missing  words  (so  that  one  cannot  rely  on  parsing  left-to- 
right,  but  must  be  able  to  parse  in  either  direction  or  middle-out 
from  good  word  matches)  has  been  successfully  analyzed.  New 
paradigms  have  been  developed  for  many  of  the  component 
analysis  tasks  and  for  the  control  structure  of  intelligent  systems. 
Substantial  progress  has  been  made  on  understanding  how  to  score 
performance  in  a  multi-component  system,  how  to  combine  those 
scores,  and  how  to  order  search  priorities.  (ARPA  SUR  Steering 
Committee,  1977,  pp.  313-314) 

The  next  article  in  this  chapter  discusses  the  important  issues  in  the 
design  of  AI  systems  that  emerged  during  the  ARPA  SUR  projects.  It 
is  followed  by  short  articles  outlining  the  main  features  of  each  of  the 
ARPA  systems. 

References 

The  recent  book  edited  by  Lea  (1980b)  contains  the  best  com- 
parative overview  of  the  ARPA  speech  systems,  as  well  as  detailed 
articles  on  the  systems  themselves  written  by  their  designers.  The 
Computing  Surveys  article  by  Erman  et  al.  (1980)  is  a  good,  brief 
account  of  the  HEARSAY  system,  illuminating  many  of  the  issues  in 
speech  understanding  research.  For  an  excellent  popular  account  of  the 
ambiguities  inherent  in  the  phonetic  description  of  an  utterance,  see 
Cole  (1979).  And  for  descriptions  of  early  speech  research  and  the  goals 
of  the  ARPA  program,  see  Newell  (1975)  and  Reddy  (1975). 


B.     SYSTEMS  ARCHITECTURE 

During  the  ARPA-funded  research  on  speech  understanding,  different 
system  designs  were  explored  that  varied  both  in  their  organization  of 
the  knowledge  applied  to  the  task  and  in  the  way  the  reasoning  process 
was  controlled.  In  a  typical  system,  the  speech  understanding  process 
begins  with  a  series  of  transformations  that  are  applied  to  the  original 
speech  signal,  resulting  in  a  compact  digital  encoding  of  the  utterance. 
Further  processing  of  the  digitized  signal  by  the  different  systems  can  be 
viewed  as  the  interpretation  of  this  signal  in  light  of  different  kinds  of 
knowledge  about  the  vocabulary  and  grammar  allowed  and  about  the 
subject  under  discussion. 

What  Knowledge  Can  Be  Applied  to  Understanding  Speech? 

The  types  of  knowledge  at  various  "levels"  that  are  used  in  pro- 
cessing spoken  language  include  (from  the  signal  level  up): 

1.  Phonetics — representations  of  the  physical  characteristics  of  the 
sounds  in  all  of  the  words  in  the  vocabulary; 

2.  Phonemics — rules  describing  variations  in  pronunciation  that  ap- 
pear when  words  are  spoken  together  in  sentences  (coarticu- 
lation  across  word  boundaries,   "swallowing"  of  syllables,  etc.); 

3.  Morphemics — rules  describing  how  morphemes  (units  of  meaning) 
are  combined  to  form  words  (formation  of  plurals,  conjugations 
of  verbs,  etc.); 

4.  Prosodies — rules  describing  fluctuation  in  stress  and  intonation 
across  a  sentence; 

5.  Syntax — the  grammar  or  rules  of  sentence  formation,  resulting  in 
important  constraints  on  the  number  of  sentences  (not  all  com- 
binations of  words  in  the  vocabulary  are  legal  sentences); 

6.  Semantics — the  "meaning"  of  words  and  sentences,  which  can 
also  be  viewed  as  a  constraint  on  the  speech  understander  (not 
all  grammatically  legal  sentences  have  a  meaning — e.g.,  The  snow 
was  loud);  and,  finally, 

7.  Pragmatics — rules  of  conversation  (in  a  dialogue,  a  speaker's 
response  must  not  only  be  a  meaningful  sentence  but  also  be  a 
reasonable  reply  to  what  was  said  to  him).  For  instance,  it  is 
pragmatic  knowledge  that  tells  us  that  the  question  Can  you  tell 
me  what  time  it  is?  requires  more  than  just  a  Yes  or  No 
response. 


B  Systems  Architecture  333 

Phonetic  knowledge  was  used  in  the  early  isolated-word  recognition 
systems  in  the  form  of  word  templates,  representations  of  the  acoustic 
signal  produced  by  a  speaker  uttering  a  single  word,  which  were 
matched  against  the  signal  to  be  recognized.  However,  when  words  are 
spoken  in  a  sentence,  the  acoustic  characteristics  of  the  sounds  within 
the  words  vary,  so  that  it  is  necessary  to  choose  a  representation  of  the 
speech  signal  that  includes  elementary  speech  sounds  as  basic  units. 
Two  kinds  of  basic  unit  are  the  allophone  and  the  phoneme.  Allophones 
are  representations  of  sounds  as  they  actually  occur  in  words.  Pho- 
nemes are  more  abstract  representations  that  capture  the  common  char- 
acteristics of  a  class  of  allophones. 

For  example,  the  phoneme  /t/  is  known  to  have  four  allophones  in 
English,  corresponding  to  four  different  ways  in  which  it  occurs.  (Two 
of  the  allophones  of  /t/  are  the  "hard"  t  at  the  beginning  the  word  top 
and  the  "flap"  t  in  the  middle  of  the  word  rattle.)  The  major  advan- 
tage of  using  phonemes  as  the  basic  unit  for  representing  spoken  words 
is  that  there  are  relatively  few  to  recognize,  which  simplifies  the  higher 
levels  of  the  speech  understanding  task.  The  disadvantage  is  that  pho- 
nemes are  abstract  units  that  are  not  actually  found  in  spoken  utter- 
ances. To  map  from  the  allophones  that  can  be  identified  in  the  speech 
signal  (like  the  two  kinds  of  /t/  above)  to  abstract  phonemes  requires  a 
sophisticated  understanding  of  how  the  speech  context  determines  the 
allophones  of  a  phoneme.  Contextual  rules  of  this  kind  are  the  domain 
of  phonemics.  There  has  been  only  limited  success  in  applying  phonemic 
rules  in  speech  understanding  systems  (see  Shoup,  1980,  p.  125). 

A  third  possible  "basic  unit"  of  speech  is  the  syllable.  The  syllable 
is  a  difficult  unit  to  define,  but  it  can  be  recognized  with  some  success 
by  following  the  stress  patterns  in  speech.  One  advantage  of  using  the 
syllable  as  the  basic  recognition  unit  is  that  the  subtle  transitional 
phenomena  are  subsumed  in  one  syllabic  unit.  Two  problems  in  doing 
so  are  that  it  is  difficult  to  decide  where  one  syllable  ends  and  another 
begins  in  the  speech  signal  and  that  there  are  a  great  many  more  syl- 
lables in  a  language  than  there  are  phonemes. 

The  lexicon,  or  vocabulary,  allowed  by  each  speech  understanding 
system  was  represented  internally  in  terms  of  the  pronunciations  of  all 
of  the  words.  (Some  systems  encoded  all  of  the  multiple  pronunciations 
of  each  word  that  could  arise  from  context  effects.)  In  general,  the 
morphemic  level  of  analysis  of  traditional  linguistics  (e.g.,  determining 
number  or  tense  by  looking  for  word  endings)  is  not  used  in  speech 
understanding  research;  the  words  in  the  lexicon  are  taken  as  basic  units 
of  recognition,  even  though  they  may  contain  more  than  one  morpheme. 
One  exception  to  this  is  the  lexical  knowledge  used  in  the  SDC  speech 
system  (see  Barnett  et  al.,  1980,  p.  272). 


334  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

Prosody,  the  pattern  of  stress  and  intonation  in  spoken  language, 
provides  extensive  information  about  the  meaning  of  an  utterance:  At 
the  lower  levels  of  analysis,  prosody  can  help  identify  syllable  and  word 
boundaries;  at  a  syntactic  level,  it  helps  to  identify  phrases  within  a 
sentence;  and  at  the  semantic  level,  it  helps  to  differentiate  questions 
from  declarations  and  can  be  a  cue  to  subtle  speech  acts  like  irony  and 
sarcasm.  However,  prosodic  analysis  has  not  yet  been  used  in  AI  speech 
understanding  systems. 

Syntax  and  Semantics:     Top-down  Processing 

The  most  dramatic  use  of  knowledge  in  speech  processing  focused  on 
the  application  of  syntax  and  semantics  to  the  generation  of  expecta- 
tions about  the  speech  signal.  The  bottom-end  knowledge  about  pho- 
nemes and  words  described  in  the  previous  section  was  used  to  construct 
hypotheses  about  what  words  were  present  in  the  signal  being  analyzed. 
As  mentioned  in  Article  V.A,  top-end  knowledge  about  what  things 
would  be  said  at  certain  points  in  the  dialogue  and  about  what  form 
they  might  take  was  used  to  help  identify  the  words  in  the  speech  sig- 
nal. The  types  of  knowledge  used  in  this  way  include  syntax,  semantics, 
and  pragmatics. 

For  example,  consider  the  HEARSAY-I  speech  system  that  played 
voice  chess  with  a  human  by  responding  to  the  moves  that  he  spoke 
into  the  microphone,  using  a  chess  program  (see  Article  n.C5c)  to  figure 
out  its  best  response.  Not  only  did  HEARSAY-I  apply  syntactic  knowl- 
edge about  the  specific  format  of  chess  moves  (e.g.,  "Pawn  to  King-4") 
to  anticipate  the  form  of  incoming  utterances,  but  it  also  used  the  legal- 
move  generator  of  its  chess  program  to  suggest  moves  that  were  most 
likely  to  be  tried  by  the  opponent  and  then  examined  the  incoming 
speech  signal  for  evidence  of  those  particular  moves. 

The  importance  of  top-down  or  expectation-driven  processing  has  also 
been  pointed  out  by  workers  in  natural  language  understanding.  In 
their  research  on  systems  that  respond  to  typed-in  input,  rather  than  to 
spoken  sentences,  recognition  of  individual  words  is  not  a  problem,  as  it 
is  in  speech  understanding.  Nevertheless,  determining  the  meaning  of 
the  input,  so  that  an  appropriate  response  is  evoked,  requires  the  use  of 
much  knowledge  about  the  world  to  predict  what  the  input  might  be 
(see  Chap.  IV,  especially  Articles  IV.F5  and  IV.F6). 

Similarly,  in  AI  research  on  vision,  where  the  computer  must 
interpret  a  visual  scene  supplied  by  a  TV  camera,  a  strong  model  of  the 
physical  world,  as  well  as  knowledge  about  what  things  the  camera  is 
likely  to  find,  is  typically  used  to  help  figure  out  what  is  in  the  scene 


B  Systems  Architecture  335 

(see  Chap,  xm,  in  Vol.  m).  It  is  generally  agreed  that  this  constraining 
knowledge  is  necessary  for  adequate  performance  in  tasks  like  speech 
understanding:  Without  expectations  about  what  to  look  for  in  the 
input,  the  task  of  identifying  what  is  there  is  impossible.  Recent  AI 
research  on  knowledge  representation  using  frames  and  scripts  has 
stressed  this  predictive  use  of  knowledge  (see  Articles  m.A  and  m.C7). 

"Experiments"  with  several  systems  demonstrated  the  effect  of  re- 
moving the  constraints  on  signal  interpretation  supplied  by  syntactic  and 
semantic  knowledge.  The  HARPY  system,  which  combined  all  of  the 
phonetic,  syntactic,  and  semantic  knowledge  into  one  integrated  network, 
was  97%  accurate  in  actually  identifying  the  words  in  the  utterance, 
even  though  it  showed  only  42%  accuracy  in  phonetic  segmentation  of 
the  utterance.  In  other  words,  because  of  top-end  knowledge  about 
what  sequences  of  words  were  allowed  in  utterances,  HARPY  could  often 
guess  the  right  words  even  when  it  didn't  have  an  accurate  phonetic 
interpretation  of  the  signal. 

In  the  HEARSAY-I  system,  where  the  phonetic,  syntactic,  semantic, 
and  other  knowledge  was  separated  into  independent  knowledge  sources, 
a  more  convincing  kind  of  experiment,  called  ablation  studies  by  Newell 
(1975),  could  be  performed:  The  system  was  designed  so  that  it  could 
run  with  only  some  of  the  knowledge  sources  "plugged  in."  Compared 
with  its  performance  with  just  the  phonetics  and  lexicon  knowledge 
sources  operating,  the  performance  of  HEARSAY-I  improved  by  25% 
with  the  addition  of  its  syntax  knowledge  source  and  by  another  25% 
with  the  addition  of  the  semantics  knowledge  source  (Lea,  1980a). 

Generality  versus  power.  The  way  that  top-down  processing  is  used 
to  constrain  the  expected  content  of  sentences  reflects  an  important,  uni- 
versal issue  in  AI  systems  design — the  trade-off  between  generality  and 
power.  The  top  end  of  the  speech  systems  contains  knowledge  about  a 
specific  language  and  a  specific  domain  of  discourse.  In  the  devel- 
opment of  all  of  the  speech  understanding  systems,  the  use  of  general 
grammatical  knowledge  gave  way  to  grammars  that  were  very  specific  to 
the  task  requirements  (called  semantic  or  performance  grammars).  By 
incorporating  the  structure  of  the  typical  phrases  used  in  a  particular 
task  domain,  these  grammars  combined  syntactic,  semantic,  and  some- 
times pragmatic  knowledge  (see  Articles  V.C3  and  V.C4).  Repeatedly  in 
AI  research,  general  methods  for  problem  solving  have  proved  inadequate 
until  supplemented  with  large  amounts  of  knowledge  and  heuristics 
specific  to  the  problem  at  hand  (see  Article  n.A). 


336  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

Knowledge  Sources 

Given  all  of  the  knowledge  needed  during  the  processing  of  the 
speech  signal,  much  AI  research  focused  on  finding  ways  of  organizing 
this  knowledge  within  the  system.  One  influential  approach,  used  by 
the  HEARSAY  systems,  involves  separating  the  different  types  of  knowl- 
edge into  coherent  modules,  called  knowledge  sources  (KSs).  For 
example,  there  might  be  a  prosodies  knowledge  source  that  examines  the 
speech  signal  for  intonation  and  stress  patterns  and  makes  hypotheses 
about  syllable,  word,  and  phrase  boundaries.  The  knowledge  sources 
were  viewed  as  independent  modules  of  expertise  that  cooperated  in  an- 
alyzing the  speech  signal.  This  modular  organization  of  the  knowledge 
in  the  system  should  be  contrasted  with  the  other  principal  architecture 
used  in  the  ARPA  SUR  projects,  the  precompiled  network,  which  rep- 
resents all  possible  pronunciations  of  all  possible  sentences  in  one  data 
structure  (see  below). 

In  the  HEARSAY  model,  the  independent  knowledge  sources  for  pho- 
netics, syntax,  semantics,  and  the  like  were,  in  theory,  to  know  nothing 
about  each  other,  not  even  of  each  other's  existence.  They  were 
thought  of  as  independent  processes  that  looked  at  the  speech  signal 
and  posted  hypotheses  about  likely  syllables,  words,  phrases,  and  so  forth 
on  the  blackboard — a  global  data- structure  accessed  by  all  of  the  KSs 
through  an  established  protocol.  Hypotheses  generated  by  the  lower 
level  knowledge  sources  (about  syllables  and  words)  would  be  examined 
for  feasibility  by  the  syntactic  and  semantic  KSs;  these,  in  turn,  could 
make  suggestions  about  what  words  might  be  expected  and  post  them 
on  the  blackboard. 

The  advantages  of  this  organization  are  those  generally  associated 
with  modularization  of  knowledge  (see  Article  m.A):  Adding,  modifying, 
or  removing  a  knowledge  source  could  theoretically  be  accomplished 
without  changing  the  other  knowledge  sources.  Also,  in  a  distributed- 
processing  implementation,  where  the  different  knowledge  sources  are 
running  as  processes  on  different  machines,  a  modular  system  would  be 
less  sensitive  to  transient  failures  of  processors  and  communication  links, 
exhibiting  graceful  degradation,  as  it  is  called  (see  Erman  et  al.,  1976; 
Lesser  and  Erman,  in  press).  The  blackboard  organization  for  repre- 
senting multiple  types  of  knowledge  has  been  used  in  several  domains 
besides  speech  understanding,  including  crystallography  (Article  vn.C3,  in 
Vol.  n),  signal  interpretation  (Nii  and  Feigenbaum,  1978),  vision  (Hanson 
and  Riseman,  1978b;  Levine,  1978),  and  psychological  modeling  (Rumel- 
hart,  1976;  Hayes-Roth  and  Hayes-Roth,  1979). 


B  Systems  Architecture  337 

Compiled  Knowledge 

The  other  principal  kind  of  system  architecture  explored  in  the 
ARPA  SUR  projects  is  one  in  which  the  knowledge  about  all  of  the 
sentences  that  are  legal  or  meaningful  in  the  task  domain  are  pre- 
compiled into  one  decision- tree- like  network.  The  nodes  in  the  network 
are  allophonic  templates,  representing  the  different  sounds  in  the  lan- 
guage, to  be  matched  against  the  voice  signal.  The  links  in  the  network 
are  used  to  control  the  matching  process:  After  a  successful  match  at 
node  N,  only  the  nodes  that  are  linked  in  the  net  to  node  N  need  be 
tried  next — no  other  sounds  are  "legal"  at  that  point.  The  processing 
of  the  input  signal  matches  some  node  in  the  net  to  a  portion  of  the 
utterance  and  proceeds  left  to  right  through  the  network,  trying  to  find 
the  best  match  according  to  some  comparison  metric.  Since  all  of  the 
alternative  sound  sequences  are  already  in  the  network  and  are  not 
"hypothesized"  on  the  fly  as  in  the  blackboard  model,  precompiled 
network  systems  are  relatively  efficient  and  fast.  Deciding  which  alter- 
natives are  in  fact  present  at  each  instant  of  the  utterance  is  the  es- 
sence of  the  processing  performed  by  systems  like  DRAGON  and  HARPY 
and  can  be  viewed  as  a  form  of  search.  (See  the  discussions  of  island 
driving  and  beam  search  below.) 

The  HARPY  system  is  distinguished  by  its  integration  of  phonemic, 
lexical,  and  syntactic  knowledge  into  a  single  network;  other  systems 
also  adopted  network  representations,  usually  for  one  knowledge  source 
only.  In  particular,  the  SDC  system  used  network-like  spelling  graphs  to 
represent  the  different  pronunciations  possible  for  a  word.  Similarly,  the 
HWIM  system  used  a  segmented  lattice  representation  of  different  pro- 
nunciations and  embedded  the  lattices  in  a  tree-like  dictionary  that  had 
the  important  property  that  any  two  words  that  could  be  spoken  in 
sequence  were  linked  by  an  arc  representing  any  contextual  effect  on 
pronunciation.  The  phonemic  and  lexical  knowledge  sources  in  HWIM 
are  thus  integrated  in  a  manner  similar  to  HARPY,  although  its  other 
knowledge  sources  are  not. 

Precompiling  the  alternatives  has  some  disadvantages.  For  one, 
every  time  the  knowledge  base  is  changed — for  example,  when  a  new 
pronunciation  of  some  word  is  added — the  entire  network  must  be 
reconstructed  (which  took  13  hours  of  PDP-10  processing  time  for  one  of 
HARPY's  vocabularies).  A  second  disadvantage  is  that,  to  fit  into 
present-day  computers,  the  language  recognized  by  the  speech  system 
must  be  quite  constrained  syntactically.  In  general,  only  subsets  of 
English  that  can  be  represented  by  a  finite-state  grammar  can  be 
compiled  into  a  network  of  finite  size  (see  Article  iV.Ci).     Finally,  the 


338  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

strategies  that  control  the  network-based  understanding  process  may 
tend  to  be  more  sensitive  to  errors,  like  getting  off  on  a  wrong  track, 
than  are  the  more  flexible,  blackboard-like  systems. 

With  the  exception  of  HARPY,  the  ARPA  SUR  systems  implemented 
independent,  modular  organizations  for  their  knowledge  bases  (although 
only  in  HEARSAY  was  their  independence  a  theoretical  issue).  The  way 
that  knowledge  sources  interact,  and  the  strategy  for  applying  the 
knowledge  to  the  understanding  process,  is,  as  always,  the  complement 
to  knowledge-base  organization  in  any  discussion  of  system  architecture. 

Control  Strategies:    Hypotheses  and  Agendas 

How  do  the  different  speech  understanding  systems  go  about  inter- 
preting an  utterance?  Where  do  they  start?  What  are  the  steps  of  the 
process?  How  do  they  decide  what  to  focus  on  next?  The  different 
knowledge  organizations  reflect  different  ideas  about  how  the  process  of 
interpreting  the  speech  signal  is  to  be  carried  out,  and  each  of  the 
speech  understanding  systems  has  its  own  complicated  algorithm.  But 
the  basic  ideas  involve  the  concepts  of  agenda  and  search. 

In  the  preceding  discussions  of  knowledge  sources  and  top-down  pro- 
cessing, the  idea  of  a  knowledge  source  posting  a  hypothesis  on  a  global 
data  structure  was  introduced.  The  hypotheses  indicate  that  the 
knowledge  source  has  either  (a)  found  evidence  (in  the  signal  or  already 
posted  on  the  blackboard)  for  a  certain  phoneme,  word,  or  phrase  or 
(b)  predicts,  based  on  what  has  already  been  posted,  that  certain  words 
or  phrases  will  be  found  at  certain  points  in  the  utterance. 

The  question  of  control  arises  here  because,  somehow,  this  process  of 
hypothesis  posting  has  to  be  coordinated.  Will  all  of  the  knowledge 
sources  make  hypotheses  simultaneously?  Or  will  lower  level  sources  be 
used  to  confirm  the  guesses  of  higher  sources?  Or  will  it  be  the  other 
way  around,  with  phonemic  and  lexical  sources  proposing  words  and 
syntactic  and  semantic  sources  checking  the  likelihood  of  these  pro- 
posals? How  much  effort  should  be  focused  on  the  different  hypotheses 
that  are  "active,"  and  which  alternative  hypothesis  should  be  tried  first? 
These  issues  of  top-down  versus  bottom-up  processing  and  focus  of 
attention  find  their  expression  within  the  systems  in  an  agenda-like 
mechanism — every  time  the  processor  (or  one  of  the  processors  if  there 
are  several)  is  free,  it  must  decide,  based  on  some  control  strategy,  what 
to  do  next. 

In  different  systems,  this  strategy  is  more  or  less  involved  and  more 
or  less  explicit.  In  the  HEARSAY  systems,  all  knowledge  sources  post 
hypotheses   on   the   blackboard,    and   the   lower   level   knowledge   sources 


B  Systems  Architecture  339 

look  for  evidence  in  the  speech  signal  supporting  these  hypotheses.  In 
the  SRI  system,  explicit  procedures  were  incorporated  to  identify  the 
phrases  that  were  the  focus  of  the  discourse,  and  to  process  tasks 
on  the  agenda  in  light  of  this  knowledge.  In  the  HWIM  system,  the 
interaction  of  knowledge  sources  is  governed  by  one  of  many  control 
processes,  controlling  the  interaction  of  procedural  (subroutine-like) 
knowledge  sources.  In  HARPY,  where  the  posting  of  hypotheses  is  all 
done  implicitly  when  the  network  is  compiled,  the  control  strategy  takes 
the  form  of  a  search  through  a  space  of  alternatives  in  the  network. 

Speech  Understanding  as  Search 

In  systems  like  HARPY,  in  which  all  or  part  of  the  knowledge  is  in 
the  form  of  a  precompiled  network  with  "sounds"  at  each  node  con- 
nected to  all  of  the  sounds  that  can  follow  it  in  any  of  the  legal 
sentences  in  the  language,  interpreting  an  utterance  corresponds  to 
finding  a  path  through  the  network  representing  a  sequence  of  sounds 
that  most  closely  matches  the  sounds  in  the  utterance.  Finding  such  a 
path  can  be  thought  of  in  terms  of  the  important  AI  paradigm  of 
search  (see  Chap.  n).  The  goal  is  the  optimal  path,  and  the  search 
space  consists  of  nodes  representing  partially  completed  paths  and 
branches  representing  each  alternative  continuation  from  the  partial 
paths.  The  strategy  problem  is  then  rephrased  in  terms  of  anchor  points 
or  islands,  keeping  track  of  alternatives,  backtracking,  and  beam  width. 

Island  driving.  The  first  question  that  arises  when  a  speech  system 
is  given  a  sentence  to  understand  is  where  to  start.  It  turns  out  that 
starting  with  the  first  word  in  the  sentence  is  not  necessarily  the  most 
efficient  strategy,  just  as  a  purely  bottom-up  interaction  of  knowledge 
sources  was  not  always  optimal.  This  left- to-right  strategy  was,  how- 
ever, used  in  HARPY  and  works  well  with  the  precompiled  network 
representation.  The  disadvantage  of  this  strategy  is  that  if  the  first  word 
is  not  identified  correctly,  or  is  not  identifiable,  understanding  of  the 
rest  of  the  sentence  is  retarded. 

A  middle -out  strategy  was  used  in  HEARSAY  and  the  SRI  speech 
systems:  Find  whatever  words  can  be  immediately  identified,  then 
expand  out  to  either  side  of  all  of  them.  It  is  called  island  driving,  be- 
cause it  establishes  islands  of  relatively  certain  hypotheses  and  pushes 
out  from  these  islands  into  the  rest  of  the  sentence.  One  problem  with 
the  strategy  is  that  the  number  of  hypothesized  extensions  of  islands 
can  be  very  large,  and  this  combinatorial  problem  is  compounded  by 
having  many  islands,  especially  if  the  islands  are  not  really  reliable 
hypotheses  and  will  soon  be  abandoned. 


340  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

A  strategy  explored  in  the  HWIM  system  is  a  hybrid  between  island 
driving  and  the  left-to-right  strategy.  The  problem  of  not  being  able  to 
understand  reliably  the  first  word  in  the  sentence  is  overcome  by  trying 
to  understand  any  of  the  first  three  or  four  words.  Then  the  expansion 
of  this  word  is  in  one  direction  at  a  time:  first  back  to  the  beginning 
of  the  sentence,  and  then  on  to  the  end.  This  dramatically  reduces  the 
number  of  extension  hypotheses  that  must  be  considered  at  one  time. 

Scoring  of  alternative  hypotheses.  The  sound  templates  stored  in  the 
system's  database  never  exactly  match  segments  of  the  acoustic  signal, 
so  that  the  hypotheses  about  individual  speech  sounds  must  be  "scored." 
Briefly,  the  internal  template  representation  of  the  proposed  sound  (pho- 
neme, or  allophone,  or  syllable)  is  compared  with  a  segment  of  the 
actual  speech  signal,  and  the  similarities  and  differences  are  noted  and  a 
number  is  calculated  representing  the  likelihood  that  the  proposed  sound 
exists  at  that  point  in  the  signal. 

Above  the  level  of  individual  speech  sounds,  the  scoring  of  hypoth- 
eses is  handled  differently  by  different  systems.  In  HARPY,  which 
searches  through  its  net  of  individually  scored  allophones,  scoring  can  be 
regarded  as  simple  cumulation  of  the  allophone  scores  along  a  path. 
The  score  given  to  a  hypothesized  allophone  depends  on  how  closely  it 
matches  the  speech  signal  and  also  on  the  score  of  the  preceding 
allophone  in  the  path.  HARPY  expands  several  paths  at  once,  but  the 
scoring  system  guarantees  that  the  highest  scoring  allophone  in  the  net 
is  the  last  allophone  in  the  best  available  interpretation  of  the  sentence, 
up  to  that  point  in  the  sentence. 

In  the  other  systems,  where  the  knowledge  sources  remain  separate, 
each  hypothesis  can  be  evaluated  by  several  of  the  knowledge  sources. 
A  hypothesis  that  has  the  support  of  several  knowledge  sources  is  given 
a  score  that  is  a  linear  combination  of  the  individual  scores  contributed 
by  each  knowledge  source.  The  relative  weights  of  the  different  KSs  are 
determined  by  trial  and  error  in  the  HEARSAY  systems.  However,  the 
designers  of  HWIM  put  a  great  deal  of  effort  into  devloping  a  uniform 
scoring  policy  for  hypotheses. 

Focus  of  attention.  One  important  issue  in  the  control  of  the 
recognition  process  is  determining  which  hypotheses  about  the  contents 
of  the  signal  should  be  attended  to  at  each  instant.  In  the  HEARSAY 
and  SDC  systems,  hypotheses  are  ordered  by  their  score  and  the  highest 
scoring  alternative  is  examined  first.  Thus,  all  hypotheses  compete  in 
these  systems. 

In  HWIM,  hypotheses  are  not  ordered  by  their  scores  alone,  because 


B  Systems  Architecture  341 

it  is  recognized  that  all  hypotheses  should  not  necessarily  compete.  In 
particular,  two  hypotheses  about  different  parts  of  the  utterance  should 
both  be  examined  and  a  "bridge"  formed  between  them  if  possible.  An 
ordering  metric  called  the  shortfall  density  was  developed  for  HWIM 
based  on  these  considerations.  (This  was,  in  addition,  an  admissible 
strategy — see  Article  V.C3.)  In  HARPY,  if  the  score  of  an  allophone  falls 
below  a  certain  threshold,  the  entire  path  leading  up  to  that  allophone 
is  discarded.  HARPY  applies  a  heuristic  technique  called  beam  search 
that  involves  expanding  a  small  number  of  the  highest  scoring  allo- 
phones,  the  beam  width  (Article  V.C2). 

Backtracking.  Typically  in  the  speech  understanding  process,  a  sys- 
tem will  have  an  interpretation  for  some  of  the  words  in  a  sentence 
that  gets  discontinued.  For  example,  it  may  propose  that  the  third 
word  in  the  sentence  is  elephant,  only  to  learn  from  its  syntactic 
knowledge  source  that  the  third  word  in  the  sentence  must  be  a  verb. 
In  cases  like  this,  the  system  must  revise  its  interpretation;  it  must 
backtrack  to  some  point  at  which  it  was  sure  of  its  interpretation  and 
start  again  from  there.  The  choice  of  control  strategy,  including  the 
scoring  mechanism,  beam  width,  and  so  on,  can  make  backtracking 
unnecessary,  easy,  or  very  expensive. 

Summary 

In  many  respects,  the  systems  discussed  here  are  quite  similar.  All 
employ  multiple  sources  of  knowledge  and  apply  constraining  knowledge 
about  what  utterances  are  likely  to  be  made  to  help  figure  out  what 
was  said.  However,  the  systems  reflect  different  design  philosophies. 
The  HARPY  system  is  noted  for  its  use  of  a  precompiled-network 
knowledge  representation;  HWIM  and  HEARS AY-II  use  similar  modular 
knowledge  sources.  However,  the  systems  differ  in  the  control  of  speech 
processing.  Specifically,  control  strategies  are  regarded  as  a  major  vari- 
able affecting  the  success  or  failure  of  HWIM,  while  in  HEARSAY, 
emphasis  is  put  on  the  organization — the  architecture — of  the  speech 
system. 

The  differences  in  the  final  systems  produced  by  the  ARPA  SUR 
projects  reflect  a  difference  in  emphasis  in  the  research.  At  the  outset 
of  the  HWIM  project,  a  technique  called  incremental  simulation  was 
employed  to  explore  the  process  of  speech  understanding.  Individuals 
simulated  the  not-yet-developed  components  of  the  system,  and  their 
interactions  were  analyzed.  In  experiments  with  humans  interpreting 
speech  spectrograms,  a  number  of  knowledge  sources  were  identified,  but, 
in  addition, 


342  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

it  was  obvious  that  the  spectrogram  readers  were  making  use  of  an 
additional  ability  that  was  considerably  less  overt.  By  some  cri- 
teria, they  were  making  decisions  about  which  fragmentary  hypoth- 
eses to  rule  out,  which  ones  to  pursue  further  by  trying  to  find 
compatible  interpretations  of  adjacent  portions  of  the  utterance, 
and  when  to  return  to  a  previously  rejected  hypothesis  in  light  of 
new  information.  These  decisions  imply  the  existence  of  a  control 
strategy  for  speech  understanding,  and  from  the  beginning,  our  speech 
understanding  system  has  been  designed  to  facilitate  the  discovery 
and  exploration  of  such  strategies.  (Wolf  and  Woods,  1980,  p.  317) 

Control  strategies  certainly  were  not  ignored  by  the  HARPY  or 
HEARSAY  designers.  The  emphasis,  however,  in  both  systems,  has  been 
on  knowledge  representation  and  organization: 

Much  of  .  .  .  Harpy's  success  is  the  result  of  solving  the  difficult 
technical  problems  associated  with  forcing  all  the  diverse  KSs  into 
a  unified  framework.     (Lowerre  and  Reddy,  1980,  p.  346) 

The  Hearsay  II  architecture  is  based  on  the  view  that  the  inher- 
ently errorful  nature  of  processing  connected  speech  can  be  handled 
only  through  the  effective  and  efficient  cooperation  of  multiple, 
diverse  sources  of  knowledge.  Additionally,  the  experimental  ap- 
proach needed  for  system  development  requires  the  ability  to  add 
and  replace  sources  of  knowledge  and  to  explore  different  control 
strategies.  .  .  .  The  major  focus  of  the  design  of  the  Hearsay  II 
system  was  the  development  of  a  framework  for  experimenting 
with  the  representation  of  and  cooperation  among  these  diverse 
sources  of  knowledge.     (Erman  and  Lesser,  1980,  p.  362) 

Many  of  the  issues  of  system  design  and  language  processing  dis- 
cussed here  are  also  important  in  natural  language  understanding  re- 
search (see  especially  Article  iV.Di).  The  remaining  articles  in  this 
chapter  describe  the  main  features  of  the  HEARSAY,  HARPY,  HWIM, 
and  SRI/SDC  systems  in  more  detail. 


C.     THE  ARPA  SUR  PROJECTS 
CI.     HEARSAY 


The  HEARSAY  speech  understanding  system,  developed  as  part  of 
the  ARPA-funded  speech  understanding  research  project,  has  been  one  of 
the  most  influential  of  all  AI  programs  over  the  years.  The  importance 
of  HEARSAY  lies  not  in  how  well  the  system  understands  speech,  but 
in  the  way  that  it  is  constructed — the  idea  of  independent  knowledge 
sources  cooperatively  solving  a  problem  by  posting  hypotheses  on  a 
global  blackboard  data  structure.  This  modular  architecture — the  knowl- 
edge sources  don't  address  each  other  directly — proved  to  allow  great 
flexibility  as  the  system  evolved  and  different  combinations  of  knowledge 
sources  and  control  strategies  were  tried  (see  Article  m.A  for  a  discussion 
of  modularity  in  knowledge  representation). 

In  problem  domains  characterized  by  a  large  search  space,  by  the 
need  to  combine  different  kinds  of  knowledge,  and  by  ambiguous  or 
noisy  data,  HEARSAY'S  architecture  has  proved  especially  well  suited  for 
the  design  of  a  problem- solving  system.  It  has  been  incorporated  into 
AI  systems  for  solving  diverse  tasks  in  crystallography  (Article  vn.C3,  in 
Vol.  n),  signal  interpretation  (Nii  and  Feigenbaum,  1978),  vision  (Hanson 
and  Riseman,  1978b;  Levine,  1978),  and  psychological  modeling  (Rumel- 
hart,  1976;  Hayes-Roth  and  Hayes-Roth,  1979).  A  considerable  number 
of  articles  about  the  HEARSAY  architecture  and  its  applications  have 
been  written.  In  this  short  description  of  the  system,  we  introduce  the 
technical  terms  used  in  the  descriptions  of  it  in  the  literature. 

HEARS AY-I 

HEARSAY  went  through  two  major  stages  in  its  development  at 
Carnegie-Mellon  University.  The  first  implementation  of  the  system, 
called  HEARSAY-I,  was  already  based  on  the  idea  of  cooperating,  inde- 
pendent knowledge  sources  (Reddy  et  al.,  1976).  The  three  knowledge 
sources  in  HEARSAY-I  represented  knowledge  about — 

1.  Acoustics  and  phonetics  (the  features  in  the  speech  signal  that 
are  evidence  for  each  type  of  syllable),  including  ways  the  signal 
may  change  because  of  different  speakers  and  noise  in  the 
environment; 


344  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

2.  The  syntax  of  legal  utterances;  and 

3.  The  semantics  of  the  domain. 

The  domain  was  voice  chess,  which  pits  the  computer  against  a  person 
(who  makes  his  moves  by  speaking  into  a  microphone).  The  fact  that 
only  particular  phrases  make  sense  in  the  world  of  chess  was  utilized 
to  limit  the  searching  required  by  the  program.  (As  discussed  in 
Article  V.B,  the  use  of  constraining  knowledge  about  what  utterances  can 
be  expected  is  a  central  idea  in  all  successful  speech  understanding  re- 
search.) 

Consider  the  possible  ways  that  knowledge  about  chess  could  be 
used  to  help  identify  a  spoken  chess  move.  For  example,  in  trying  to 
understand  an  incomplete  utterance  like  "Pawn  to  King  [missing  word]" 
prior  knowledge  about  the  form,  or  syntax,  of  spoken  chess  moves  would 
lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  missing  word  is  a  small  number  cor- 
responding to  one  of  the  rows  of  the  chess  board.  Moreover,  if  knowing 
the  current  positions  of  all  the  pieces  and  the  rules  for  making  moves 
would  further  narrow  the  possibilities  to  one  of  the  places  a  pawn  could 
move  to  in  the  King's  file  and  if  a  person  who  knew  something  about 
chess  strategy  saw  that  this  was  the  first  move  of  the  game,  he  or  she 
could  guess  that  it  was  very  likely  that  this  was  one  of  the  standard 
opening  moves — for  example,  "Pawn  to  King-four."  HEARSAY-I  was  tied 
directly  into  the  legal-move  generator  of  a  chess-playing  program  for  its 
knowledge  about  likely  moves. 

Despite  the  obvious  simplifications  inherent  in  this  domain,  it  is  cer- 
tainly possible  that  speech  understanding  systems  that  could  handle 
domains  of  equal  complexity  might  find  tremendous  utility  in  specialized 
areas,  like  air  traffic  control.  At  any  rate,  HEARSAY-I  was  the  first 
system  to  demonstrate  recognition  of  non trivial,  connected  speech.  This 
system  marked  a  radical  departure  in  both  knowledge  representation  and 
control  structure  from  previous  AI  systems.  Top-down  processing — the 
use  of  expectations  generated  by  syntactic  and  semantic  knowledge 
sources  to  help  judge  the  relevance  of  words  hypothesized  by  bottom- 
end  acoustic  processing — proved  to  be  a  widely  useful  idea.  In  fact,  it 
is  believed  that  had  current  acoustic  processing  techniques  been  available 
in  the  early  1970s,  HEARSAY-I  might  have  met  the  1976  ARPA  speech 
goals  in  the  voice  chess  domain  (Lea  and  Shoup,  1980).  Many  of  the 
concepts  applied  in  this  system  were  incorporated  into  the  HEARSAY-II 
and  HARPY  systems  developed  later  at  C.M.U. 


CI 


HEARSAY 


345 


Changes  to  Knowledge  Sources  and  the  Blackboard 

The  modifications  that  resulted  in  the  final  implementation  of 
HEARSAY  included  the  development  of  many  specialized  knowledge 
sources — 12  were  used  in  the  final  version  of  the  system.  The  black- 
board was  divided  into  a  number  of  levels  corresponding  to  a  hier- 
archical breakdown  of  speech  into  units  such  as  segments,  syllables, 
words,  and  phrases  (see  Fig.  Cl-1).  Hypotheses  about  these  sentence 
units  are  posted  at  the  appropriate  level,  along  with  a  time  frame  that 
indicates  when  the  unit  is  hypothesized  to  occur  in  the  utterance. 


LEVELS 


SEMAIMT 


Phrase 


Word— sequence 


Word 


•CONCAT 


Sy I  table 


Segment 


Parameter 


— * 

4 
P                                                      3l 

* 

...PARSE               ~] 

* * — 

• .WORD-SEQ-CTL 

t 

- 

.. -WORD-SEQ 

j. • -WORD-CTL 

. 

k.                                                                                                                                                 4 

. . -now 

•••VERIFY 

4 

...  PON 

4 

> 

•••SEG 

n 

Figure  Cl-1. 


Knowledge  sources  and  blackboard  configuration  for 
final  version  (C2)  of  HEARSAY-E  (from  Erman  et  al., 
1980,  p.  366). 


The  horizontal  lines  in  Figure  Cl-1  represent  the  levels  of  the 
blackboard.  Each  knowledge  source  looks  at  hypotheses  posted  on  one 
level,  called  its  stimulus  frame  (indicated  by  *  ),  and  in  turn  posts  hy- 
potheses on  one  or  more  levels,  possibly  the  same  one  (the  response 
frame).  For  example,  the  PREDICT  knowledge  source  illustrated  in 
Figure  Cl-1  works  completely  within  the  phrase  level  on  the  blackboard, 
predicting    the    words    that    might    extend    a    phrase.     In    contrast,    the 


346  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

VERIFY  knowledge  source  looks  for  acoustic  evidence  in  the  signal  for 
hypotheses  at  the  word  level. 

The  knowledge  sources  shown  in  Figure  Cl-1  were  those  used  in  the 
C2  configuration  of  HEARSAY-H,  the  version  that  was  evaluated  at  the 
end  of  the  ARPA  SUR  project  in  1976.  The  bottom-end  processing  was 
accomplished  by  the  acoustic  segmentation  (SEG)  and  word- spotting 
(POM,  MOW,  and  WORD-CTL)  knowledge  sources.  The  SEG  knowledge 
source  abstracts  a  string  of  allophones  from  the  acoustic  signal  (actually 
the  same  allophones  recognized  by  HARPY).  These  are  assigned  to  syl- 
lable classes  by  the  POM  knowledge  source,  and  the  syllable  classes  are 
used  by  the  MOW  knowledge  source  to  hypothesize  words.  (HEARSAY'S 
lexicon  is  organized  by  syllable  classes;  each  section  of  the  lexicon 
contains  pronunciations  of  all  the  words  that  make  up  one  syllable- 
class.)  The  number  of  hypotheses  that  MOW  makes  is  controlled  by  the 
WORD-CTL  knowledge  source.  The  WIZARD  procedure  scores  the 
hypothesized  words  by  comparing  their  acoustic  characteristics  to  stored 
representations  of  the  pronunciations  of  the  words.  (This  representation 
is  similar  in  structure  to  the  integrated  network  used  to  represent  all 
knowledge  in  the  HARPY  system.) 

The  top-end  processing  in  HEARSAY-H  involved  predicting,  testing, 
and  concatenating  multiple-word  sequences,  one  or  more  of  which  will 
eventually  account  for  all  of  the  words  spoken.  The  WORD-SEQ  and 
WORD-SEQ-CTL  knowledge  sources  extend  those  words  recognized  by 
the  bottom  end  into  a  small  number  of  islands  of  one  or  more  words, 
using  a  data  structure  that  contains  all  legal  pairings  of  words.  Islands 
can  be  extended  recursively  in  this  manner — by  hypothesizing  extensions 
of  the  newly  hypothesized  words.  However,  the  syntax  of  islands  longer 
than  three  words  must  be  checked,  because  the  island  was  generated 
from  legal  pairs  of  words  and  therefore  the  longer  island  may  not  be 
syntactically  correct.     The  PARSE  knowledge  source  checks  the  syntax. 

When  a  number  of  multiple-word  islands  are  developed,  the  VERIFY 
knowledge  source  tries  to  check  each  word  against  the  segmented 
acoustic  signal  in  the  context  of  its  island.  The  PREDICT  and  CONCAT 
knowledge  sources  are  also  used  to  extend  hypothesized  word  sequences. 
PREDICT  generates  all  the  words  that  can  immediately  precede  or  follow 
a  word  sequence,  while  CONCAT  tries  to  join  word  sequences  together 
to  form  longer  ones.  Finally,  the  STOP  knowledge  source  is  used  to  ter- 
minate processing  of  the  speech  signal,  either  because  the  best  inter- 
pretation of  the  sentence  has  been  found  or  because  too  much  processing 
time  has  been  used.  The  SEMANT  knowledge  source  generates  ma- 
chine instructions  to  carry  out  the  spoken  command  (in  the  case  of 
HEARSAY-H,  answering  a  question  about  a  database  on  AI  publications). 


CI  HEARSAY  347 

Control  in  HEARSAY-II 

The  majority  of  the  hypotheses  contributed  by  knowledge  sources  at 
any  level  do  not  find  their  way  into  the  final  interpretation  of  the  sen- 
tence. It  is  important  that  the  system  focus  its  limited  computational 
resources  on  expanding  the  best  word  hypotheses  into  word  sequences 
and  that  only  the  best  of  these  get  verified,  expanded,  and  concatenated 
into  larger  phrases.  This  is  accomplished  by  scoring  the  response  frame 
of  each  knowledge  source  on  the  hypothesis — that  is,  estimating  the  ex- 
pected result  of  operating  on  the  hypothesis  with  the  relevant  knowl- 
edge sources — and  using  a  scheduling  routine  to  expand  high-scoring 
hypotheses  before  lower  scoring  ones. 

In  theory,  the  blackboard  framework  permits  autonomous  and  asyn- 
chronous activation  of  knowledge  sources,  meaning  that,  at  any  time, 
any  knowledge  source  can  post  hypotheses  on  the  blackboard.  In  prac- 
tice, some  constraints  were  placed  on  the  order  in  which  knowledge 
sources  were  activated.  In  HEARSAY-I  the  bottom-end  knowledge  sources 
propagated  hypotheses  to  higher  levels  in  an  asynchronous  order,  but  it 
was  found  that  these  hypotheses  were  not  accurate  enough  to  be  reliably 
expanded.  As  a  result,  processing  at  the  bottom  end  of  HEARSAY-II  is 
strictly  bottom-up:  The  SEG,  POM,  and  MOW  knowledge  sources  are 
activated  in  that  order,  and  the  processing  done  by  one  is  completed 
before  another  is  activated. 

Some  effort  was  made  in  HEARSAY  to  separate  the  operation  of 
knowledge  sources  from  the  control  of  their  operation.  Two  knowledge 
sources,  WORD-CTL  and  WORD-SEQ-CTL,  have  been  included  specif- 
ically to  control  the  MOW  and  WORD-SEQ  knowledge  sources,  respec- 
tively. 

Summary 

The  HEARSAY-II  speech  understanding  system  achieved  the  per- 
formance goals  of  the  five-year  ARPA  SUR  program  in  the  same 
document-retrieval  task  used  to  evaluate  HARPY.  The  system  has  also 
been  used  in  other  conversational  domains.  More  important  is  that  its 
architecture  has  been  useful  in  the  design  of  AI  systems  unrelated  to 
speech  understanding.  The  design  ideas  of  HEARSAY  can  be  summa- 
rized along  the  following  lines: 

Separate,  independent,  anonymous  knowledge  sources.  Isolating  the 
knowledge  along  functional  lines  allows  efficient  modification  of  the 
problem- solving  structure  of  the  program,  by  allowing  a  free  substitution 
of  modular  knowledge  sources.  Substitution  is  possible  since  each  knowl- 
edge source  is  not  dependent  on  the  methodology  behind,  or  even  the 
existence  of,  any  other. 


348  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

Self-activating,  asynchronous,  parallel  processes.  The  knowledge 
sources  can  be  viewed  as  individual  knowledge-based  programs  that 
respond  to  patterns  in  the  blackboard  database  autonomously.  No 
temporal  relationship  between  their  execution  is  explicitly  required 
(although,  as  described  above,  this  condition  was  sometimes  relaxed  in 
the  interest  of  efficiency).  A  parallel-processor  version  of  portions  of  the 
HEARSAY  design  has  been  built  to  exploit  these  features  (see  Fox, 
in  press;  Lesser  and  Erman,  in  press). 

Globally  accessed  database.  The  blackboard  acts  as  a  structure  on 
which  the  hypotheses  and  their  support  criteria  can  be  stored.  The  data 
structure  is  fixed  for  each  information  level  on  the  blackboard.  This 
feature  allows  the  creation  of  kernel-accessing  routines,  used  in  common 
by  each  KS  for  manipulating  the  global  store  at  each  level.  A  snapshot 
of  the  blackboard  during  HEARSAY  execution  reveals  a  partial  analysis 
of  the  utterance  as  a  three-dimensional  network  consisting  of  the  levels 
of  representation,  time,  and  the  possible  alternatives — with  the  contex- 
tual and  structural  support  for  each  alternative  explicitly  marked  in  the 
network. 

Data-directed  knowledge  invocation.  The  knowledge  sources  react  to 
changes  in  the  blackboard  and  criticize  or  create  hypotheses  wherever 
practical.  This  procedure  sets  up  a  new  pattern  over  the  blackboard,  to 
which  other  KSs  may  be  able  to  respond.  This  activity  continues  until 
no  knowledge  source  can  respond  or  until  the  time  and  space  limits  of 
the  program  are  exceeded. 

References 

Erman  et  al.  (1980)  is  an  excellent  introduction  to  HEARSAY.  Sev- 
eral articles  in  the  recent  book  edited  by  Lea  (1980b)  are  of  interest, 
especially  Erman  and  Lesser  (1980).  Also  of  interest  is  C.M.U.  Speech 
Group  (1977). 


C2.     HARPY 

The  HARPY  speech  understanding  system  was  developed  at 
Carnegie-Mellon  University  after  extensive  evaluation  of  two  earlier  sys- 
tems, HEARSAY-I  (Article  V.Cl)  and  DRAGON  (Baker,  1975).  HARPY's 
most  important  characteristic  is  its  use  of  a  single,  precompiled,  network 
knowledge  structure  (Lowerre  and  Reddy,  1980).  The  network  contains 
knowledge  at  all  levels:  acoustic,  phonemic,  lexical,  syntactic,  and  seman- 
tic. It  stores  acoustic  representations  of  every  possible  pronunciation  of 
the  words  in  all  of  the  sentences  that  HARPY  recognizes.  The  alter- 
native sentences  are  represented  as  paths  through  the  network,  and  each 
node  in  the  network  is  a  template  of  allophones.  The  paths  through  the 
network  can  be  thought  of  as  "sentence  templates,"  much  like  the  word 
templates  in  isolated-word  recognition  (see  Article  v. A).  HARPY's  integra- 
tion of  diverse  forms  of  knowledge  into  a  single  network  representation 
is  its  principal  contribution. 

The  Knowledge  Compiler 

The  program  that  actually  builds  the  network  is  called  the  knowl- 
edge compiler.  Its  task  is  to  generate  allophonic  representations  of  all 
possible  sentences,  given  HARPY's  syntax  and  lexicon.  The  first  step  in 
this  process  is  to  substitute  words  from  the  lexicon  into  the  grammar  in 
order  to  generate  all  possible  sentences.  For  example,  if  the  syntax  was 
defined  by  the  rules: 

Sentence  <—  <ss> 

<ss>   <—  please  help  <m> 

<—  please  show  <m>  <q> 

<q>    <—  everything 

< —  someth  i  ng 

<m>    <—  me 

<—  us 

then  the  possible  meaningful  sentences  are: 

PI  ease  he  I p  me 

Please  help  us 

Please  show  me  everything 

Please  show  us  everything 

Please  show  me  something 

Please  show  us  something 

The    sentences   are   put   into   a   network   structure    (see   Fig.  C2-1)   that 
eliminates   much   of  the   redundancy   involved   in   representing   sentences 


350  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

individually  but  has  the  effect  of  introducing  grammatical  sentences  that 
are  not  meaningful,  namely,  Please  help  me  everything  and  Please  help 
me  something.  (See  the  discussion  of  transition-network  representations 
for  grammars  in  Article  IV. D2.) 


help  me  everything 

please       Y      Y  [end  of  sentence] 

\  A  A  .. 

show     us     someth  i  ng 


Figure  C2-1.    HARPY's  sentence  network. 

The  next  step  in  compiling  the  network  is  to  substitute  phonetic 
representations  of  words  for  the  words  themselves.  In  the  event  that 
there  is  more  than  one  pronunciation  for  a  word,  all  pronunciations  are 
put  into  the  network.  For  example,  if  two  pronunciations  of  show  are 
known,  then  both  would  be  alternative  paths  following  the  phonetic  rep- 
resentation of  please.  In  this  way,  the  network  is  expanded  to  contain 
all  possible  pronunciations  of  all  possible  sentences. 

The  last  step  is  to  embed  juncture  phenomena  in  the  network. 
These  are  descriptions  of  the  effect  of  context  on  the  allophones  at  word 
boundaries.  For  example,  in  please  show,  the  z  sound  at  the  end  of 
please  is  sometimes  dropped,  although  it  is  not  dropped  in  please  tell 
For  the  1976  version  of  HARPY,  the  juncture  rules  were  hand-tailored 
to  the  words  in  the  lexicon.  This  was  a  very  time-consuming  process, 
but  the  phonemic  rules  available  at  the  time  were  not  sufficiently 
powerful  or  complete  to  capture  the  necessary  range  of  juncture  phe- 
nomena. 

This  discussion  of  the  knowledge  compiler  is  highly  abbreviated.  In 
fact,  the  process  is  considerably  more  complicated  and  consumes  a  great 
deal  of  computer  processing  time:  It  required  13  hours  of  PDP-10  time 
to  generate  a  network  of  15,000  allophonic  templates  for  HARPY's  1,011- 
word  vocabulary. 

Control  in  HARPY 

HARPY  utilizes  a  heuristic  search  method  called  beam  search. 
Briefly  stated,  it  proceeds  left  to  right  through  the  network,  matching 


C2  HARPY  351 

spoken  sounds  to  allophonic  states.  The  first  sounds  spoken  are 
matched  to  all  of  the  starting  states  in  the  network  (in  the  example 
above,  this  would  correspond  to  all  possible  pronunciations  of  please). 
HARPY  assigns  scores  to  all  of  these,  and  it  prunes  away  the  paths  that 
do  not  score  well  (see  the  discussion  of  scoring  in  Article  v.b).  The  few 
that  score  best  are  kept  as  alternative  interpretations  of  the  sentence. 
These  constitute  the  "beam"  of  hypotheses  that  HARPY  will  examine. 
It  is  an  important  characteristic  of  beam  search  that  the  paths  included 
in  the  beam  are  the  best  interpretations  of  the  sentence  that  HARPY 
has  found.  Thus,  it  need  never  backtrack,  but  need  only  extend  the 
paths  in  its  beam  as  long  as  they  retain  sufficiently  high  scores. 

Beam  search  is  an  approximate  heuristic  method  that  does  not  guar- 
antee that  the  interpretation  of  a  sentence  is  the  best  possible  inter- 
pretation. Nevertheless,  in  its  trial  domains  of  chess  and  document 
retrieval,  HARPY  was  the  most  efficient  and  accurate  performer  of  all  of 
the  ARPA  SUR  systems  (see  Article  v. A). 

Summary 

A  case  study  of  two  dissimilar  early  speech  understanding  systems, 
DRAGON  and  HEARSAY-I,  led  to  a  first  in  system  design:  a  system 
that  met  the  1976  goals  of  the  speech  understanding  research  com- 
munity. This  objective  was  accomplished  by  combining  DRAGON's 
dynamic  programming  techniques  with  useful  heuristics  for  search,  such 
as  beam  search.  The  main  ideas  incorporated  into  HARPY  are  the 
following. 

Precompiled  network.  HARPY  creates  a  large  network  comprised  of 
all  phonetic  "spellings"  for  each  syntactic  path  in  the  grammar.  This 
network  includes  word  junction  phenomena,  which  are  the  adjustments 
made  in  the  pronunciations  of  words  due  to  the  words  preceding  and 
following  them  in  continuous  speech. 

Beam  search.  The  best  paths  in  the  recognition  network  are  se- 
lected for  further  evaluation.  This  pruning  is  determined  by  the  compar- 
ison of  the  likelihood  of  success  with  a  variable  threshold.  This  strategy 
eliminates  evaluation  of  possible  sentences  that  start  correctly  but 
contain  one  or  more  incorrect  words.  HARPY  keeps  about  1%  of  the 
states  at  each  step  in  the  evaluation  of  the  network.  Experiments 
showed  that  neither  a  fixed  number  nor  a  fixed  fraction  worked  well  for 
this  process.  Finally,  a  fixed  range  of  likelihood  from  the  best  state 
was  settled  upon  (Newell,  1978). 

Processing  segmented  speech.  The  decision  to  use  a  flexible  division 
of  the  acoustic  signal  according  to  acoustic  events,  rather  than  according 


352  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

to  a  fixed  time  interval,  allows  for  a  single  acoustic  template  per  phone. 
However,  since  the  network  is  composed  of  a  sequential  phonetic  rep- 
resentation, the  system  is  very  sensitive  to  missing  or  poorly  labeled 
segments. 

Heuristics  to  limit  search  time  and  size  of  network.  The  compu- 
tation time  of  the  program  is  drastically  reduced  by  the  compilation  of 
the  speech  recognition  knowledge  into  the  network  representation.  The 
network  is  condensed  by  removing  redundant  states  or  by  recognizing 
common  groupings  of  states.  The  number  of  states  is  slightly  increased, 
but  the  number  of  connections  (i.e.,  pointers)  can  be  markedly  de- 
creased, by  introducing  special  states  at  common  intersections  in  the 
network. 

The  extension  of  HARPY's  design  to  handle  much  larger  vocabularies 
must  be  examined  in  future  research  work,  since  the  explicit  creation  of 
the  network  of  possibilities  can  have  a  large  memory  and  processing 
requirement.  Also,  the  design  of  the  current  system  cannot  easily  ac- 
commodate the  pragmatics  of  the  utterance,  which  other  systems  use  to 
constrain  search.  HARPY's  algorithm  is  also  relatively  sensitive  to 
missing  acoustical  segments  and  missing  words. 

References 

See  Lowerre  and  Reddy  (1980).  Also  of  interest  is  C.M.U.  Speech 
Group  (1977). 


C3.     HWM 

The  HWIM  ("Hear  What  I  Mean")  speech  understanding  system  was 
developed  between  1974  and  1976  at  BBN  (Wolf  and  Woods,  1980). 
HWIM  was  the  successor  to  BBN's  earlier  SPEECHLIS  speech  under- 
standing system  (Woods,  1975a)  and  to  the  BBN  work  on  natural  lan- 
guage understanding  (see  Article  IV.F3  on  the  LUNAR  system). 

The  BBN  speech  understanding  system  has  evolved  within  a  gen- 
eral framework  for  viewing  perceptual  processes.  Central  to  this 
framework  is  an  entity  called  a  theory.  A  theory  represents  a 
particular  hypothesis  about  some  or  all  of  the  sensory  stimuli  that 
are  present.  Perception  is  viewed  as  the  process  of  forming  a 
believable,  coherent  theory  that  can  account  for  all  of  the  stimuli. 
In  our  framework,  this  is  achieved  by  successive  refinement  and 
extension  of  partial  theories  until  a  best  complete  theory  is  found. 
(Wolf  and  Woods,  1980,  p.  318) 

In  the  speech  setting,  a  typical  theory  is  a  set  of  compatible  word 
hypotheses,  with  possible  gaps  between  words,  and  partial  syntactic  and 
semantic  interpretations. 

HWIM  was  used  to  answer  questions  in  the  role  of  a  travel  budget 
manager,  using  a  database  of  facts  about  trips  and  expenses.  This  was 
the  most  demanding  task  in  any  of  the  ARPA  SUR  projects,  and  the 
resulting  system  shows  concern  with  some  issues  of  language  and  of 
systems  design  that  were  not  considered  by  the  other  SUR  projects. 

System  Organization 

In  the  HWIM  system,  all  processing  passes  through  its  control  strat- 
egy component;  in  fact,  this  component  uses  the  knowledge  sources  as 
subroutines.  This  is  in  contrast  to  the  HEARSAY  model,  in  which 
knowledge  sources  are  autonomous  and  don't  call  each  other.  (Of  course, 
knowledge  sources  in  HEARSAY  can  attempt  to  control  processing  by 
what  they  post  on  the  blackboard;  see  Article  V.Cl.)  HWIM's  organi- 
zation permits  more  direct  experimentation  with  control  strategies — 
manipulating,  for  example,  how  many  word  islands  are  generated,  the 
direction  in  which  they  are  expanded,  and  the  interactions  of  system 
components  (see  Article  V.b). 

The  lower  level  system  components  of  HWIM  (see  Fig.  C3-1)  are 
responsible  for  digitizing  the  speech  signal  (RTIME)  and  generating  a 
parametric  representation  of  it  (PSA),  as  well  as  segmenting  and  labeling 


354 


Understanding  Spoken  Language 


the  parametric  representation  (APR)  and  lexical  retrieval.  The  APR 
component  produces  a  segmented  lattice  by  segmenting  the  output  of 
the  PSA  component  at  phoneme  boundaries,  then  generating  one  or 
more  possible  phoneme  labels  for  each  segment,  and  finally  ranking  the 
alternative  interpretations  of  each  segment.  The  final  segmented  lattice 
is  a  graph  that  is  read  from  left  to  right,  and  is  divided  into  time 
segments  each  of  which  has  one  or  more  ranked  phonetic  interpretations. 
(See  related  discussion  of  charts  in  Article  IV.D3.)  This  lattice  is  matched 
against  a  dictionary  of  word  pronunciations  by  the  lexical  retrieval  com- 
ponent, which  generates  word  hypotheses. 


TRIP 


TALKER 


.(LISTENER) 


Di  scourse 
Expectations 


Semanti  c 
Interpretations 


Control  Strategy 


Word 
Hypotheses 


Word 
Matches 

Word 
Hypotheses 


Lex  i  ca I 
Retri  eva I 


Syntactic 
Hypotheses 


Scores 


Syntactic 
Pred  i  ctions 


Syntax 


Veri  f  i  cation 


Segment 
Lattice 


APR 


TRIP 


Parameters 


PSA 


RTINE 


(Speech  Si  gna I ) 


Figure  C3-1.     The  structure  of  HWIM  (after  Wolf  and  Woods, 
1980,  p.  321). 

The  structure  of  the  dictionary  is  interesting  for  several  reasons. 
First,  it  is  a  network  with  phonemes  for  nodes.  Nodes  can  be  shared 
by  different  words;  for  example,  list  and  like  share  the  j\j  phoneme. 
Another  important  characteristic  of  the  dictionary  is  its  implementation 
of  juncture  rules.     The  words  like,  list,  and  some  are  all  included  in  the 


C3  HWTM  355 

network   represented   in   Figure  C3-2,    but,    in   addition,    the   phrase    list 
some  is  represented  as  it  is  actually  pronounced:     "lissum." 


00 


.(IY) >(K) 


_(IH) >(S) >(T) 

I 
(S) >(AH)— (M) 

Figure  C3-2.     Network  of  phonemes. 

The  dictionary  is  generated  semiautomatically  by  applying  phono- 
logical rules  to  the  base  set  of  words.  The  initial  vocabulary  of  1,138 
words  is  increased  to  a  list  of  1,363  possible  pronunciations  by  ac- 
counting for  inflection  patterns,  then  to  3,371  by  the  application  of 
within-word  phonological  rules,  and  then  to  8,642  pronunciations  by  the 
application  of  across- word  juncture  rules. 

The  higher  levels  of  the  HWTM  system  include  word  verification,  syn- 
tax, and  the  TRIP  semantic  component  (Fig.  C3-1).  The  verification 
component  takes  a  word  pronunciation  and  the  available  context  and 
generates  a  synthesized  acoustic  signal  for  words  that  are  hypothesized 
by  other  knowledge  sources.  The  actual  acoustic  signal  is  compared  to 
this  synthesized  signal  and  the  hypothesis  is  scored.  This  method,  which 
was  found  to  be  rather  expensive  computationally,  allows  an  independent 
verification  of  hypothesized  words,  since  all  other  methods  use  the  same 
acoustic  source  as  a  basis  for  making  conclusions. 

The  syntactic  component  is  used  to  judge  whether  proposed  word- 
sequences  are  grammatical  or  not  and  to  predict  grammatical  extensions 
of  existing  word-sequences.  The  parser  used  by  this  component  is  built 
around  an  ATN  grammar  (Article  IV.D2).  It  is  a  performance  grammar; 
that  is,  the  parts  of  speech  in  the  grammar  are  tailored  specifically  to 
the  trip-planning  task  domain,  rather  than  being  the  usual  parts  of 
speech:  noun,  verb,  adjective,  and  so  on.  (See  related  discussion  of 
semantic  grammars  in  Article  DC.C3,  in  Vol.  n.)  The  TRIP  component 
uses  a  semantic  network  representation  of  all  the  facts  and  relations 
relevant  to  this  task  domain.  It  supplies  top-down  discourse  expec- 
tations, interprets  the  sentences  passed  to  it,  and  carries  out  the  spoken 
instructions  when  they  are  finally  interpreted. 

Control  Strategy 

HWTM  was  designed  to  have  a  flexible  control  structure.  However, 
there   is  a  basic  form   common   to  all   control  strategies   in   the  system 


356  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

that  involves  bottom-up  word  theories  that  are  extended  top-down  by 
the  syntactic  component  until  an  entire  sentence  is  achieved.  More  spe- 
cifically, the  following  algorithm  is  followed: 

1.  Form  the  segmented  lattice.  Generate  a  set  of  words  that  match 
the  lattice  well  and  rate  these  seed  matches  for  their  goodness 
of  fit  to  the  segmented  lattice.  Put  the  seed  matches  on  an 
event  queue  ordered  by  their  ratings. 

2.  Take  the  event  at  the  top  of  the  queue  and  send  it  to  the 
parser,  which  will  reject  it,  find  that  it  constitutes  a  whole 
sentence,  or  propose  words  or  categories  of  words  that  can  ex- 
tend the  event. 

3.  Use  the  lexical  retrieval  component  to  predict  between- word  con- 
text effects  for  each  of  the  proposals  made  by  the  parser.  Rate 
the  proposals  and  put  them  on  the  event  list. 

4.  Before  selecting  the  highest  rating  event  from  the  event  list  for 
further  expansion,  some  additional  processing  is  needed.  One 
task  is  to  check  the  event  list  for  islands  of  words  that  have 
proposed  the  same  word  as  an  extension.  If  the  proposed  word 
forms  a  bridge  between  the  islands,  then  a  collision  event  that 
includes  both  islands  is  added  to  the  event  list.  Another 
process  is  used  to  check  for  the  possibility  that  a  proposed 
extension  exhausts  the  words  in  the  sentence.  This  is  called  an 
end  event 

5.  Unless  the  resources  allowed  to  HWTM  for  this  sentence  have 
been  exhausted,  return  to  (2). 

The  HWTM  system  allows  for  many  variations  on  this  control  strat- 
egy. In  particular,  some  search  strategies  were  designed  to  be  admis- 
sible, which  means  that  any  solution  they  find  is  guaranteed  to  be  the 
best  possible  solution  (see  Article  n.C3b).  In  general,  admissible  strat- 
egies require  more  processing  time  than  approximate  methods  that  do 
not  guarantee  the  best  possible  solution  (e.g.,  the  heuristic  beam  search 
used  in  HARPY).  One  powerful  admissible  strategy,  a  middle-out 
control  strategy  using  the  shortfall  density  metric  for  scoring  alternative 
theories,  was  discovered  to  be  not  much  more  expensive  than  approx- 
imate methods,  although  it  was  still  not  used  in  the  final  tests  of  HWTM 
because  of  time  limitations  (see  Wolf  and  Woods,  1980,  p.  327). 

A  hybrid  strategy  for  focus  of  attention  is  used  in  HWTM.  Rather 
than  processing  words  in  strictly  left-to-right  order  (as  in  HARPY)  or  by 
expanding  islands  wherever  they  are  found  (as  in  HEARSAY),  HWIM  was 
most  successful  when  it  was  configured  to  find  an  island  in  the  first 
part  of  the  sentence,  expand  it  backwards  to  the  beginning  of  the  sen- 
tence,   and   then    continue   to   the   end   of  the    sentence.      This   method 


C3  HWIM  357 

overcame  the  problem  of  identifying  incorrectly  the  first  word  in  a  left- 
to-right  strategy  and  the  combinatorial  problems  of  following  alternative 
extensions  of  multiple  islands  (see  Article  v.b). 

In  most  speech  systems,  it  is  assumed  that  the  order  in  which  hy- 
potheses are  expanded  is  a  function  of  their  scores.  High-scoring  hypoth- 
eses are  expanded  before  lower  scoring  ones.  In  HWIM,  much  effort 
went  into  designing  scoring  and  scheduling  policies  for  theories.  One 
result  of  this  was  that  the  intuitive  scheduling  algorithm  mentioned 
above  is  not  optimal  in  HWIM.  Used  instead  is  the  shortfall  density 
strategy,  which  involves  the  difference  between  a  theory's  score  and  its 
ideal  score  divided  by  the  length  of  the  theory  in  segments. 

References 

See  Wolf  and  Woods  (1980)  and  the  earlier  report  by  the  BBN 
speech  group  (Woods  et  al.,  1976). 


C4.     The  SRI/SDC  Speech  Systems 

One  of  the  ARPA  speech  understanding  projects  was  to  be  under- 
taken jointly  by  SRI  International  and  Systems  Development  Corpora- 
tion (SDC).  The  low-end  portions  of  the  system — signal-processing, 
acoustics,  and  phonetics — were  developed  at  SDC  from  earlier  work  done 
there  on  speech  recognition  systems.  SRI  was  to  provide  the  top-end 
of  the  system — parsing,  syntax,  semantics,  pragmatics,  and  discourse- 
analysis.  Unfortunately,  the  two  components  were  never  actually  merged. 
The  SDC  research  stressed  the  bottom-end  processing  involved  in  speech 
understanding — encoding  and  analysis  of  the  speech  waveform  (although 
a  top-end  processor  was  eventually  developed  to  make  testing  and 
evaluation  possible).  Several  interesting  aspects  of  the  SDC  system  are 
described  in  Barnett  et  al.  (1980). 

The  SRI  speech  understanding  research  extended  earlier  work  in 
natural  language  understanding  and  knowledge  representation.  The  top- 
end  system  was  developed  and  tested  with  simulated  output  from  the 
SDC  bottom-end.  The  important  features  of  the  SRI  speech  understand- 
ing research  included  concern  with  the  nature  of  real  man-machine  dis- 
course, a  language  definition  system  for  specifying  the  input  language  to 
be  understood,  techniques  for  focusing  the  system's  attention  on  certain 
aspects  of  the  dialogue,  top-down  process  control  stressing  phrase-level 
hypothesizing,  knowledge  representation  using  partitioned  semantic 
networks,  and  experimental  evaluation  of  system  design  parameters. 

Discourse 

The  SRI  research  stressed  understanding  spoken  utterances  in  a 
"natural"  environment — a  situation  that  might  realistically  involve  a  per- 
son talking  to  a  computer-based  assistant.  In  particular,  the  two  tasks 
explored  in  the  SRI  work  were  an  information  retrieval  task  and  an 
assembly  task  (in  which  the  computer  acted  as  a  consultant  in  a 
maintainence  work- station  setting).  The  novelty  of  the  SRI  approach  to 
understanding  dialogues  in  these  domains  was  the  concern  with  the 
nature  of  the  actual  discourse:  In  realistic  conversations  focused  on  a 
particular  goal,  partial  utterances  (words  and  phrases)  and  implicit 
references  to  previous  statements  are  common  and  present  special  prob- 
lems for  the  understanding  system. 

For  example,  the  two  questions  What  is  the  depth  of  the  Ethan 
Allen?  and  What  is  its  speed?  both  refer  to  the  ship  Ethan  Allen.  In 
order   to  disambiguate   such   anaphoric   references  (pronoun   reference  to 


C4  The  SRI/SDC  Speech  Systems  359 

previous  phrases),  the  system  must  use  information  gleaned  from  pre- 
vious utterances.  Similarly,  elliptic  references  require  filling  out  incom- 
plete phrases  using  terms  already  mentioned.  For  example,  the  utter- 
ances What  is  the  depth  of  the  Ethan  Allen?  .  .  .  The  Lafayette?  seek  the 
depth  of  both  ships.  Discourse  analysis  is  also  used  to  predict  what 
kinds  of  questions  might  be  expected  in  subsequent  utterances. 

Language  Definition  System 

The  complete  specification  of  the  portion  of  the  English  language  to 
be  accepted  by  the  system  is  provided  in  the  language  definition  system. 
The  lexicon  is  divided  along  semantic  boundaries  into  categories  for 
ships,  countries,  and  so  on  (a  semantic  or  performance  grammar;  see 
Robinson,  1975).  The  language  definition  contains  rules  for  combining 
words  and  phrases  into  larger  phrases.  Associated  with  each  phrase-rule 
are  procedures  for  calculating  attributes  of  member  words  (like  mood, 
number,  meaning  representation,  and  acoustic  form)  and  a  procedure  for 
evaluating  the  acceptability  of  the  phrase  hypothesis  in  context.  These 
rules  also  specify  which  attributes  can  be  assigned  to  the  new  phrase; 
for  example,  they  determine  the  focus  of  the  phrase  or  relate  the  se- 
mantics of  a  particular  word  to  the  whole  phrase.  Prosodic  information 
is  also  included,  such  as  the  expected  change  in  pitch  at  the  end  of  an 
interrogative  utterance. 

Process  Control  and  Focus  of  Attention 

Perhaps  because  it  never  really  had  a  bottom  end  to  work  with,  the 
SRI  system  stressed  top-down  processing  in  its  control  strategy.  Top- 
down  control  allows  the  semantic  information  to  guide  the  search 
through  potentially  ambiguous  acoustic  information.  The  system  is  con- 
trolled from  the  parsing  mechanism  that  tries  to  form  phrases  to  match 
the  acoustic  signal.  The  parser  uses  the  language  definition  system  to 
integrate  all  sources  of  knowledge  in  a  coherent  way.  Thus,  the  main 
program  representation  is  at  the  phrase  level,  a  relatively  large  linguistic 
unit,  with  the  meaning  and  ramifications  (e.g.,  likelihood)  of  each  phrase 
recorded.  Semantic  nets  encode  the  relations  between  concepts,  both  in 
the  static  knowledge  base  and  in  the  representations  of  the  contents  of 
previous  utterances.  Pragmatic  information  is  used  to  predict  likely 
utterances  based  on  previous  utterances. 

The  main  data  structure  for  the  parser  is  the  parse  net,  which  rep- 
resents phrases  generated  by  the  language  definition  system.  The  parse 
net  is  made  up  of  nodes  representing  the  phrases  that  have  been 
generated  and  the  predictions  to  be  examined  (usually  against  acoustic 


360  Understanding  Spoken  Language  V 

data).  Predictions  are  of  the  form:  "Look  for  a  word  of  category  X  at 
location  Y  in  the  utterance."  The  nodes  are  linked  by  connections 
between  unverified  phrases  and  the  predictions  they  spawn.  The  parse 
net  also  contains  attribute  information  such  as  the  expected  start  and 
stop  time  of  the  candidate  phrases.  False  steps  are  avoided  in  the 
parsing  process  by  storing  past  mistakes,  but  the  generated  mistaken 
phrases  can  be  used  again  if  they  are  recognized  as  appropriate  in 
another  context. 

A  task  queue  holds  a  selection  of  operations  waiting  to  be  performed 
to  expand  the  parse  net  (e.g.,  requests  for  checking  the  acoustic  infor- 
mation for  a  specific  word  or  phrase).  Tasks  in  the  queue  are  scheduled 
to  run  according  to  priorities  determined  by  the  language  definition 
system — a  best-first  approach.  To  help  coordinate  the  choice  of  which 
phrases  to  expand  next,  a  particular  part  of  the  parse  net  is  singled  out 
as  being  the  focus  of  attention  and  this  decision  biases  future  decisions 
until  another  area  looks  more  promising.  By  considering  the  topics  of 
most  recent  interest,  focusing  attention  not  only  can  affect  the  amount 
of  processing  needed  but  also  can  be  used  to  disambiguate  utterances 
with  multiple  meanings.  The  parse  is  completed  when  the  task  queue  is 
empty  or  when  limits  on  resources  are  exceeded. 

Knowledge  Representation 

The  system's  knowledge  representation  scheme  was  based  on  the 
partitioned  semantic-net  formalism  (see  Article  IV.F7  on  SRI's  LIFER 
system).  The  scheme  was  used  both  to  encode  the  concepts  of  the  sub- 
ject domain  and  to  represent  the  meaning  of  previous  utterances.  The 
mechanism  of  partitioning  the  network  into  spaces  is  used  to  handle 
quantification,  to  distinguish  real  and  hypothetical  worlds,  and  to  dis- 
tinguish different  levels  of  abstractions.  The  semantic  processor,  for  ex- 
ample, contains  a  series  of  functions  that  map  between  the  surface  and 
the  deep  case  structures;  these  functions  facilitate  suggestions  as  to 
which  surface  features  to  examine,  based  on  semantic  knowledge.  There 
are  also  functions  that  generate  text  (e.g.,  answers)  corresponding  to  a 
given  semantic  net  representation  of  the  intended  meaning  (see  Article 
rv.E). 

Performance  Evaluation 

The  SRI  research  group  made  a  serious  effort  to  evaluate  system- 
atically their  speech  understanding  program.  In  particular,  they  attempt- 
ed to  determine  the  effect  on  the  system's  performance  of  changes  in 
several  design  parameters — for  example,  whether  to  consider  the  current 


C4  The  SRI/SDC  Speech  Systems  361 

context  when  setting  priorities,  whether  to  match  all  possible  words  to 
pick  the  best  versus  taking  the  first  one  above  a  certain  criterion, 
whether  to  process  out  from  known  points  in  the  signal  (island  driving) 
versus  strictly  left-to-right  activity,  and  whether  to  identify  and  use  a 
focus  of  attention  in  assigning  processing  priorities  (see  Paxton,  1976). 

Summary 

The  SRI  system  stressed  the  natural  language  understanding  aspects 
of  the  speech  recognition  problem.  Detailed  symbolic  models  of  the  do- 
main of  discourse  were  available  for  assisting  in  the  interpretation  and 
response  phases  of  the  program. 

References 

See  the  summary  article  by  Walker  (1980)  or  the  extended  dis- 
cussion of  the  system  in  the  book  edited  by  Walker  (1978). 


Bibliography 


List  of  Abbreviations 


Journals,  Technical  Reports,  and  Conference  Proceedings 


AAAI  Conferences  of  the  American  Association  for  AI 

ACM  Journal  of  the  Association  for  Computing  Machinery 

AFIPS  American  Federation  of  Information  Processing  Societies 

AISB  European  Society  for  AI  and  the  Simulation  of  Behavior 

CACM  Communications  of  the  Association  for  Computing  Machinery 

EEEE  Institute  for  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineers 

IFIPS  International  Federation  of  Information  Processing  Societies 

IJCAI  International  Joint  Conferences  on  AI 

SIGART  Newsletter  of  the  ACM  Special  Interest  Group  on  AI 

TINLAP  Workshops  on  Theoretical  Issues  in  Natural  Language  Processing 


Abelson,  R.  1973.  The  structure  of  belief  systems.  In  Schank  and  Colby, 
287-339. 

Adelson-Velskiy,  G.  M.,  Arlazarov,  V.  L.,  and  Donskoy,  M.  V.  1975.  Some 
methods  of  controlling  the  tree  search  in  chess  programs.  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence 6:361-371. 

Aho,  A.  V.,  Hopcroft,  J.  E.,  and  Ullman,  J.  D.  1974.  The  design  and  analysis 
of  computer  algorithms.     Reading,  Mass.:    Addison-Wesley. 

Aikins,  J.  S.  1979.  Prototypes  and  production  rules:  An  approach  to 
knowledge  representation  for  hypothesis  formation.     IJCAI  6,  1-3. 

Akmajian,  A.,  and  Heny,  F.  1975.  An  introduction  to  the  principles  of  trans- 
formational syntax.     Cambridge,  Mass.:     MIT  Press. 

Allen,  J.     1978.     Anatomy  of  LISP.     New  York:     McGraw-Hill. 

Amarel,  S.  1968.  On  representations  of  problems  of  reasoning  about  actions. 
In  D.  Michie  (Ed.),  Machine  intelligence  S.  New  York:  American  Elsevier, 
131-171. 

Anderson,  J.  1976.  Language,  memory,  and  thought.  Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 

Anderson,  J.,  and  Bower,  G.  1973.  Human  associative  memory.  Washington, 
D.C.:     Winston. 

Anderson,  J.,  Kline,  P.,  and  Beasley,  C.  1979.  A  general  learning  theory 
and  its  application  to  schema  abstraction.  In  G.  H.  Bower  (Ed.),  The 
psychology  of  learning  and  motivation  (Vol.  13).  New  York:  Academic  Press, 
277-318. 

Appelt,  D.  1980.  Problem  solving  applied  to  natural  language  generation. 
Proceedings  of  the  Association  of  Computational  Linguistics,  Philadelphia,  59-63. 

ARPA  SUR  Steering  Committee.  1977.  Speech  understanding  systems:  Report 
of  a  steering  committee.     Artificial  Intelligence  9:307-316. 

Bahl,  L.  R.,  Baker,  J.  K.,  Cohen,  P.  S.,  Cole,  A.  G.,  Jelinek,  F.,  Lewis, 
B.  L.,  and  Mercer,  R.  L.  1978.  Automatic  recognition  of  continuously 
spoken  sentences  from  a  finite  state  grammar.  Proceedings  of  the  1978  IEEE 
International  Conference  on  Acoustics,  Speech,  and  Signal  Processing,  Tulsa, 
Oklahoma,  418-421. 

Baker,  J.  K.  1975.  The  DRAGON  system:  An  overview.  IEEE  Transactions 
on  Acoustics,  Speech,  and  Signal  Processing  ASSP-23(1),  24-29. 

Baker,  R.  1973.  A  spatially-oriented  information  processor  which  simulates 
the  motions  of  rigid  objects.     Artificial  Intelligence  4:29-40. 


366  Bibliography 

Bar-Hillel,  Y.  1960.  The  present  status  of  automatic  translation  of  lan- 
guages. In  F.  L.  Alt  (Ed.),  Advances  in  computers  (Vol.  1).  New  York: 
Academic  Press,  91-163. 

Bar-Hillel,  Y.  1964.  Language  and  information.  Reading,  Mass.:  Addison- 
Wesley. 

Barnett,  J.,  Bernstein,  M.,  Gillman,  R.,  and  Kameny,  I.  1980.  The  SDC 
speech  understanding  system.     In  Lea,   Trends,  272-293. 

Barrow,  H.  G.,  Boiles,  R.  C,  Garvey,  T.  D.,  Kremers,  J.  H.,  Lantz,  K., 
Tenenbaum,  J.  M.,  and  Wolf,  H.  C.  1977.  Interactive  aids  for  car- 
tography and  photo  interpretation.  In  L.  S.  Baumann  (Ed.),  Image  under- 
standing: Proceedings  of  a  workshop  held  at  Palo  Alto,  California,  October 
20-21,  1977.  Rep.  No.  SAI-78-656-WA,  Science  Applications,  Inc.,  Sunny- 
vale, Calif.,  111-127. 

Barstow,  D.  R.  1979.  Knowledge-based  program  construction.  New  York:  Amer- 
ican Elsevier. 

Bartlett,  F.  C.  1932.  Remembering:  A  study  in  experimental  and  social  psychol- 
ogy. Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge  University  Press.  Reprinted  in  1977. 

Baudet,  G.  M.  1978.  On  the  branching  factor  of  the  alpha-beta  pruning 
algorithm.     Artificial  Intelligence  10:173-199. 

Berliner,  H.  J.  1973.  Some  necessary  conditions  for  a  master  chess  program. 
IJCAI  S,  77-85. 

Berliner,  H.  J.  1974.  Chess  as  problem  solving:  The  development  of  a  tac- 
tics analyzer.     Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  Carnegie-Mellon  University. 

Berliner,  H.  J.  1977a.  Experiences  in  evaluation  with  BKG — A  program  that 
plays  backgammon.     IJCAI  5,  428-433. 

Berliner,  H.  J.  1977b.  A  representation  and  some  mechanisms  for  a  problem- 
solving  chess  program.  In  M.  R.  B.  Clarke  (Ed.),  Advances  in  computer 
chess  1.     Edinburgh:     Edinburgh  University  Press,  7-29. 

Berliner,  H.  J.     1977c.     Search  and  knowledge.     IJCAI  5,  975-979. 

Berliner,  H.  J.  1978a.  The  B*  search  algorithm:  A  best-first  proof  proce- 
dure. Rep.  No.  CMU-CS-78-112,  Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  Carnegie- 
Mellon  University. 

Berliner,  H.  J.  1978b.  A  chronology  of  computer  chess  and  its  literature. 
Artificial  Intelligence  10:201-214. 

Bernstein,  A.,  Arbuckle,  T.,  Roberts,  M.  de  V.,  and  Belsky,  M.  A.  1959.  A 
chess  playing  program  for  the  IBM  704.  In  Proceedings  of  the  Western  Joint 
Computer  Conference,  1958.  New  York:  American  Institute  of  Electrical 
Engineers,  157-159. 

Bernstein,  M.  I.  1977.  Knowledge-based  systems:  A  tutorial.  Rep.  No.  TM- 
(L)-5903/000/00A,  Systems  Development  Corporation,  Santa  Monica,  Calif. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.  1968.  Natural  language  input  for  a  computer  problem- 
solving  system.     In  Minsky,  146-226. 


Bibliography  367 

Bobrow,  D.  G.  1975.  Dimensions  of  representation.  In  Bobrow  and  Collins, 
1-34. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.,  and  Collins,  A.  (Eds.).  1975.  Representation  and  understanding: 
Studies  in  cognitive  science.     New  York:     Academic  Press. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.,  and  Fraser,  B.  1969.  An  augmented  state  transition  net- 
work analysis  procedure.     IJCAI  1,  557-567. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.,  Kaplan,  R.  M.,  Kay,  M.,  Norman,  D.  A.,  Thompson,  H.,  and 
Winograd,  T.  1977.  GUS,  a  frame-driven  dialog  system.  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence 8:155-173. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.,  and  Winograd,  T.  1977a.  Experience  with  KRL-0,  one  cycle 
of  a  knowledge  representation  language.     IJCAI  5,  213-222. 

Bobrow,  D.  G.,  and  Winograd,  T.  1977b.  An  overview  of  KRL,  a  knowledge 
representation  language.     Cognitive  Science  1:3-46. 

Boden,  M.  1977.  Artificial  intelligence  and  natural  man.  New  York:  Basic  Books. 

Booth,  A.  D.  (Ed.).     1967.     Machine  translation.     Amsterdam:     North-Holland. 

Bott,  M.  F.  1970.  Computational  linguistics.  In  J.  Lyons  (Ed.),  New  hori- 
zons in  linguistics.     Harmondsworth,  England:     Penguin  Books,  215-228. 

Brachman,  R.  J.  1978.  A  structural  paradigm  for  representing  knowledge. 
Rep.  No.  3605,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Brachman,  R.  J.  1979.  What's  in  a  concept:  Structural  foundations  for 
semantic  networks.     In  Findler,  3-50. 

Brachman,  R.  J.,  and  Smith,  B.  C.  1980.  SIGART  Newsletter  70  (special 
issue  on  knowledge  representation). 

Bratko,  L,  Kopec,  D.,  and  Michie,  D.  1978.  Pattern-based  representation  of 
chess  end-game  knowledge.     Computer  J.  21:149-153. 

Bresnan,  J.  1978.  A  realistic  transformational  grammar.  In  M.  Halle, 
J.  Bresnan,  and  G.  A.  Miller  (Eds.),  Linguistic  theory  and  psychological  reality. 
Cambridge,  Mass.:     MIT  Press,  1-59. 

Brooks,  R.  1977.  Production  systems  as  control  structures  for  programming 
languages.     SIGART  Newsletter  63:33-37. 

Bruce,  B.  1975.  Case  systems  for  natural  language.  Artificial  Intelligence 
6:327-360. 

Bullwinkle,  C.  1977.  Levels  of  complexity  in  discourse  for  anaphora  dis- 
ambiguation and  speech  act  interpretation.     IJCAI  5,  43-49. 

Burton,  R.  R.  1976.  Semantic  grammar:  An  engineering  technique  for  con- 
structing natural  language  understanding  systems.  BBN  Rep.  No.  3453, 
Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Burton,  R.  R.,  and  Brown,  J.  S.  1979.  Toward  a  natural-language  capa- 
bility for  computer-assisted  instruction.  In  H.  O'Neil  (Ed.),  Procedures  for 
instructional  systems  development.     New  York:     Academic  Press,  273-313. 


368  Bibliography 

Carbonell,  J.  R.  1970.  AI  in  CAI:  An  artificial  intelligence  approach  to 
computer-assisted  instruction.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Man-Machine  Systems 
MMS-ll:190-202. 

Carbonell,  J.  R.,  and  Collins,  A.  M.  1974.  Natural  semantics  in  AI.  IJCAI 
S,  344-351. 

Chafe,  W.  L.  1972.  Discourse  structure  and  human  knowledge.  In  R.  O. 
Freedle  and  J.  B.  Carroll  (Eds.),  Language  comprehension  and  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge.    Washington,  D.C.:     Winston,  41-69. 

Chang,  C.  L.,  and  Slagle,  J.  R.  1971.  An  admissible  and  optimal  algorithm 
for  searching  AND/OR  graphs.     Artificial  Intelligence  2:117-128. 

Charness,  N.     1977.     Human  chess  skill.     In  Frey,  34-53. 

Charniak,  E.  1972.  Toward  a  model  of  children's  story  comprehension. 
Rep.  No.  TR-266,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Charniak,  E.  1975.  A  brief  on  case.  Rep.  No.  22,  Institute  for  Semantic 
and  Cognitive  Studies,  Castagnola,  Switzerland. 

Charniak,  E.  1978.  With  spoon  in  hand  this  must  be  the  Eating  frame. 
TINLAP-2,  187-193. 

Charniak,  E.,  Riesbeck,  C.  K.,  and  McDermott,  D.  V.  1980.  Artificial  intel- 
ligence programming.     Hillsdale,  N.J.:     Lawrence  Erlbaum. 

Charniak,  E.,  and  Wilks,  Y.  1976.  Computational  semantics:  An  introduction 
to  artificial  intelligence  and  natural  language  comprehension.  Amsterdam: 
North-Holland. 

Chomsky,  N.  1956.  Three  models  for  the  description  of  language.  IRE 
Transactions  on  Information  Theory  2:113-124.  (Also  in  R.  D.  Luce,  R.  Bush, 
and  E.  Galanter,  Eds.,  Readings  in  mathematical  psychology.  New  York: 
Wiley,  1965,  105-124.) 

Chomsky,  N.     1957.     Syntactic  structures.     The  Hague:     Mouton. 

Chomsky,  N.  1959.  On  certain  formal  properties  of  grammars.  Information  and 
Control  2:137-167.  (Also  in  R.  D.  Luce,  R.  Bush,  and  E.  Galanter,  Eds., 
Readings  in  mathematical  psychology.  New  York:  Wiley,  1965,  125-155.) 

Chomsky,  N.  1965.  Aspects  of  the  theory  of  syntax.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT 
Press. 

Chomsky,  N.  1963.  Formal  properties  of  grammars.  In  R.  D.  Luce,  R.  Bush, 
and  E.  Galanter  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  mathematical  psychology  (Vol.  2).  New 
York:  Wiley,  323-418. 

Chomsky,  N.  1971.  Deep  structure,  surface  structure,  and  semantic  inter- 
pretation.    In  Steinberg  and  Jakobovits,  183-216. 

Clippinger,  J.  H.,  Jr.  1975.  Speaking  with  many  tongues:  Some  problems 
in  modeling  speakers  of  actual  discourse.     TINLAP-1,  78-83. 

C.M.U.  Speech  Group.  1977.  Speech  understanding  systems:  Summary  of 
results  of  the  five-year  research  effort  at  Carnegie-Mellon  University. 
Computer  Science  Dept.  Tech.  Report,  Carnegie-Mellon  University. 


Bibliography  369 

Codd,  E.  F.  1974.  Seven  steps  to  rendezvous  with  the  casual  user.  In  J.  W. 
Klimbie  and  K.  L.  Koffeman  (Eds.),  Data  base  management  Amsterdam: 
North-Holland,  179-200. 

Cohen,  P.  R.  1978.  On  knowing  what  to  say:  Planning  speech  acts. 
Tech.  Rep.  118,  Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  University  of  Toronto. 

Cohen,  P.  R.,  and  Perrault,  C.  R.  1979.  Elements  of  a  plan-based  theory 
of  speech  acts.     Cognitive  Science  3:177-212. 

Colby,  K.,  Weber,  S.,  and  Hilf,  F.  1971.  Artificial  paranoia.  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence 2:1-25. 

Cole,  R.  A.  1979.  Navigating  the  slippery  stream  of  speech.  Psychology 
Today  (12):11,  77-87. 

COLING76.  1976.  Preprints  of  the  6th  International  Conference  on  Computational 
Linguistics,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  Canada,  June  1976. 

Conway,  M.  E.  1963.  Design  of  a  separable  transition-diagram  compiler. 
CACM  6:396-408. 

Culicover,  P.  W.,  Wasow,  T.,  and  Akmajian,  A.  1977.  Formal  syntax.  New 
York:    Academic  Press. 

Davies,  D.  J.  M.  1972.  POPLER:  A  POP-2  Planner.  Rep.  No.  MIP-89, 
School  of  AI,  University  of  Edinburgh. 

Davis,  R.  In  press.  The  application  of  meta-level  knowledge  to  the  con- 
struction, maintenance,  and  use  of  large  knowledge  bases.  In  Davis  and 
Lenat. 

Davis,  R.,  and  Buchanan,  B.  G.  1977.  Meta-level  knowledge:  Overview  and 
applications.     IJCAI  5,  920-927. 

Davis,  R.,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  and  Shortliffe,  E.  H.  1977.  Production  rules  as 
a  representation  for  a  knowledge-based  consultation  system.  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence 8:15-45. 

Davis,  R.,  and  King,  J.  J.  1977.  An  overview  of  production  systems.  In 
E.  Elcock  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  8.  Chichester,  England: 
Ellis  Horwood,  300-332. 

Davis,  R.,  and  Lenat,  D.  B.  In  press.  Knowledge-based  systems  in  artificial 
intelligence.     New  York:     McGraw-Hill. 

de  Champeaux,  D.,  and  Sint,  L.  1977.  An  improved  bi-directional  heuristic 
search  algorithm.     J.  ACM  24:177-191. 

Dijkstra,  E.  W.  1959.  A  note  on  two  problems  in  connection  with  graphs. 
Numerische  Mathematik  1:269-271. 

Doran,  J.  E.  1967.  An  approach  to  automatic  problem- solving.  In  N.  L. 
Collins  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  1.  New  York:  American 
Elsevier,  105-123. 

Doran,  J.  E.,  and  Michie,  D.  1966.  Experiments  with  the  graph  traverser 
program.     Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London  (Series  A)  294:235-259. 

Dreyfus,  H.  L.  1972.   What  computers  can't  do.     New  York:  Harper  and  Row. 


370  Bibliography 

Duda,  R.  O.,  Hart,  P.  E.,  Nilsson,  N.  J.,  and  Sutherland,  G.  L.  1978.  Seman- 
tic network  representations  in  rule-based  inference  systems.  In  Waterman 
and  Hayes-Roth,  203-221. 

Eastman,  C.  M.    1970.  Representations  for  space  planning.  CACM  13:242-250. 

Eastman,  C.  M.  1973.  Automated  space  planning.  Artificial  Intelligence  4:41- 
64. 

Elcock,  E.  W.  1977.  Representation  of  knowledge  in  a  geometry  machine. 
In  E.  W.  Elcock  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  8.  New  York: 
Wiley,  11-29. 

Erman,  L.  D.,  Fennell,  R.  D.,  Lesser,  V.  R.,  and  Reddy,  D.  R.  1976. 
System  organizations  for  speech  understanding:  Implications  of  network  and 
multiprocessor  computer  architectures  for  AI.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Com- 
puters C-25(4):414-421. 

Erman,  L.  D.,  Hayes-Roth,  F.,  Lesser,  V.  R.,  and  Reddy,  D.  R.  1980.  The 
HEARSAY-n  speech  understanding  system:  Integrating  knowledge  to  resolve 
uncertainty.     Computing  Surveys  12(2):213-253. 

Erman,  L.  D.,  and  Lesser,  V.  R.  1975.  A  multi-level  organization  for  prob- 
lem solving  using  many  diverse,  cooperating  sources  of  knowledge.  IJCAI  4, 
483-490. 

Erman,  L.  D.,  and  Lesser,  V.  R.  1980.  The  HEARSAY-H  speech  under- 
standing system:     A  tutorial.     In  Lea,   Trends,  361-381. 

Ernst,  G.,  and  Newell,  A.  1969.  GPS:  A  case  study  in  generality  and  problem 
solving.     New  York:    Academic  Press. 

Fahlman,  S.  E.  1974.  A  planning  system  for  robot  construction  tasks.  Arti- 
ficial Intelligence  5:1-49. 

Fahlman,  S.  E.  1975.  Symbol-mapping  and  frames.  SIGART  Newsletter  53:7-8. 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1969.  Artificial  intelligence:  Themes  in  the  second  decade. 
In  A.  J.  H.  Morrell  (Ed.),  Information  processing  68:  Proceedings  IFIP  Congress 
1968  (Vol.  2).     Amsterdam:     North-Holland,  1008-1024. 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1977.  The  art  of  artificial  intelligence:  Themes  and  case 
studies  of  knowledge  engineering.     IJCAI  5,  1014-1029. 

Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  and  Feldman,  J.  (Eds.).  1963.  Computers  and  thought. 
New  York:     McGraw-Hill. 

Fikes,  R.  E.,  Hart,  P.,  and  Nilsson,  N.  J.  1972.  Learning  and  executing 
generalized  robot  plans.     Artificial  Intelligence  3:251-288. 

Fikes,  R.  E.,  and  Hendrix,  G.  1977.  A  Network-based  knowledge  repre- 
sentation and  its  natural  deduction  system.     IJCAI  5,  235-246. 

Fikes,  R.  E.,  and  Nilsson,  N.  J.  1971.  STRIPS:  A  new  approach  to  the 
application  of  theorem  proving  to  problem  solving.  Artificial  Intelligence 
2:189-208. 

Fillmore,  C.  1968.  The  case  for  case.  In  E.  Bach  and  R.  Harms  (Eds.), 
Universals  in  linguistic  theory.  New  York:  Holt,  Rinehart,  and  Winston, 
1-88. 


Bibliography  371 

Fillmore,  C.  1971a.  Some  problems  for  case  grammar.  In  R.  J.  O'Brien 
(Ed.),  Report  of  the  twenty-second  annual  round  table  meeting  on  linguistics  and 
language  studies.  (Monograph  Series  on  Languages  and  Linguistics,  No.  24.) 
Washington,  D.C.:     Georgetown  University  Press,  35-56. 

Fillmore,  C.  1971b.  Types  of  lexical  information.  In  Steinberg  and  Jakob- 
ovits,  370-392. 

Filman,  R.  E.  1979.  The  interaction  of  observation  and  inference  in  a 
formal  representation  system.     IJCAI  6,  269-274. 

Filman,  R.  E.,  and  Weyhrauch,  R.  W.  1976.  An  FOL  primer.  Memo  288, 
AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 

Findler,  N.  V.  (Ed.).  1979.  Associative  networks:  The  representation  and  use  of 
knowledge  by  computers.     New  York:     Academic  Press. 

Flanagan,  J.,  Levinson,  S.,  Rabiner,  L.,  and  Rosenberg,  A.  1980.  Tech- 
niques for  expanding  the  capabilities  of  practical  speech  recognizers.  In 
Lea,   Trends,  425-444. 

Flavell,  J.  H.  1977.  Cognitive  development.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice- 
Hall. 

Flavell,  J.  H.  1979.  Metacognition  and  cognitive  monitoring:  A  new  area  for 
cognitive-developmental  inquiry.     American  Psychologist  34:906-911. 

Forgy,  C,  and  McDermott,  J.  1977.  OPS,  a  domain-independent  production 
system  language.     IJCAI  5,  933-939. 

Fox,  M.  In  press.  An  organizational  view  of  distributed  systems.  IEEE  Trans- 
actions on  Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics. 

Frey,  P.  W.  (Ed.).  1977.  Chess  skill  in  man  and  machine.  New  York:  Springer- 
Verlag. 

Friedman,  J.  1969.  Directed  random  generation  of  sentences.  CACM  12:40-46. 

Friedman,  J.  1971.  A  computer  model  of  transformational  grammar.  New  York: 
American  Elsevier. 

Fuller,  S.  H.,  Gaschnig,  J.  G.,  and  Gillogly,  J.  J.  1973.  Analysis  of  the 
alpha-beta  pruning  algorithm.  Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  Carnegie-Mellon 
University. 

Funt,  B.  V.  1976.  WHISPER:  A  computer  implementation  using  analogs  in 
reasoning.  Rep.  No.  76-09,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  University  of  British 
Columbia. 

Funt,  B.  V.  1977.  WHISPER:  A  problem-solving  system  utilizing  diagrams 
and  aparallel  processing  retina.     IJCAI  5,  459-464. 

Garvey,  T.,  and  Kling,  R.  1969.  User's  guide  to  QA3.5  question-answering 
system.  Tech.  Note  15,  AI  Group,  Stanford  Research  Institute,  Menlo  Park, 
Calif. 

Gaschnig,  J.  1977.  Exactly  how  good  are  heuristics?  Toward  a  realistic  pre- 
dictive theory  of  best-first  search.     IJCAI  5,  434-441. 


372  Bibliography 

Gelernter,  H.  1959.  A  note  on  syntactic  symmetry  and  the  manipulation  of 
formal  systems  by  machine.     Information  and  Control  2:80-89. 

Gelernter,  H.  1963.  Realization  of  a  geometry-theorem  proving  machine.  In 
Feigenbaum  and  Feldman,  134-152. 

Gelernter,  H.,  Hansen,  J.  R.,  and  Gerberich,  C.  L.  1960.  A  FORTRAN- 
compiled  list  processing  language.     /.  ACM  7:87-101. 

Gelernter,  H.,  Hansen,  J.  R.,  and  Loveland,  D.  W.  1963.  Empirical  ex- 
plorations of  the  geometry-theorem  proving  machine.  In  Feigenbaum  and 
Feldman,  153-163. 

Gelernter,  H.,  and  Rochester,  N.  1958.  Intelligent  behavior  in  problem- 
solving  machines.     IBM  J.  Research  and  Development  2:336-345. 

Gelperin,  D.     1977.     On  the  optimality  of  A*.    Artificial  Intelligence  8:69-76. 

Gentner,  D.,  and  Collins,  A.  M.  In  press.  Knowing  about  knowing:  Effects 
of  meta-knowledge  on  inference.     In  Memory  and  Cognition. 

Gillogly,  J.  J.  1972.  The  technology  chess  program.  Artificial  Intelligence 
3:145-163. 

Gilmore,  P.  C.  1970.  An  examination  of  the  geometry  theorem  machine. 
Artificial  Intelligence  2:171-187. 

Goldman,  N.     1975.     Conceptual  generation.     In  Schank,  289-371. 

Goldstein,  I.  P.,  and  Roberts,  R.  B.  1977.  NUDGE,  a  knowledge-based 
scheduling  program.     IJCAI  5,  257-263. 

Good,  I.  J.  1968.  A  five-year  plan  for  automatic  chess.  In  E.  Dale  and 
D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  2.  New  York:  American  Elsevier,  89- 
118. 

Green,  B.  F.,  Jr.,  Wolf,  A.  K.,  Chomsky,  C,  and  Laughery,  K.  1963. 
BASEBALL:  An  automatic  question  answerer.  In  Feigenbaum  and  Feld- 
man, 207-216. 

Green,  C.  C.  1969.  The  application  of  theorem-proving  to  question- answering 
systems.     IJCAI  1,  219-237. 

Greenblatt,  R.  D.,  Eastlake,  D.  E.,  and  Crocker,  S.  D.  1967.  The  Green- 
blatt  chess  program.  In  AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings,  Fall  Joint  Computer 
Conference,  1967.     Washington,  D.C.:     Thompson,  801-810. 

Griffith,  A.  K.  1974.  A  comparison  and  evaluation  of  three  machine  learn- 
ing procedures  as  applied  to  the  game  of  checkers.  Artificial  Intelligence 
5:137-148. 

Grishman,  R.  1976.  A  survey  of  syntactic  analysis  procedures  for  natural 
language.     American  Journal  of  Computational  Linguistics,  Microfiche  47. 

Grosz,  B.  J.  1980.  Utterance  and  objective:  Issues  in  natural  language  com- 
munication.    AI  Magazine  1:11-20. 

Hall,  P.  A.  V.     1971.     Branch-and-bound  and  beyond.     IJCAI  2,  641-650. 

Halliday,  M.  A.  K.  1961.  Categories  of  the  theory  of  grammar.  Word  17:241- 
292. 


Bibliography  373 

Halliday,  M.  A.  K.  1967-68.  Notes  on  transitivity  and  theme  in  English. 
Journal  of  Linguistics  3:37-81,  199-244;  4:179-215. 

Halliday,  M.  A.  K.  1970a.  Functional  diversity  in  language  as  seen  from  a 
consideration  of  modality  and  mood  in  English.  Foundations  of  Language 
6:322-361. 

Halliday,  M.  A.  K.  1970b.  Language  structure  and  language  function.  In 
J.  Lyons  (Ed.),  New  horizons  in  linguistics.  Harmon  dsworth,  England: 
Penguin  Books,  140-165. 

Hanson,  A.  R.,  and  Riseman,  E.  M.  (Eds.).  1978a.  Computer  vision  systems. 
New  York:    Academic  Press. 

Hanson,  A.  R.,  and  Riseman,  E.  M.  1978b.  VISIONS:  A  computer  system 
for  interpreting  scenes.     In  Hanson  and  Riseman,  303-333. 

Harman,  G.  (Ed.).  1974.  On  Noam  Chomsky:  Critical  essays.  Garden  City,  N.Y.: 
Anchor  Books. 

Harris,  L.  R.     1973.     The  bandwidth  heuristic  search.     IJCAI  S,  23-29. 

Harris,  L.  R.  1974.  The  heuristic  search  under  conditions  of  error.  Artificial 
Intelligence  5:217-234. 

Harris,  L.  R.  1975.  The  heuristic  search  and  the  game  of  chess:  A  study 
of  quiescence,  sacrifices,  and  plan  oriented  play.     IJCAI  4,  334-339. 

Harris,  L.  R.  1977a.  The  heuristic  search:  An  alternative  to  the  alpha-beta 
minimax  procedure.     In  Frey,  157-166. 

Harris,  L.  R.  1977b.  ROBOT:  A  high  performance  natural  language  pro- 
cessor for  data  base  query.     SIGART  Newsletter  61:39-40. 

Harris,  L.  1979.  Experience  with  ROBOT  in  twelve  commercial  natural  lan- 
guage data  base  query  applications.     IJCAI  6,  365-368. 

Hart,  P.  E.,  Nilsson,  N.  J.,  and  Raphael,  B.  1968.  A  formal  basis  for  the 
heuristic  determination  of  minimum  cost  paths.  IEEE  Transactions  on  SSC 
SSC-4:100-107. 

Hart,  P.  E.,  Nilsson,  N.  J.,  and  Raphael,  B.  1972.  Correction  to  'A  formal 
basis  for  the  heuristic  determination  of  minimum  cost  paths.'  SIGART 
Newsletter  37:28-29. 

Hayes,  P.  J.  1973.  Computation  and  deduction.  Symposium  on  mathematical 
foundations  of  computer  science,  Czechslovakia  Academy  of  Science. 

Hayes,  P.  J.  1974.  Some  problems  and  non-problems  in  representation  the- 
ory. British  Computer  Society,  AI  and  Simulation  of  Behavior  Group  summer 
conference,  University  of  Sussex,  63-79. 

Hayes,  P.  J.     1977a.     In  defence  of  logic.     IJCAI  5,  559-565. 

Hayes,  P.  J.  1977b.  On  semantic  nets,  frames,  and  associations.  IJCAI  5, 
99-107. 

Hayes-Roth,  B.,  and  Hayes-Roth,  F.  1979.  A  cognitive  model  of  planning. 
Cognitive  Science  3:275-310. 


374  Bibliography- 

Hays,  D.  G.,  and  Mathias,  J.  (Eds.).  1976.  FBIS  seminar  on  machine  trans- 
lation.    American  Journal  of  Computational  Linguistics,  Microfiche  46. 

Hearst,  E.  1977.  Man  and  machine:  Chess  achievements  and  chess  think- 
ing.    In  Frey,  167-200. 

Hedrick,  C.  1976.  Learning  production  systems  from  examples.  Artificial 
Intelligence  7:21-49. 

Heidorn,  G.  E.  1976.  Automatic  programming  through  natural  language 
dialogue:     A  survey.     IBM  J.  Research  and  Development  20:302-313. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.  1976.  Expanding  the  utility  of  semantic  networks  through 
partitioning.     Artificial  Intelligence  7:21-49. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.  1977a.  Human  engineering  for  applied  natural  language  pro- 
cessing.    IJCAI  5,  183-191. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.  1977b.  LIFER:  A  natural  language  interface  facility.  SIGART 
Newsletter  61:25-26. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.  1977c.  The  LIFER  manual:  A  guide  to  building  practical 
natural  language  interfaces.  Tech.  Note  138,  Artificial  Intelligence  Center, 
SRI  International,  Inc.,  Menlo  Park,  Calif. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.,  Sacerdoti,  E.  D.,  Sagalowicz,  D.,  and  Slocum,  J.  1978.  De- 
veloping a  natural  language  interface  to  complex  data.  ACM  Transactions 
on  Database  Systems  3:105-147. 

Hendrix,  G.  G.,  Thompson,  C,  and  Slocum,  J.  1973.  Language  processing 
via  canonical  verbs  and  semantic  models.     IJCAI  S,  262-269. 

Heuristic  Programming  Project— 1980.  1980.  Computer  Science  Department,  Stan- 
ford University. 

Hewitt,  C.  1972.  Description  and  theoretical  analysis  (using  schemata)  of 
PLANNER,  a  language  for  proving  theorems  and  manipulating  models  in  a 
robot.  Rep.  No.  TR-258,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Tech- 
nology. 

Hewitt,  C.     1975.     How  to  use  what  you  know.     IJCAI  4,  189-198. 

Hillier,  F.  S.,  and  Lieberman,  G.  J.  1974.  Operations  research  (2nd  ed.). 
San  Francisco:     Holden-Day. 

Hofstadter,  D.  1979.  Godel,  Escher,  Bach:  an  eternal  golden  braid.  New  York: 
Basic  Books. 

Hopcroft,  J.  E.,  and  Ullman,  J.  D.  1969.  Formal  languages  and  their  relation 
to  automata.     Reading,  Mass.:     Addison- Wesley. 

Hudson,  R.  A.  1971.  English  complex  sentences:  An  introduction  to  systemic  gram- 
mar.    Amsterdam:     North-Holland. 

Hudson,  R.  A.  1976.  Arguments  for  a  non-transformational  grammar.  Chicago: 
University  of  Chicago  Press. 

Jackendoff,  R.     1975.     A  system  of  semantic  primitives.     TINLAP-1,  28-33. 

Jackendoff,  R.  1976.  Toward  an  explanatory  semantic  representation.  Lin- 
guistic Inquiry  7:89-150. 


Bibliography  375 

Jackson,  P.  C.  1974.  Introduction  to  artificial  intelligence.  New  York:  Petro- 
celli. 

Josselson,  H.  H.  1971.  Automatic  translation  of  languages  since  1960:  A 
linguist's  view.  In  M.  C.  Yovits  (Ed.),  Advances  in  computers  (Vol.  11). 
New  York:     Academic  Press,  1-58. 

Kaplan,  R.  M.     1973.     A  general  syntactic  processor.     In  Rustin,  193-241. 

Kaplan,  S.  J.  1979.  Cooperative  responses  from  a  portable  natural  language  data 
base  query  system.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Dept.  of  Computer  and  Information 
Science,  University  of  Pennsylvania. 

Karp,  R.  M.  1972.  Reducibility  among  combinatorial  problems.  In  R.  E. 
Miller  and  J.  W.  Thatcher  (Eds.),  Complexity  of  computer  computations.  New 
York:     Plenum  Press,  85-103. 

Katz,  J.,  and  Postal,  P.  1964.  An  integrated  theory  of  linguistic  descriptions. 
Cambridge,  Mass.:     MIT  Press. 

Kay,  M.     1973.     The  MIND  system.     In  Rustin,  155-188. 

Kellogg,  C.  1968.  A  natural  language  compiler  for  on-line  data  manage- 
ment. AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings  88,  1968  Fall  Joint  Computer  Conference. 
Washington,  D.C.:     Thompson,  473-492. 

Kister,  J.,  Stein,  P.,  Ulam,  S.,  Walden,  W.,  and  Wells,  M.  1957.  Experi- 
ments in  chess.     J.  ACM  4:174-177. 

Klatt,  D.  H.  1977.  Review  of  the  ARPA  speech  understanding  project. 
Journal  of  the  Acoustical  Society  of  America  62:1345-1366. 

Klein,  S.  1965.  Automatic  paraphrasing  in  essay  format.  Mechanical  Trans- 
lation 88:68-83. 

Klein,  S.,  and  Simmons,  R.  F.  1963.  Syntactic  dependence  and  the  com- 
puter generation  of  coherent  discourse.     Mechanical  Translation  7:50-61. 

Knuth,  D.  1973.  The  art  of  computer  programming:  Fundamental  algorithms 
(Vol.  1,  2nd  ed.).     Reading,  Mass.:     Addison- Wesley. 

Knuth,  D.  1979.  TEX  and  Metafont:  New  directions  in  typesetting.  Providence, 
R.I.:     American  Mathematical  Society  and  Bedford,  Mass.:     Digital  Press. 

Knuth,  D.  E.,  and  Moore,  R.  W.  1975.  An  analysis  of  alpha-beta  pruning. 
Artificial  intelligence  6:293-326. 

Kotok,  A.  1962.  A  chess  playing  program.  RLE  and  MIT  Computation 
Center  Memo  41,  Artificial  Intelligence  Project,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology. 

Kowalski,  R.  1972.  And-or  graphs,  theorem-proving  graphs,  and  bi-direc- 
tional search.  In  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  7. 
New  York:     Wiley,  167-194. 

Kowalski,  R.  1974.  Predicate  logic  as  a  programming  language.  IFIP  74. 
Amsterdam:     North-Holland,  569-574. 

Kuipers,  B.  1975.  A  frame  for  frames:  Representing  knowledge  for  recog- 
nition.    In  Bobrow  and  Collins,  151-184. 


376  Bibliography 

Landsbergen,  S.  P.  J.  1976.  Syntax  and  formal  semantics  of  English  in 
PHLIQA1.  In  L.  Steels  (Ed.),  Advances  in  natural  language  processing.  Ant- 
werp, Belgium:     University  of  Antwerp. 

Lawler,  E.  W.,  and  Wood,  D.  E.  1966.  Branch-and-bound  methods:  A  sur- 
vey.    Operations  Research  14:699-719. 

Lea,  W.  1980a.  Speech  recognition:  Past,  present,  and  future.  In  Lea, 
Trends,  39-89. 

Lea,  W.  (Ed.).  1980b.  Trends  in  speech  recognition.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.: 
Prentice-Hall. 

Lea,  W.  1980c.  The  value  of  speech  recognition  systems.  In  Lea,  Trends, 
3-18. 

Lea,  W.,  and  Shoup,  J.  1980.  Specific  contributions  of  the  ARPA  SUR 
project.     In  Lea,   Trends,  382-421. 

Lehnert,  W.  C.  1978.  The  process  of  question  answering:  A  computer  simulation 
of  cognition.    Hillsdale,  N.J.:     Lawrence  Erlbaum. 

Lenat,  D.  B.  In  press.  AM:  An  AI  approach  to  discovery  in  mathematics. 
In  Davis  and  Lenat. 

Lenat,  D.  B.,  and  McDermott,  J.  1977.  Less  than  general  production  sys- 
tem architectures.     IJCAI  5,  928-932. 

Lesser,  V.  R.,  and  Erman,  L.  D.  In  press.  Distributed  interpretation:  A 
model  and  experiment.     In  IEEE  Transactions  on  Computers. 

Levi,  G.,  and  Sirovich,  F.  1975.  A  problem  reduction  model  for  non- 
independent  subproblems.     IJCAI  4,  340-344. 

Levi,  G.,  and  Sirovich,  F.  1976.  Generalized  AND/OR  graphs.  Artificial 
Intelligence  7:243-259. 

Levine,  M.  D.  1978.  A  knowledge-based  computer  vision  system.  In  A.  Han- 
son and  E.  Riseman  (Eds.),  Computer  vision  systems.  New  York:  Academic 
Press,  335-352. 

Levy,  D.  1979.  The  computer  chess  revolution.  Chess  Life  and  Review 
(February):84-85. 

Lindsay,  R.  K.  1963a.  Inferential  memory  as  the  basis  of  machines  which 
understand  natural  language.     In  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman,  217-233. 

Lindsay,  R.  K.  1963b.  A  program  for  parsing  sentences  and  making  infer- 
ences  about   kinship    relations.      In   A.    C.    Hoggatt    and   F.    E.    Balderston 

(Eds.),    Symposium   on  simulation  models:     Methodology   and   applications   to   the 
behavioral  sciences.     Cincinnati:     South- Western  Publishing,  111-138. 

Lindsay,  R.  K.,  Buchanan,  B.  G.,  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  and  Lederberg,  J. 
1980.  Applications  of  Artificial  Intelligence  for  Chemical  Inference:  The  DENDRAL 
Project.     New  York:     McGraw-Hill. 

Locke,  W.  N.,  and  Booth,  A.  D.  (Eds.).  1955.  Machine  translation  of  lan- 
guages.    New  York:     Technology  Press  of  MIT  and  Wiley. 

Lowerre,  B.,  and  Reddy,  R.  1980.  The  HARPY  speech  understanding  sys- 
tem.    In  Lea,    Trends,  340-360. 


Bibliography  377 

Lyons,  J.  1968.  Introduction  to  theoretical  linguistics.  London:  Cambridge  Uni- 
versity Press. 

Lyons,  J.     1970.     Noam  Chomsky.     New  York:     Viking  Press. 

Mann,  W.,  and  Moore,  J.  1980.  Computer  as  author — Results  and  prospects. 
Tech.  Rep.  RR-79-82,  Information  Science  Institute,  Marina  del  Rey,  Calif. 

Manna,  Z.  1973.  Introduction  to  the  mathematical  theory  of  computation.  New 
York:     McGraw-Hill. 

Manove,  M.,  Bloom,  S.,  and  Engelman,  E.  1968.  Rational  functions  in 
MATHLAB.  In  D.  G.  Bobrow  (Ed.),  Symbol  manipulation  languages  and  tech- 
niques.    Amsterdam:     North-Holland,  86-102. 

Marcus,  M.  P.  1980.  A  theory  of  syntactic  recognition  for  natural  language. 
Cambridge,  Mass.:     MIT  Press. 

Martelli,  A.  1977.  On  the  complexity  of  admissible  search  algorithms.  Arti- 
ficial Intelligence  8:1-13. 

Martelli,  A.,  and  Montanari,  U.  1973.  Additive  AND/OR  graphs.  IJCAI  S, 
1-11. 

Matuzceck,  D.  1972.  An  implementation  of  the  augmented  transition  net- 
work system  of  Woods  (as  revised  by  J.  Slocum).  Dept.  of  Computer  Sci- 
ences and  CAI  Laboratory,  University  of  Texas,  Austin. 

McCarthy,  J.  1977.  Epistmological  problems  of  artificial  intelligence.  IJCAI  5, 
1038-1044. 

McCarthy,  J.,  and  Hayes,  P.  J.  1969.  Some  philosophical  problems  from 
the  standpoint  of  artificial  intelligence.  In  D.  Michie  and  B.  Meltzer  (Eds.), 
Machine  intelligence  4-     Edinburgh:     Edinburgh  University  Press,  463-502. 

McCord,  M.  1975.  On  the  form  of  a  systemic  grammar.  Journal  of  Lin- 
guistics 11:195-212. 

McCorduck,  P.     1979.     Machines  who  think.     San  Francisco:     Freeman. 

McDermott,  D.  1974.  Assimilation  of  new  information  by  a  natural  language- 
understanding  system.  Rep.  No.  TR-291,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts 
Institute  of  Technology. 

McDermott,  D.  1976.  Artificial  intelligence  meets  natural  stupidity.  SIGART 
Newsletter  57:4-9. 

McDermott,  D.,  and  Doyle,  J.  In  press.  Non-monotonic  logic — I.  Artificial  Intel- 
ligence 13. 

McDermott,  J.,  and  Forgy,  C.  1978.  Production  system  conflict  resolution 
strategies.     In  Waterman  and  Hayes-Roth,  177-199. 

McDermott,  J.,  Newell,  A.,  and  Moore,  J.  1978.  The  efficiency  of  certain 
production  system  implementations.  In  Waterman  and  Hayes-Roth,  155- 
176. 

McDonald,  D.  1980.  Natural  language  production  as  a  process  of  decision  making 
under  constraint.  Doctoral  dissertation,  Laboratory  for  Computer  Science, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 


378  Bibliography 

Mcintosh,  A.,  and  Halliday,  M.  A.  K.  1966.  Patterns  of  language.  Bloom- 
ington:     Indiana  University  Press. 

McKeown,  K.  1980.  Generating  relevant  explanation:  Natural  language  re- 
sponses to  questions  about  database  structure.  Proceedings  of  the  AAAI, 
306-309. 

Michie,  D.  1967.  Strategy  building  with  the  graph  traverser.  In  N.  L. 
Collins  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  1.  New  York:  American 
Elsevier,  135-152. 

Michie,  D.  1977.  A  theory  of  advice.  In  E.  W.  Elcock  and  D.  Michie 
(Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  8.     New  York:     Wiley,  151-168. 

Michie,  D.,  and  Bratko,  I.  1978.  Advice  table  representations  of  chess  end- 
game knowledge.  In  Proceedings  of  the  AISB/GI  Conference  on  Artificial 
Intelligence,  194-200. 

Michie,  D.,  and  Ross,  R.  1970.  Experiments  with  the  adaptive  graph  tra- 
verser. In  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  5.  New 
York:    American  Elsevier,  301-318. 

Miller,  G.  A.     1975.     Comments  on  lexical  analysis.     TINLAP-1,  34-37. 

Miller,  G.  A.,  and  Johnson-Laird,  P.  N.  1976.  Language  and  perception.  Cam- 
bridge, Mass.:     Harvard  University  Press. 

Minsky,  M.  1963.  Steps  toward  artificial  intelligence.  In  Feigenbaum  and 
Feldman,  406-450. 

Minsky,  M.  (Ed.).  1968.  Semantic  information  processing.  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
MIT  Press. 

Minsky,  M.  1975.  A  framework  for  representing  knowledge.  In  P.  Winston 
(Ed.),   The  psychology  of  computer  vision.     New  York:     McGraw-Hill,  211-277. 

Mittman,  B.  1977.  A  brief  history  of  the  computer  chess  tournaments:  1970- 
1975.     In  Frey,  1-33. 

Moore,  E.  F.  1959.  The  shortest  path  through  a  maze.  In  Proceedings  of  an 
International  Symposium  on  the  Theory  of  Switching,  Part  II.  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
Harvard  University  Press,  285-292. 

Moore,  R.  C.  1975.  Reasoning  from  incomplete  knowledge  in  a  procedural 
deductive  system.  Rep.  No.  TR-347,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Insti- 
tute of  Technology. 

Moses,  J.  1967.  Symbolic  integration.  Rep.  No.  MAC-TR-47,  Project  MAC, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Myopolous,  J.,  Cohen,  P.,  Borgida,  A.,  and  Sugar,  L.  1975.  Semantic 
networks  and  the  generation  of  context.     IJCAI  4,  134-142. 

Nash-Webber,  B.  1974.  Semantics  and  speech  understanding.  BBN  Rep. 
No.  2896,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Nash-Webber,  B.  L.  1975.  The  role  of  semantics  in  automatic  speech  under- 
standing.    In  Bobrow  and  Collins,  351-382. 


Bibliography  379 

National  Research  Council,  Automatic  Language  Processing  Advisory  Com- 
mittee. 1966.  Language  and  machines:  Computers  in  translation  and 
linguistics.  Publication  1416,  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  National 
Research  Council,  Washington,  D.C. 

Newborn,  M.     1975.     Computer  chess.     New  York:     Academic  Press. 

Newborn,  M.  1977.  The  efficiency  of  the  alpha-beta  search  on  trees  with 
branch-dependent  terminal  node  scores.     Artificial  Intelligence  8:137-153. 

Newborn,  M.  1978.  Computers  and  chess  news:  Recent  tournaments.  SIGART 
Newsletter  65:11. 

Newell,  A.  1973a.  Artificial  intelligence  and  the  concept  of  mind.  In  Schank 
and  Colby,  1-60. 

Newell,  A.  1973b.  Production  systems:  Models  of  control  structure.  In 
W.  Chase  (Ed.),  Visual  information  processing.  New  York:  Academic  Press, 
463-526. 

Newell,  A.  1975.  A  tutorial  on  speech  understanding  systems.  In  D.  R. 
Reddy  (Ed.),  Speech  recognition:  Invited  papers  presented  at  the  1974  IEEE 
symposium.     New  York:     Academic  Press,  3-54. 

Newell,  A.  1978.  HARPY:  Production  systems  and  human  cognition.  Rep. 
CMU-CS-78-140,  Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  Carnegie-Mellon  University. 

Newell,  A.,  Barnett,  J.,  Forgie,  J.,  Green,  C,  Klatt,  D.  H.,  Licklider, 
J.  C.  R.,  Munson,  J.,  Reddy,  D.  R.,  and  Woods,  W.  A.  1973.  Speech 
understanding  systems:  Final  report  of  a  study  group.  Amsterdam:  North- 
Holland. 

Newell,  A.,  and  Ernst,  G.  1965.  The  search  for  generality.  In  W.  A. 
Kalenich  (Ed.),  Information  processing  65:  Proceedings  IFIP  Congress  1965. 
Washington,  D.C:     Spartan  Books,  17-24. 

Newell,  A.,  Shaw,  J.  C,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1960.  A  variety  of  intelligent 
learning  in  a  general  problem-solver.  In  M.  C.  Yovits  and  S.  Cameron 
(Eds.),  Self-organizing  systems.     New  York:     Pergamon  Press,  153-189. 

Newell,  A.,  Shaw,  J.  C,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1963a.  Chess-playing  programs 
and  the  problem  of  complexity.     In  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman,  39-70. 

Newell,  A.,  Shaw,  J.  C,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1963b.  Empirical  explorations 
with  the  logic  theory  machine:  A  case  history  in  heuristics.  In  Feigen- 
baum and  Feldman,  109-133. 

Newell,  A.,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1963.  GPS,  a  program  that  simulates  human 
thought.     In  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman,  279-293. 

Newell,  A.,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1972.  Human  problem  solving.  Englewood 
Cliffs,  N.J.:     Prentice-Hall. 

Newell,  A.,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1976.  Computer  science  as  empirical  inquiry: 
Symbols  and  search.  (The  1976  ACM  Turing  Lecture.)  CACM  19:113-126. 

Nii,  H.  P.,  and  Feigenbaum,  E.  A.  1978.  Rule-based  understanding  of  sig- 
nals.    In  Waterman  and  Hayes-Roth,  483-501. 


380  Bibliography 

Nilsson,  N.  J.  1969.  Searching  problem- solving  and  game-playing  trees  for 
minimal  cost  solutions.  In  A.  J.  H.  Morrell  (Ed.),  Information  processing  68: 
Proceedings  IFIP  Congress  1968  (Vol.  2).  Amsterdam:  North-Holland,  1556- 
1562. 

Nilsson,  N.  J.  1971.  Problem- solving  methods  in  artificial  intelligence.  New  York: 
McGraw-Hill. 

Nilsson,  N.  J.  1974.  Artificial  intelligence.  In  J.  L.  Rosenfeld  (Ed.),  Infor- 
mation processing  74:  Proceedings  IFIP  Congress  1974-  Amsterdam:  North- 
Holland,  778-801. 

Nilsson,  N.  J.     1980.  Principles  of  artificial  intelligence.     Palo  Alto,  Calif.:  Tioga. 

Norman,  D.  A.,  Rumelhart,  D.  E.,  and  the  LNR  Research  Group.  1975. 
Explorations  in  cognition.     San  Francisco:     Freeman. 

Novak,  G.  S.  1977.  Representation  of  knowledge  in  a  program  for  solving 
physics  problems.     IJCAI  5,  286-291. 

Oettinger,  A.  G.  1955.  The  design  of  an  automatic  Russian-English  tech- 
nical dictionary.     In  Locke  and  Booth,  47-65. 

Paige,  J.  M.,  and  Simon,  H.  A.  1966.  Cognitive  processes  in  solving  algebra 
word  problems.  In  B.  Kleinmuntz  (Ed.),  Problem  solving.  New  York:  Wiley, 
51-119. 

Paxton,  W.  H.  1976.  A  framework  for  language  understanding.  SRI  Tech. 
Note  131,  AI  Center,  SRI  International,  Inc.,  Menlo  Park,  Calif. 

Petrick,  S.  R.     1973.     Transformational  analysis.     In  Rustin,  27-41. 

Pitrat,  J.  1977.  A  chess  combination  program  which  uses  plans.  Artificial 
Intelligence  8:275-321. 

Plath,  W.  1976.  REQUEST:  A  natural  language  question- answering  system. 
IBM  J.  Research  and  Development  20:326-335. 

Pohl,  I.  1969.  Bi-directional  and  heuristic  search  in  path  problems.  SLAC 
Rep.  No.  104,  Stanford  Linear  Accelerator  Center,  Stanford,  Calif. 

Pohl,  I.  1970a.  First  results  on  the  effect  of  error  in  heuristic  search.  In 
B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  5.  New  York:  Amer- 
ican Elsevier,  219-236. 

Pohl,  I.  1970b.  Heuristic  search  viewed  as  path  finding  in  a  graph.  Artifi- 
cial Intelligence  1:193-204. 

Pohl,  I.  1971.  Bi-directional  search.  In  B.  Meltzer  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.), 
Machine  intelligence  6.     New  York:     American  Elsevier,  127-140. 

Pohl,  I.  1973.  The  avoidance  of  (relative)  catastrophe,  heuristic  competence, 
genuine  dynamic  weighting  and  computational  issues  in  heuristic  problem 
solving.     IJCAI  S,  12-17. 

Pohl,  I.  1977.  Practical  and  theoretical  considerations  in  heuristic  search 
algorithms.  In  E.  W.  Elcock  and  D.  Michie  (Eds.),  Machine  intelligence  8. 
New  York:     Wiley,  55-72. 

Polya,  G.     1957.     How  to  solve  it  (2nd  ed.).     New  York:     Doubleday  Anchor. 


Bibliography  381 

Post,  E.  1943.  Formal  reductions  of  the  general  combinatorial  problem. 
American  Journal  of  Mathematics  65:197-268. 

Postal,  P.  1964.  Limitations  of  phrase  structure  grammars.  In  J.  A.  Fodor 
and  J.  J.  Katz,  The  structure  of  language.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice- 
Hall,  137-151. 

Prawitz,  D.  1965.  Natural  deduction:  A  proof-theoretical  study.  Stockholm: 
Almqvist  and  Wiksell. 

Propp,  V.  1968.  Morphology  of  the  folktale  (2nd.  ed.,  transl.  L.  Scott).  Austin: 
University  of  Texas  Press. 

Pylyshyn,  Z.  1973.  What  the  mind's  eye  tells  the  mind's  brain:  A  critique 
of  mental  imagery.     Psychological  Bulletin  13:1-24. 

Pylyshyn,  Z.     1975.     Do  we  need  images  and  analogs?     TINLAP-1,  174-177. 

Pylyshyn,  Z.  1978.  Imagery  and  artificial  intelligence.  In  C.  W.  Savage  (Ed.), 
Perception  and  cognition:  Issues  in  the  foundations  of  psychology.  Minneapolis: 
University  of  Minnesota  Press. 

Quillian,  M.  R.     1968.     Semantic  memory.     In  Minsky,  227-270. 

Quillian,  M.  R.  1969.  The  teachable  language  comprehender:  A  simulation 
program  and  the  theory  of  language.     CACM  12:459-476. 

Raphael,  B.  1968.  SIR:  A  computer  program  for  semantic  information 
retrieval.     In  Minsky,  33-145. 

Raphael,  B.     1976.     The  thinking  computer.     San  Francisco:     Freeman. 

Reboh,  R.,  Sacerdoti,  E.,  Fikes,  R.  E.,  Sagalowicz,  D.,  Waldinger,  R.  J.,  and 
Wilber,  M.  1976.  QLISP:  A  language  for  the  interactive  development  of 
complex  systems.  Rep.  No.  TN-120,  AI  Center,  SRI  International,  Inc., 
Menlo  Park,  Calif. 

Reddy,  R.  (Ed.).  1975.  Speech  recognition:  Invited  papers  of  the  IEEE  sympo- 
sium.    New  York:     Academic  Press. 

Reddy,  R.,  Erman,  L.,  Fennell,  R.,  and  Neely,  R.  1976.  The  HEARSAY 
speech  understanding  system:  An  example  of  the  recognition  process. 
IEEE  Transactions  on  Computers  C-25:427-431. 

Reingold,  E.  M.,  Nievergelt,  J.,  and  Deo,  N.  1977.  Combinatorial  algorithms: 
Theory  and  practice.     Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:     Prentice-Hall. 

Reiter,  R.     1978.     On  reasoning  by  default.     TINLAP-2,  210-218. 

Rieger,  C.     1975.     Conceptual  memory  and  inference.     In  Schank,  157-288. 

Riesbeck,  C.  K.     1975.     Conceptual  analysis.     In  Schank,  83-156. 

Robinson,  A.  E.,  Appelt,  D.  E.,  Grosz,  B.  J.,  Hendrix,  G.  G.,  and  Robinson, 
J.  J.  1980.  Interpreting  natural-language  utterances  in  dialogs  about  tasks. 
Tech.  Note  210,  Artificial  Intelligence  Center,  SRI  International,  Inc.,  Menlo 
Park,  Calif. 

Robinson,  J.  J.     1975.     Performance  grammars.     In  Reddy,  401-427. 


382  Bibliography 

Rulifson,  J.,  Derkson,  J.  A.,  and  Waldinger,  R.  J.  1972.  QA4:  A  proce- 
dural calculus  for  intuitive  reasoning.  Rep.  No.  TN-83,  AI  Center,  SRI 
International,  Inc. 

Rumelhart,  D.  1975.  Notes  on  a  schema  for  stories.  In  Bobrow  and 
Collins,  211-236. 

Rumelhart,  D.  1976.  Toward  an  interactive  model  of  reading.  Tech.  Rep. 
56,  Center  for  Human  Information  Processing,  Univ.  of  California,  San 
Diego. 

Russell,  S.  W.  1972.  Semantic  categories  of  nominals  for  conceptual 
dependency  analysis  of  natural  language.  Memo  172,  AI  Laboratory, 
Stanford  University. 

Rustin,  R.  (Ed.).  1973.  Natural  language  processing.  New  York:  Algorithmics 
Press. 

Rychener,  M.  D.  1976.  Production  systems  as  a  programming  language  for 
artificial  intelligence  applications.  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Carnegie-Mellon 
University. 

Rychener,  M.  D.  1977.  Control  requirements  for  the  design  of  production 
system  architectures.  ACM  symposium  on  artificial  intelligence  and  programming 
languages,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  37-44. 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.  1974.  Planning  in  a  hierarchy  of  abstraction  spaces.  Arti- 
ficial Intelligence  5:115-135. 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.  1977.  Language  access  to  distributed  data  with  error  recov- 
ery.    IJCAI  5,  196-202. 

Samlowski,  W.     1976.     Case  grammar.     In  Charniak  and  Wilks,  55-72. 

Samuel,  A.  L.  1963.  Some  studies  in  machine  learning  using  the  game  of 
checkers.     In  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman,  71-105. 

Samuel,  A.  L.  1967.  Some  studies  in  machine  learning  using  the  game  of 
checkers.     II — Recent  progress.     IBM  J.  Research  and  Development  11:601-617. 

Sandewall,  E.  J.  1971.  Heuristic  search:  Concepts  and  methods.  In  N.  V. 
Findler  and  B.  Meltzer  (Eds.),  Artificial  intelligence  and  heuristic  programming. 
New  York:     American  Elsevier,  81-100. 

Scha,  R.  J.  H.  1976.  A  formal  language  for  semantic  representation.  In 
L.  Steels  (Ed.),  Advances  in  natural  language  processing.  Antwerp,  Belgium: 
University  of  Antwerp. 

Schank,  R.  C.  1972.  Conceptual  dependency:  A  theory  of  natural  language 
understanding.     Cognitive  Psychology  3:552-631. 

Schank,  R.  C.  1973a.  The  fourteen  primitive  actions  and  their  inferences. 
Memo  183,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 

Schank,  R.  C.  1973b.  Identification  of  conceptualizations  underlying  natural 
language.     In  Schank  and  Colby,  187-247. 

Schank,  R.  C.  1975a.  Conceptual  information  processing.  New  York:  North- 
Holland. 


Bibliography  383 

Schank,    R.    C.      1975b.      The    primitive    ACTs    of    conceptual    dependency. 
TINLAP-1,  38-41. 

Schank,  R.  C.  1975c.  The  structure  of  episodes  in  memory.  In  Bobrow  and 
Collins,  237-272. 

Schank,  R.  C.     1980.     Language  and  memory.     Cognitive  Science  4:243-284. 

Schank,  R.  C,  and  Abelson,  R.  P.  1977.  Scripts,  plans,  goals,  and  under- 
standing.    Hillsdale,  N.J.:     Lawrence  Erlbaum. 

Schank,  R.  C,  and  Colby,  K.  M.  (Eds.).  1973.  Computer  models  of  thought 
and  language.     San  Francisco:     Freeman. 

Schank,  R.,  Goldman,  N.,  Rieger,  C,  and  Riesbeck,  C.  1973.  MARGIE: 
Memory,  analysis,  response  generation,  and  inference  on  English.  IJCAI  8, 
255-261. 

Schank,  R.,  and  Yale  AI  Project.  1975.  SAM — A  story  understander.  Research 
Rep.  43,  Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  Yale  University. 

Schubert,  L.  K.  1975.  Extending  the  expressive  power  of  semantic  net- 
works.    IJCAI  4,  158-164. 

Searle,  J.  1969.  Speech  acts.  Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge  University  Press. 

Searle,  J.  R.  1980.  Mind,  brains,  and  programs.  Behavioral  and  Brain  Sciences 
3:417-457. 

Self,  J.  1975.  Computer  generation  of  sentences  by  systemic  grammar.  Amer- 
ican Journal  of  Computational  Linguistics,  Microfiche  29. 

Shannon,  C.  E.  1950.  Programming  a  computer  for  playing  chess.  Philo- 
sophical Magazine  (Series  7)  41:256-275. 

Shannon,  C.  E.  1956.  A  chess-playing  machine.  In  J.  R.  Newman  (Ed.), 
The  world  of  mathematics  (Vol.  4).  New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  2124- 
2133. 

Shortliffe,  E.  H.  1976.  Computer-based  medical  consultations:  MYCIN.  New  York: 
North-Holland. 

Shoup,  J.  1980.  Phonological  aspects  of  speech  recognition.  In  Lea,  Trends, 
125-138. 

Siklossy,  L.     1976.     Let's  talk  LISP.     Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:     Prentice-Hall. 

Simmons,  R.  F.  1965.  Answering  English  questions  by  computer:  A  survey. 
CACM  8:53-70. 

Simmons,  R.  F.  1966.  Storage  and  retrieval  of  aspects  of  meaning  in 
directed  graph  structures.     CACM  9:211-214. 

Simmons,  R.  F.  1970.  Natural  language  question-answering  systems:  1969. 
CACM  13:15-30. 

Simmons,  R.  F.  1973.  Semantic  networks:  Their  computation  and  use  for 
understanding  English  sentences.     In  Schank  and  Colby,  63-113. 

Simmons,  R.  F.,  Burger,  J.  F.,  and  Long,  R.  E.  1966.  An  approach  toward 
answering  English  questions  from  text.  AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings  29,  1966 
Fall  Joint  Computer  Conference.     Washington,  D.C.:     Spartan  Books,  357-363. 


384  Bibliography 

Simmons,  R.  F.,  Burger,  J.  F.,  and  Schwarcz,  R.  M.  1968.  A  computa- 
tional model  of  verbal  understanding.  AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings  S3,  1968 
Fall  Joint  Computer  Conference.     Washington,  D.C.:     Thompson,  441-456. 

Simmons,  R.  F.,  Klein,  S.,  and  McConlogue,  K.  1964.  Indexing  and  depen- 
dency logic  for  answering  English  questions.  American  Documentation  15:196— 
204. 

Simmons,  R.  F.,  and  Slocum,  J.  1972.  Generating  English  discourse  from 
semantic  networks.     CACM  15:891-905. 

Simon,  H.  A.  1969.   The  sciences  of  the  artificial.     Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press. 

Simon,  H.  A.,  and  Kadane,  J.  B.  1975.  Optimal  problem-solving  search: 
All-or-none  solutions.     Artificial  Intelligence  6:235-247. 

Slagle,  J.  R.  1961.  A  heuristic  program  that  solves  symbolic  integration 
problems  in  freshman  calculus:  Symbolic  Automatic  Integrator  (SAINT). 
Rep.  No.  5G-0001,  Lincoln  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Tech- 
nology. 

Slagle,  J.  R.  1963.  A  heuristic  program  that  solves  symbolic  integration 
problems  in  freshman  calculus.  In  Feigenbaum  and  Feldman,  191-203. 
(Also  in  /.  ACM  10:507-520  [1963].) 

Slagle,  J.  R.  1971.  Artificial  intelligence:  The  heuristic  programming  approach. 
New  York:     McGraw-Hill. 

Slagle,  J.  R.,  and  Dixon,  J.  K.  1969.  Experiments  with  some  programs  that 
search  game  trees.     /.  ACM  16:189-207. 

Slagle,  J.  R.,  and  Dixon,  J.  K.  1970.  Experiments  with  the  M  and  N  tree- 
searching  program.     CACM  13:147-154. 

Slate,  D.  J.,  and  Atkin,  L.  R.  1977.  CHESS  4.5— The  Northwestern  Uni- 
versity chess  program.     In  Frey,  82-118. 

Sloman,  A.  1971.  Interactions  between  philosophy  and  AI:  The  role  of  intui- 
tion and  non-logical  reasoning  in  intelligence.  Artificial  Intelligence  2:209- 
225. 

Sloman,  A.  1975.  Afterthoughts  on  analogical  representations.  TINLAP-1, 
178-182. 

Stefik,  M.  1980.  Planning  with  constraints.  Rep.  No.  784,  Computer  Science 
Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Steinberg,  D.,  and  Jakobovits,  L.  1971.  Semantics.  Cambridge,  England: 
Cambridge  University  Press. 

Suppes,  P.     1957.     Introduction  to  logic.     New  York:     Van  Nostrand  Reinhold. 

Sussman,  G.,  and  McDermott,  D.  V.  1972.  CONNIVER  reference  manual. 
Memo  259,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Sussman,  G.,  Winograd,  T.,  and  Charniak,  E.  1970.  MICRO-PLANNER 
reference  manual.  AI  Memo  203,  AI  Laboratory,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology. 


Bibliography  385 

Szolovitz,  P.,  Hawkinson,  L.  B.,  and  Martin,  W.  A.  1977.  An  overview  of 
OWL,  a  language  for  knowledge  representation.  Rep.  No.  TM-86,  Labora- 
tory for  Computer  Science,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology. 

Taylor,  B.,  and  Rosenberg,  R.  S.  1975.  A  case-driven  parser  for  natural 
language.     American  Journal  of  Computational  Linguistics,  Microfiche  31. 

Thompson,  F.  B.  1966.  English  for  the  computer.  AFIPS  Conference  Pro- 
ceedings 29,  1966  Fall  Joint  Computer  Conference.  Washington,  D.C.:  Spartan 
Books,  349-356. 

Thorndyke,  P.  W.  1977.  Cognitive  structures  in  comprehension  and  memory 
of  narrative  discourse.     Cognitive  Psychology  9:77-110. 

Thorp,  E.,  and  Walden,  W.  E.  1970.  A  computer-assisted  study  of  Go  on 
m  X  n  boards.  In  R.  B.  Banerji  and  M.  D.  Mesarovic  (Eds.),  Theoretical 
approaches  to  non-numerical  problem  solving.     Berlin:  Springer- Verlag,  303-343. 

TINLAP-1  (Schank,  R.,  and  Nash-Webber,  B.,  Eds.).  1975.  Theoretical  issues 
in  natural  language  processing:  An  interdisciplinary  workshop  in  computational  lin- 
guistics, psychology,  linguistics,  and  artificial  intelligence,  June  1975. 

TINLAP-2  (Waltz,  D.  L.,  Ed.).  1978.  Theoretical  issues  in  natural  language 
processing — 2.     New  York:     Association  for  Computing  Machinery. 

Turing,  A.  M.,  et  al.  1953.  Digital  computers  applied  to  games.  In  B.  V. 
Bowden  (Ed.),  Faster  than  thought.     London:     Pitman,  286-310. 

Vanderbrug,  G.,  and  Minker,  J.  1975.  State-space,  problem-reduction,  and 
theorem  proving — Some  relationships.     CACM  18:107-115. 

Vere,  S.  A.  1977.  Relational  production  systems.  Artificial  Intelligence  8:47-68. 

Vincens,  P.  1969.  Aspects  of  speech  recognition  by  computer.  Doctoral 
dissertation,  Computer  Science  Dept.,  Stanford  University. 

Walker,  D.  E.  (Ed.).  1976.  Speech  understanding  research.  New  York:  North- 
Holland. 

Walker,  D.  E.  (Ed.).  1978.  Understanding  spoken  language.  New  York:  North- 
Holland. 

Walker,  D.  E.  1980.  SRI  research  on  speech  understanding.  In  Lea,  Trends, 
294-315. 

Waltz,  D.  L.  1977.  Natural  language  interfaces.  SIGART  Newsletter  61:16-64. 

Waltz,  D.  L.  In  press.  An  English  language  question  answering  system  for 
a  large  relational  data  base. 

Waterman,  D.  A.  1970.  Generalization  learning  techniques  for  automating 
the  learning  of  heuristics.     Artificial  Intelligence  1:121-170. 

Waterman,  D.  A.,  and  Hayes-Roth,  F.  (Eds.).  1978.  Pattern- directed  inference 
systems.     New  York:    Academic  Press. 

Weaver,    W.      1955.      Translation.    In    Locke    and    Booth,    15-23.      (Originally 

published,  1949.) 
Weizenbaum,  J.     1963.     Symmetric  list  processor.     CACM  6:524-544. 


386  Bibliography 

Weizenbaum,  J.  1966.  ELIZA — A  computer  program  for  the  study  of  natural 
language  communication  between  man  and  machine.     CACM  9:36-45. 

Weizenbaum,  J.  1976.  Computer  power  and  human  reason:  From  judgment  to 
calculation.     San  Francisco:     Freeman. 

Welin,  C.  W.  1975.  Semantic  networks  and  case  grammar.  Publication  29, 
Institute  of  Linguistics,  University  of  Stockholm. 

Weyhrauch,  R.  W.  1978.  Prolegomena  to  a  theory  of  mechanized  formal 
reasoning.     Memo  315,  AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University. 

Whitehead,  A.  N.,  and  Russell,  B.  1925.  Principia  mathematica  (2nd  ed., 
Vol.  1).     Cambridge,  England:     University  Press. 

Wilensky,  R.  1978a.  Understanding  goal-based  stories.  Research  Rep.  No. 
140,  Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  Yale  University. 

Wilensky,  R.  1978b.  Why  John  married  Mary:  Understanding  stories  involv- 
ing recurring  goals.     Cognitive  Science  2:235-266. 

Wilkins,  D.     1979.     Using  plans  in  chess.     IJCAI  6. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1973.  An  artificial  intelligence  approach  to  machine  trans- 
lation.    In  Schank  and  Colby,  114-151. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1974.  Natural  language  understanding  systems  within  the  AI 
paradigm:  A  survey  and  some  comparisons.  AI  Memo  237,  AI  Laboratory, 
Stanford  University.  (Also  in  A.  Zampolli,  Ed.,  Linguistic  structures  pro- 
cessing.    Amsterdam:     North-Holland,  1977,  341-398.) 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1975a.  An  intelligent  analyzer  and  understander  of  English. 
CACM  18:264-274. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1975b.  Preference  semantics.  In  E.  L.  Keenan  (Ed.),  Formal 
semantics  of  natural  language.  Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge  University 
Press,  329-348. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1975c.  A  preferential,  pattern- seeking  semantics  for  natural 
language  inference.     Artificial  Intelligence  6:53-74. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.     1975d.     Primitives  and  words.     TINLAP-2,  42-45. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1976.  Processing  case.  American  Journal  of  Computational  Lin- 
guistics, Microfiche  56. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1977a.  Good  and  bad  arguments  about  semantic  primitives. 
Research  Rep.  42,  Dept.  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  University  of  Edinburgh. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1977b.  Knowledge  structures  and  language  boundaries.  IJCAI  5, 
151-157. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1977c.  Methodological  questions  about  artificial  intelligence: 
Approaches  to  understanding  natural  language.  Journal  of  Pragmatics  1:69- 
84. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.     1977d.     Time  flies  like  an  arrow.     New  Scientist  76:696-698. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1977e.  What  sort  of  taxonomy  of  causation  do  we  need  for 
language  understanding?     Cognitive  Science  1:235-264. 


Bibliography  387 

Wilks,  Y.  A.  1978.  Making  preferences  more  active.  Artificial  Intelligence 
11:197-223. 

Wilks,  Y.  A.,  and  Herskovits,  A.  1973.  An  intelligent  analyser  and  generator 
for  natural  language.  Proceedings  of  the  international  conference  on  compu- 
tational linguistics,  Pisa,  Italy. 

Winograd,  T.  1972.   Understanding  natural  language.  New  York:  Academic  Press. 

Winograd,  T.  1973.  A  procedural  model  of  language  understanding.  In 
Schank  and  Colby,  152-186. 

Winograd,  T.  1974.  Five  lectures  on  artificial  intelligence.  AI  Memo  246, 
AI  Laboratory,  Stanford  University.  (Also  in  A.  Zampolli,  Ed.,  Linguistic 
structures  processing.     Amsterdam:     North-Holland,  1977,  399-520.) 

Winograd,  T.  1975.  Frame  representations  and  the  declarative/procedural 
controversy.     In  Bobrow  and  Collins,  185-210. 

Winograd,  T.  1976.  Parsing  natural  language  via  recursive  transition  net. 
In  R.  Yeh  (Ed.),  Applied  computation  theory:  Analysis,  design,  modeling. 
Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:     Prentice-Hall,  451-467. 

Winograd,  T.  1978.  On  primitives,  prototypes,  and  other  semantic  anom- 
alies.    TINLAP-2,  25-32. 

Winograd,  T.     1979.     Beyond  programming  languages.     CACM  22(7):391-401. 

Winograd,  T.  1980a.  Extended  inference  modes  in  reasoning  by  computer 
systems.     Artificial  Intelligence  13:5-26. 

Winograd,  T.  1980b.  What  does  it  mean  to  understand  language?  Cognitive 
Science  4:209-241. 

Winograd,  T.  In  press.  Language  as  a  cognitive  process.  Reading,  Mass.: 
Addison-Wesley. 

Winston,  P.  H.  (Ed.).  1975.  The  psychology  of  computer  vision.  New  York: 
McGraw-Hill. 

Winston,  P.  H.     1977.     Artificial  intelligence.     Reading,  Mass.:     Addison-Wesley. 

Winston,  P.  H.,  and  Brown,  R.  H.  (Eds.).  1979.  Artificial  intelligence:  An  MIT 
perspective.     Cambridge,  Mass.:     MIT  Press. 

Wolf,  J.,  and  Woods,  W.  1980.  The  HWIM  speech  understanding  system. 
In  Lea,   Trends,  316-339. 

Wong,  H.  K.  1975.  Generating  English  sentences  from  semantic  structures. 
Tech.  Rep.  84,  Dept.  of  Computer  Science,  University  of  Toronto. 

Woods,  W.  A.  1968.  Procedural  semantics  for  a  question-answering  machine. 
Fall  Joint  Computer  Conference  33:457-471. 

Woods,  W.  A.  1970.  Transition  network  grammars  for  natural  language 
analysis.     CACM  13:591-606. 

Woods,  W.  A.  1973a.  An  experimental  parsing  system  for  transition  net- 
work grammars.     In  Rustin,  111-154. 


388  Bibliography 

Woods,  W.  A.  1973b.  Progress  in  natural  language  understanding:  An  appli- 
cation to  lunar  geology.  AFIPS  Conference  Proceedings  £2,  197S  National 
Computer  Conference.     Montvale,  N.J.:     AFIPS  Press,  441-450. 

Woods,  W.  A.  1975a.  SPEECHLIS:  An  experimental  prototype  for  speech 
understanding  research.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Acoustics,  Speech,  and  Signal 
Processing  23(1):2-10. 

Woods,  W.  A.  1975b.  What's  in  a  link:  Foundations  for  semantic  networks. 
In  Bobrow  and  Collins,  35-82. 

Woods,  W.  A.,  et  al.  1976.  Speech  understanding  systems:  Final  report.  Rep. 
No.  3438,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Woods,  W.  A.,  and  Kaplan,  R.  1971.  The  lunar  sciences  natural  language 
information  system.  BBN  Rep.  No.  2265,  Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc., 
Cambridge,  Mass. 

Woods,  W.  A.,  Kaplan,  R.,  and  Nash-Webber,  B.  1972.  The  lunar  sciences 
natural  language  information  system:  Final  report.  BBN  Rep.  No.  2378, 
Bolt  Beranek  and  Newman,  Inc.,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

Yngve,  V.  1962.  Random  generation  of  English  sentences.  1961  international 
conference  on  machine  translation  of  languages  and  applied  language  analysis. 
(National  Physical  Laboratory,  Symposium  No.  13.)  London:  Her  Majesty's 
Stationery  Office,  66-80. 


Indexes 


NAME     INDEX 


Pages  where  the  work  is  discussed  are  italicized. 


Abelson,  R.  P.,  15,  149,  212-215,  216, 
217,  219,  221,  222,  232,  255,  300-302, 
305,  306,  308-310,  313-315,  365,  383 

Adelson-Velskiy,  G.  M,  95,  96,  99,  102, 
103,  104,  108,  365 

Aho,  A.  V.,  68,  71,  365 

Aikins,  J.  S.,  217,  220,  365 

Akmajian,  A.,  248,  365,  369 

Allen,  J.,  16,  365 

Amarel,  S.,  27,  30,  365 

Anderson,  J.,  15,  180,  185,  189,  193,  195, 
365 

Appelt,  D.  E.,  232,  280,  365,  381 

Arbuckle,  T.,  99,  105,  108,  366 

Arlazarov,  V.  L.,  96,  99,  102-104,  108, 
365 

Artsouni,  G.  B.,  2SS 

Atkin,  L.  R.,  95,  96,  99,  100,  102,  103, 
108,  384 

Bahl,  L.  R.,  329,  365 

Baker,  J.  K.,  329,  349,  365,  366 

Baker,  R.,  204,  366 

Bar-Hillel,  Y.,  233,  236,  238,  366 

Barnett,  J.,  327,  333,  358,  366,  379 

Barrow,  H.  G.,  318,  321,  366 

Barstow,  D.  R.,  16,  194,  366 

Bartlett,  F.  C,  216,  307,  315,  366 

Baudet,  G.  M,  91,  93,  366 

Beasley,  C,  195,  365 

Belsky,  M.  A.,  99,  105,  108,  366 

Berliner,  H.  J.,  95,  96,  98,  99-100,  102, 

103,  104,  106-107,  108,  366 
Bernstein,  A.,  99,  105,  108,  366 
Bernstein,  M.  L,  198,  333,  358,  366,  367 
Bloom,  S.,  127,  377 


Bobrow,  D.  G.,  15,  147,  148,  152,  158, 
217,  219,  220-221,  222,  231,  232,  267, 
284,  367 

Boden,  M.,  15,  152,  232,  287,  299,  367 

Bolles,  R.  C,  318,  321,  366 

Booth,  A.  D.,  281,  234,  238,  367,  376 

Borgida,  A.,  186,  378 

Bott,  M.  F.,  226,  367 

Bower,  G.,  15,  180,  185,  189,  193,  365 

Brachman,  R.  J.,  147,  152,  184,  217,  221, 
222,  367 

Bratko,  I.,  95,  103,  107,  108,  367,  378 

Bresnan,  J.,  248,  367 

Britten,  D.  H.  V.,  234 

Brooks,  R.,  367 

Brown,  J.  S.,  368 

Brown,  R.  H.,  16,  387 

Bruce,  B.,  254,  255,  367 

Buchanan,  B.  G.,  16,  151,  195,  369,  376 

Bullwinkle,  C.,  221,  367 

Burger,  J.  F.,  228,  384 

Burton,  R.  R.,  318,  367,  368 

Carbonell,  J.  R.,  186,  368 

Chafe,  W.  L.,  368 

Chang,  C.  L.,  80,  81,  83,  368 

Charness,  N.,  95,  108,  368 

Charniak,  E.,  15,  222,  232,  248,  255,  262, 

291,  299,  368,  385 
Chomsky,  C,  282,  372 
Chomsky,  N.,  227,  229,  237,  289,  243, 

244,  245,  247,  248,  368 
Clippinger,  J.  H.,  Jr.,  279,  368 
Codd,  E.  F.,  292,  369 
Cohen,  P.  R.,  186,  232,  280,  369,  378 
Cohen,  P.  S.,  329,  365 


392 


Name  Index 


Colby,  K.  M.,  15,  257,  369,  383 

Cole,  A.  G.,  329,  365 

Cole,  R.  A.,  331,  369 

Collins,  A.  M.,  15,  147,  152,  186,  232, 

367,  368,  372 
Conway,  M.  E.,  267,  369 
Crocker,  S.  D.,  95,  100,  101,  104,  108, 

372 
Culicover,  P.  W.,  248,  369 

Davies,  D.  J.  M.,  176,  369 

Davis,  R.,  16,  147,  151,  194,  195,  197, 

198,  199,  369 
de  Champeaux,  D.,  78,  369 
Deo,  N.,  64,  66,  381 
Derkson,  J.  A.,  176,  382 
Dijkstra,  E.  W.,  64,  66,  369 
Dixon,  J.  K.,  91,  93,  98,  102,  108,  384 
Donskoy,  M.  V.,  96,  99,  102-104,  108, 

365 
Doran,  J.  E.,  60,  63,  67,  71,  369,  370 
Doyle,  J.,  178,  377 
Dreyfus,  H.  L.,  370 
Duda,  R.  O.,  196,  197,  370 

Eastlake,  D.  E.,  95,  100,  101,  104,  108, 

372 
Eastman,  C.  M.,  202,  370 
Elcock,  E.  W.,  122,  370 
Engelman,  E.,  127,  377 
Erman,  L.  D.,  196,  197,  331,  336,  342, 

848,  845,  348,  370,  381 
Ernst,  G.,  30,  63,  113,  117,  118,  370,  379 

Fahlman,  S.  E.,  204,  222,  370 
Feigenbaum,  E.  A.,  14,  16,  29,  30,  63, 

198,  232,  287,  336,  343,  370,  376,  380 
Feldman,  J.,  14,  29,  30,  232,  287,  370 
Fennell,  R.  D.,  336,  343,  345,  370,  381 
Fikes,  R.  E.,  42,  128,  134,  169,  176,  188, 

370,  381 
Fillmore,  C,  252,  255,  371 
Filman,  R.  E.,  169,  170,  205,  371 
Findler,  N.  V.,  16,  152,  189,  371 
Flanagan,  J.,  325,  371 
Flavell,  J.  H.,  145,  147,  371 
Forgie,  J.,  327,  379 
Forgy,  C,   197,  371,  377 
Fox,  M.,  348,  371 
Fraser,  B.,  267,  367 
Frege,  G.,  200 

Frey,  P.  W.,  95,  102,  104,  108,  371 
Friedman,  J.,  268,  278,  371 


Fuller,  S.  H.,  91,  93,  371 
Funt,  B.  V.,  208,  205,  206,  371 

Garvey,  T.  D.,  129,  134,  318,  321,  366, 

372 
Gaschnig,  J.  G.,  59,  63,  91,  93,  371,  372 
Gelernter,  H.,  119,  122,  201,  372 
Gelperin,  D.,  65,  66,  372 
Gentner,  D.,  147,  372 
Gerberich,  C.  L.,  122,  372 
Gillman,  R.,  333,  358,  366 
Gillogly,  J.  J.,  91,  93,  97,  98,  99,  102, 

103,  108,  371,  372 
Gilmore,  P.  C,  122,  372 
Goldman,  N.,  278,  279,  804,  305,  372, 

383 
Goldstein,  I.  P.,  217,  221,  372 
Good,  I.  J.,  27,  30,  372 
Green,  B.  F.,  Jr.,  282,  372 
Green,  C.  C,  155,  168,  170,  327,  372, 

379 
Greenblatt,  R.  D.,  95,  100,  101,  104,  108, 

372 
Griffith,  A.  K.,  97,  108,  372 
Grishman,  R.,  262,  372 
Grosz,  B.  J.,  232,  373,  381 

Hall,  P.  A.  V.,  64,  66,  373 

Halliday,  M.  A.  K.,  249,  251,  373,  378 

Hansen,  J.  R.,  122,  372 

Hanson,  A.  R.,  16,  336,  343,  373 

Harman,  G.,  248,  373 

Harris,  L.  R.,  69,  71,  97,  100,  102,  108, 

232,  373 
Hart,  P.  E.,  64,  66,  134,  169,  196,  197, 

370,  373 
Hawkinson,  L.  B.,  217,  220,  385 
Hayes,  P.  J.,  148,  170-171,  172,  175,  177, 

179,  186,  200,  201,  373,  374,  377 
Hayes-Roth,  B.,  336,  343,  374 
Hayes-Roth,  F.,  16,  199,  331,  336,  343, 

845,  348,  370,  374,  385 
Hays,  D.  G.,  238,  374 
Hearst,  E.,  96,  108,  374 
Hedrick,  C,  195,  374 
Heidorn,  G.  E.,  374 
Hendrix,  G.  G.,  184,  186,  188,  232,  816, 

318,  321,  370,  374,  381 
Heny,  F.,  248,  365 
Herskovits,  A.,  289,  291,  387 
Hewitt,  C,  172,  175,  176,  178,  179,  374 
Hilf,  F.,  257,  369 
Hillier,  F.  S.,  64,  66,  374 


Name  Index 


393 


Hofstadter,  D.,  4,  15,  374 

Hopcroft,  J.  E.,  68,  71,  241,  244,  365, 

374 
Hudson,  R.  A.,  251,  374 

Jackendoff,  R.,  207,  374,  375 
Jackson,  P.  C,  15,  30,  42,  375 
Jakobovits,  L.,  248,  384 
Jelinek,  F.,  329,  365 
Johnson-Laird,  P.  N.,  207,  378 
Josselson,  H.  H.,  238,  375 

Kadane,  J.  B.,  59,  63,  68,  71,  384 

Kameny,  I.,  333,  358,  366 

Kaplan,  R.  M.,  219,  221,  232,  260,  261, 

267,  268,  272,  293,  294,  367,  375,  388 
Kaplan,  S.  J.,  232,  375 
Karp,  R.  M.,  69,  71,  375 
Katz,  J.,  248,  375 
Kay,  M,  219,  221,  232,  268,  272,  367, 

375 
Kellogg,  C,  228,  375 
King,  J.  J.,  194,  197,  199,  369 
Kister,  J.,  99,  103,  108,  375 
Klatt,  D.  H.,  326,  327,  330,  375,  379 
Klein,  S.,  274,  275,  375,  384 
Kline,  P.,  195,  365 
Kling,  R.,  129,  134,  372 
Knuth,  D.  E.,  xiii,  86,  87,  89,  90,  91,  93, 

269,  375 
Kopec,  D.,  95,  107,  108,  367 
Kotok,  A.,  104,  108,  375 
Kowalski,  R.,  25,  30,  73,  74,  81,  83,  175, 

375 
Kremers,  J.  H.,  318,  321,  366 
Kuipers,  B.,  222,  376 

Landsbergen,  S.  P.  J.,  232,  376 

Lantz,  K.,  318,  321,  366 

Laughery,  K.,  282,  372 

Lawler,  E.  W.,  64,  66,  376 

Lea,  W.,  16,  232,  325,  326,  329-331,  335, 

344,  348,  376 
Lederberg,  J.,  16,  376 
Lehnert,  W.  C,  16,  212,  376 
Lenat,  D.  B.,  16,  194,  195,  196,  197,  369, 

376 
Lesser,  V.  R.,  196,  197,  331,  336,  342, 

845,  348,  370,  376 
Levi,  G.,  81,  83,  376 
Levine,  M.  D.,  336,  343,  376 
Levinson,  S.,  325,  371 
Levy,  D.,  101,  108,  376 


Lewis,  B.  L.,  329,  365 
Licklider,  J.  C.  R.,  327,  379 
Lieberman,  G.  J.,  64,  66,  374 
Lindsay,  R.  K.,  16,  281,  282,  376 
Locke,  W.  N.,  238,  376 
Long,  R.  E.,  228,  384 
Loveland,  D.  W.,  122,  372 
Lowerre,  B.,  342,  849,  352,  377 
Lyons,  J.,  243,  244,  248,  377 

Mann,  W.,  280,  377 

Manna,  Z.,  171,  377 

Manove,  M.,  127,  377 

Marcus,  M.  P.,  16,  230,  262,  377 

Martelli,  A.,  66,  74,  83,  377 

Martin,  W.  A.,  217,  220,  385 

Mathias,  J.,  238,  374 

Matuzceck,  D.,  267,  377 

McCarthy,  J.,  148,  170,  177,  201,  377 

McConlogue,  K.,  384 

McCord,  M.,  251,  377 

McCorduck,  P.,  5,  14,  15,  377 

McDermott,  D.  V.,  15,  175,  176,  178, 

368,  377,  384 
McDermott,  J.,  194,  197,  371,  376,  377 
McDonald,  D.,  280,  378 
Mcintosh,  A.,  251,  378 
McKeown,  K.,  280,  378 
Mercer,  R.  L.,  329,  365 
Michie,  D.,  59,  63,  67,  71,  95,  103, 

107-108,  367,  370,  378 
Miller,  G.  A.,  207,  378 
Minker,  J.,  31,  385 
Minsky,  M.,  14,  29,  30,  159,  216,  217, 

220,  222,  231,  232,  287,  307,  315,  378 
Mittman,  B.,  96,  108,  378 
Montanari,  U.,  74,  83,  377 
Moore,  E.  F.,  64,  66,  378 
Moore,  J.,  197,  280,  377 
Moore,  R.  C.,  178-179,  378 
Moore,  R.  W.,  86,  87,  89,  90,  91,  93,  375 
Moses,  J.,  125,  127,  378 
Munson,  J.,  327,  379 
Myopolous,  J.,  186,  378 

Nash-Webber,  B.  L.,  293,  294,  326,  378, 

379,  388 
Neely,  R.,  848,  381 

Newborn,  M.,  91,  93,  96,  101,  108,  379 
Newell,  A.,  4,  14,  29-81,  63,  98,  100, 

105,  106,  108,  109,  111,  112,  118,  117, 

118,  121,  157,  169,  193,  197,  827,  331, 

335,  351,  370,  377,  379 


394 


Name  Index 


Nievergelt,  J.,  64,  66,  381 

Nii,  H.  P.,  336,  343,  380 

Nilsson,  N.  J.,  7,  15,  SO,  31,  35,  38,  42, 
45,  51,  53,  56,  57,  58,  60,  63,  64,  65, 
66,  71,  75,  78,  83,  87,  93,  102,  108, 
128,  134,  169,  171,  197,  370,  373,  380 

Norman,  D.,  15,  149,  180,  185,  189,  207, 
215,  219,  221,  232,  255,  367,  380 

Novak,  G.  S.,  221,  380 

Oettinger,  A.  G.,  285,  238,  380 

Paige,  J.  M.,  285,  380 

Paxton,  W.  H.,  361,  380 

Perrault,  C.  R.,  232,  369 

Petrick,  S.  R.,  260,  380 

Pitrat,  J.,  107,  108,  380 

Plath,  W.,  380 

Pohl,  I.,  24,  51,  52,  53,  59,  63,  67,  69, 

71,   72,  73,  380 
Polya,  G.,  29,  31,  381 
Post,  E.,  190,  381 
Postal,  P.,  243-245,  248,  375,  381 
Prawitz,  D.,  169,  381 
Propp,  V.,  307,  315,  381 
Pylyshyn,  Z.,  201,  206,  381 

Quillian,  M.  R.,  156,  180,  185,  228,  230, 
275,  276,  381 

Rabiner,  L.,  325,  371 

Raphael,  B.,  15,  27,  31,  64,  66,  178,  185, 

228,  288,  373,  381 
Reboh,  R.,  176,  381 
Reddy,  D.  R.,  327,  331,  336,  342,  848, 

845,  348,  849,  352,  370,  377,  379,  381 
Reifler,  E.,  285 
Reingold,  E.  M.,  64,  66,  381 
Reiter,  R.,  176,  381 
Richens,  R.  H.,  284 
Rieger,  C,  808,  305,  381,  383 
Riesbeck,  C.  K.,  15,  196,  261,  262,  SOS, 

305,  806,  315,  368,  381,  383 
Riseman,  E.  M.,  16,  336,  343,  373 
Roberts,  M.  de  V.,  99,  105,  108,  366 
Roberts,  R.  B.,  217,  221,  372 
Robinson,  A.  E.,  232,  381 
Robinson,  J.  J.,  232,  359,  381,  382 
Rochester,  N.,   122,  372 
Rosenberg,  A.,  325,  371 
Rosenberg,  R.  S.,  254,  255,  385 
Ross,  R.,  59,  63,  378 


Rulifson,  J.,  176,  382 

Rumelhart,  D.  E.,  15,  149,  180,  185,  189, 

207,  215,  255,  306,  307,  315,  336,  343, 

380,  382 
Russell,  B.,  Ill,  112,  386 
Russell,  S.  W.,  212,  382.     See  also  S. 

Weber. 
Rustin,  R.,  232,  382 
Rychener,  M.  D.,  193,  195,  196,  382 

Sacerdoti,  E.  D.,  185,  139,  176,  318,  321, 

374,  381,  382 
Sagalowicz,  D.,  176,  318,  321,  374,  381 
Samlowski,  W.,  255,  382 
Samuel,  A.  L.,  27,  31,  45,   95,   97,  102, 

104,  108,  382 
Sandewall,  E.  J.,  63,  382 
Scha,  R.  J.  H.,  382 
Schank,  R.  C.,  14,  15,  149,  211,  212-215, 

216,  217,  219,  220,  221,  222,  2S1,  232, 

287,  238,  254,  255,  278,  291,  800, 

301-303,  305,  S06,  309,  310,  313-315, 

382,  383 
Schubert,  L.  K.,  383 
Schwarcz,  R.  M.,  384 
Searle,  J.  R.,  7,  383 
Self,  J.,  251,  383 
Shannon,  C.  E.,  27,  31,  94-99,  10S,  108, 

383 
Shaw,  J.  C.,  29,  30,  98,  105,  108,  109, 

111,  112,  US,  118,  379 
Shortliffe,  E.  H.,  195,  197,  369,  383 
Shoup,  J.,  329,  330,  333,  344,  376,  383 
Siklossy,  L.,  16,  383 
Simmons,  R.  F.,  182,  186,  189,  228,  254, 

256,  274,  277,  287,  375,  383,  384,  387 
Simon,  H.,  4,  14,  15,  29-80,  31,  59,  63, 

68,  71,  98,  100,  105,  106,  108,  109, 

111,  112,  US,  118,  121,  149,  157,  169, 

285,  379,  380,  384 
Sint,  L.,  78,  369 
Sirovich,  F.,  81,  83,  376 
Slagle,  J.  R.,  80,  81,  83,  87,  91,  93,  98, 

102,  108,  12S,  127,  368,  384 
Slate,  D.  J.,  95,  96,  99,  100,  102,  103, 

108,  384 
Slocum,  J.,  182,  186,  277,  318,  321,  374, 

384 
Sloman,  A.,  200,  205,  206,  384 
Smirnov-Troyansky,  P.  P.,  288 
Smith,  B.  C.,  152,  367 
Stefik,  M.,  184,  217,  221,  384 


Name  Index 


395 


Stein,  P.,  99,  103,  108,  375 

Steinberg,  S.,  248,  384 

Sugar,  L.,  186,  378 

Suppes,  P.,  171,  384 

Sussman,  G.,  175,  176,  299,  384,  385 

Sutherland,  G.  L.,  197,  370 

Szolovitz,  P.,  217,  229,  385 

Taylor,  B.,  254,  255,  385 
Tenenbaum,  J.  M.,  318,  321,  366 
Thompson,  C,  374 
Thompson,  F.  B.,  228,  385 
Thompson,  H.,  219,  221,  232,  367 
Thorndyke,  P.  W.,  306,  315,  385 
Thorp,  E.,  103,  108,  385 
Turing,  A.  M.,  4,  99,  103,  108,  385 


Winston,  P.  H.,  15,  16,  87,  90,  93,  199, 

387 
Wolf,  H.  C,  318,  321,  366 
Wolf,  J.,  329,  342,  353,  354,  356,  357, 

387 
Wolf,  A.  K.,  282,  372 
Wong,  H.  K.,  278,  387 
Wood,  D.  E.,  64,  66,  376 
Woods,  W.,  178,  184,   186,  280,  260,  261, 

268,  266,  267,  292,  293,  294,  327,  329, 

342,  858,  354,  356,  357,  379,  387,  388 

Yngve,  V.,  288,  278,  275,  388 


Ulam,  S.,  99,  103,  108,  375 

Ullman,  J.  D.,  68,  71,  241,  244,  365,  374 

Vanderbrug,  G.,  31,  385 
Vere,  S.,  195,  385 
Vincens,  P.,  325,  385 


Walden,  W.  E.,  99,  103,  108,  375,  385 

Waldinger,  R.  J.,  176,  381,  382 

Walker,  D.  E.,  186,  361,  385 

Waltz,  D.  L.,  232,  385 

Wasow,  T.,  248,  369 

Waterman,  D.,  16,  195,  199,  385 

Weaver,  W.,  226,  284,  287,  238,  288,  804, 
385 

Weber,  S.,  257,  369.     See  also  S.  W. 
Russell. 

Weizenbaum,  J.,  228,  285,  286,  386 

Welin,  C.  W.,  255,  386 

Wells,  M.,  99,  103,  108,  375 

Weyhrauch,  R.  W.,  169-171,  371,  386 

Whitehead,  A.  N.,  Ill,  112,  386 

Wilber,  M.,  176,  381 

Wilensky,  R.,  232,  818,  314,  315,  386 

Wilkins,  D.,  95,  107,  108,  386 

Wilks,  Y.,  149,  207,  209,  210,  215,  232, 
287,  238,  248,  254,  255,  262,  279,  288, 
289,  291,  299,  368,  386,  387 

Winograd,  T.,  9,  14,  31,  147,  150-152, 
156,  158,  159,  173,  176,  111,  179,  189, 
199,  207,  215,  217,  219,  221,  222,  227, 
280-282,  244,  251,  260,  261,  262,  267, 
276,  287,  291,  295,  296,  298,  299,  819, 
367,  385,  387 


SUBJECT    INDEX 


Ablation  studies,  of  HARPY,  335 
Abstraction  space,  in  ABSTRIPS,  136 
ABSTRIPS,  22,  28,  134,  135-139,  169 
Acoustics,  343 
Acquisition  of  knowledge.     See  Knowledge 

acquisition. 
ACT,  195 
Active  structural  network,  185.     See  also 

Semantic  network. 
Ad  hoc  knowledge  representation,  227 
Ad  hoc  parsers,  287 
Adaptive  production  system,  195 
Add  list 

in  ABSTRIPS,  135 

in  STRIPS,  128-134 
Admissibility 

of  A*,  65 

of  ordered  search,  80,  83 

of  shortfall  density  strategy,  341,  356 
Admissibility  condition,  65,  67,  73 
Agenda,  338,  356,  360.     See  also  Control 

strategy. 
Agreement,  in  natural  language,  263 
AI  programming  languages,  10,  172,  175. 
See  also  Knowledge  representation 
languages. 

CONNIVER,  175,  176 

INTERLISP,  320 

IPL-V,  281-282 

LISP,  15,  173,  237,  283,  295,  303 

list  processing,  227,  281-287 

MICRO-PLANNER,  295-297 

PLANNER,  151,  155,  171,  175-178, 
295-297 

POPLER,  176 

QA3,  129,  168,  169 

QA4,  176 

QLISP,  176 

SLIP,  286 


ALGOL,  237 

A*  algorithm,  64-73,  80 

Allophone,  333,  337,  349 

Alpha-beta  pruning  of  game  trees,  88-93, 

94,  101 
AM,  157,  195-197 
Ambiguity 

in  natural  language,  208-211 
in  speech,  325-327 
Analogical  knowledge  representation.     See 
Direct  (analogical)  knowledge  repre- 
sentation. 
Analogical  reasoning,  146 
Anaphoric  reference,  293,  358 
AND/OR  graph,  26,  38-40,  43,  74,  113, 
119,  124.     See  also  Problem  repre- 
sentation, 
generalized,  82 
search  of,  54-57,  74-83 
AND/OR  tree,  39,  56,  94,  268.     See  also 
Problem  representation, 
context  tree,  197 
degree  of,  91 
game  tree,  25,  43-45,  84 
solution  tree,  40,  75,  77-79 
transition  tree,  316-317 
Application  language,  in  LIFER,  316 
Applications  of  AI.     See  also  Games; 
Puzzles, 
chemistry,  168 
document  retrieval,  328,  351 
education,  186 
expert  systems,  9 
geometry,  119-122,  201-202 
information  retrieval,  22,  282,  283,  292, 

316,  318 
machine  translation,  207-213,  225,  226, 
233-238,  273,  274,  279,  281,  288-291 
mathematics,  195 


398 


Subject  Index 


Applications  of  AI  (continued) 
medicine,  195,  220 
paraphrasing,  149,  211,  255,  274, 

302-304,  321 
question  answering,  168-169,  173, 

185-186,  281,  295,  302 
science,  221 
space  planning,  202 
story  understanding,  231,  300,  306 
symbolic  integration,  21,  22,  24,  118, 

123-127 
travel  budget  manager,  353 
voice  chess,  328,  334,  344 
ARPA  speech  understanding  research 

(SUR),  327,  353 
Augmented  transition  network  (ATN), 
186,  230,  261,  263-267.     See  also 
Grammar;  Parsing, 
in  GSP,  268,  271 
in  LIFER,  316 
in  LUNAR,  292-294 
in  MARGIE,  303,  304 
in  speech  understanding  systems,  350, 

355 
in  text  generation  systems,  277-279 
Automatic  programming,  9 
Average  branching  factor.     See  Branching 

factor. 
Axiomatic  system,  165 

Babel,  278 

Backed-up  values,  in  game  trees,  87 

Backgammon,   103 

Backtracking  control  strategy,  23,  138, 

203,  258,  266,  271,  298,  339,  341,  351 

Backward-chaining  control  strategy,  195, 
198 

Backward  reasoning,  23-25,  36,  51,  56, 
74,  110,  111.     See  also  Control 
strategy;  Expectation-driven  pro- 
cessing; Top-down  processing. 

Bandwidth  condition,  69 

Bandwidth  search,  60,  69-71 

Bare  template,  288,  290 

BASEBALL,  227,  237,  282 

Beam  search,  337,  341,  350,  356 

Beam  width,  341 

Best-first  search,  59,  60,   102,  360 

Bidirectional  search,  24,  51-53,  72-73,  74 

Blackboard,   197,  331,  336,  343-346.     See 
also  Control  strategy;  Knowledge 
source. 

Blind  search,  21,  29-30,  46-57 


bidirectional,  72 
and  heuristic  search,  58 
and  ordered  search,  61-62 
in  Logic  Theorist,  111 
Blocks  world,  276 

Bottom-up  processing.     See  also  Control 
strategy;  Data-driven  processing; 
Forward  reasoning, 
definition  of,  23-24 
in  production  systems,  198 
in  natural-language  parsing,  259,  270 
in  speech  understanding,  326,  334,  338, 
358 
Branch-and-bound,  64 
Branching  factor 

average,  in  speech  system  grammars, 

328-329 
of  a  search  tree,  91,  98 
Breadth-first  search,  47-48,  56-57,  61,  68, 
73,  111 

Caps,  106,  196 

Case  ambiguity,  291 

Case  frame,  182,  186,  231,  253 

Case  grammar,  229,  249,  252-255,  277 

Causal  chain,  301 

Chart,  260,  268-271,  354 

Checkers,  26,  43,  44,  95,  97 

Chemistry,  applications  of  AI  in,  168 

Chess,  6,  22,  23,  26,  43,  94-108,  205, 

334,  351 
Co-routining,  271.     See  also  Control 

strategy;  Parallel  processing. 
Combinatorial  explosion,  27,  28,  58,  98, 

99,  154,  155,  168,  260,  339,  356 
Competence  vs.  performance,  245 
Compiled  knowledge,  336-337,  349 
Completeness,  of  a  knowledge  represen- 
tation, 178 
Computational  linguistics,  226,  229,  233, 

304 
Computer-assisted  instruction,  186 
Conceptual  analyzer,  in  MARGIE,  303 
Conceptual  dependency  theory  (CD) 
in  MARGIE,  300-303 
in  SAM  and  PAM,  306 
and  semantic  primitives,  211-215,  231 
and  text  generation,  278-279 
Conceptualization,  213 
Concordance,  226 
Conflict  resolution,  in  production  systems, 

192,  197 
Conjunctive  subgoals,   111,   119 


Subject  Index 


399 


Connected- speech  understanding.     See 

Speech  understanding. 
CONNIVER,  175-176 
Consistency  assumption,  in  search 

algorithms,  66,  69,  73 
Consistency,  of  a  knowledge  repre- 
sentation, 178 
Constraining  knowledge,  344 
Constraint-structured  planning,  203 
Construction,  in  geometry,  121 
Context 

in  production  systems,  190,  197 
in  speech  understanding,  333 
Context  tree,  in  MYCIN,  197 
Context-free  grammar.     See  also  Phrase- 
structure  grammar, 
definition  of,  242-243 
in  parsing,  260,  263 
in  text-generation,  273-274 
in  transformational  grammar,  247 
Context-sensitive  grammar,  241-242.     See 

also  Phrase-structure  grammar. 
Control  strategy.     See  also  Problem  solv- 
ing; Reasoning;  Search  algorithms, 
agenda,  338,  356,  360 
backtracking,  23,  138,  203,  258,  266, 

271,  298,  339,  341,  351 
backward  chaining,  195,  198 
blackboard,  197,  331,  336,  343-346 
bottom-up,  23-24,  198,  220,  259,  270, 

326,  334,  338,  358 
co-routining,  271 
conflict  resolution,  192,  197 
data-  or  event-driven,  24,  198,  220 
definition  of,  22 
demons,  303 

direction  of,  23-24,  198,  220 
event  queue,  356 
expectation-  or  goal-driven,  183,  198, 

216-218,  232,  326,  334,  336,  344 
focus  of  attention,  190,  197,  338,  340, 

347,  356,  360 
forward  chaining,  198 
hybrid,  340,  356 

hypothesis  posting,  336,  338,  354 
island  driving,  259,  337,  339,  346,  356, 

361 
matching,  159,  187 
parallel  processing,  258,  265,  298 
in  parsing,  230,  258-259 
in  PLANNER,  179 
procedural  attachment,  156,  158,  179, 
218-221 


and  procedural  knowledge  represen- 
tation, 174 
in  production  systems,   194,   197-198 
in  speech  systems,  336-342,  347,  350- 

351,  355-357,  359-360 
scheduler,  347,  356 

top-down,   183,  198,  216-218,  232,  259, 
326,  334,  336,  338,  344,  355,  358,  359 
CONVERSE,  228 
Cost,  in  search  algorithms,  75-77 
Critical  node,  in  a  game  tree,  91 
Criticality  value,  in  ABSTRIPS,  136 
CRYSALIS,  336 
Cybernetics,  4,  233 

Data-driven  processing,  23-24,  198,  220. 
See  also  Bottom-up  processing;  Con- 
trol strategy;  Forward  reasoning. 

Database,  22,  328.     See  also  Information 
retrieval. 

DEACON,  228 

Dead  position,  in  a  game,  87,  99 

Declarative  knowledge  representation,  230 
vs.  procedural  knowledge  representa- 
tion, 151,   172,  219 

Deduction,  146,  205.     See  also  Inference; 
Reasoning. 

Deep  structure,  in  language,  247,  266 

Default  reasoning,  176-177 

Default  values,  183,  216-220 

Degree  of  a  tree,  91 

Delete  list 

in  ABSTRIPS,  135 
in  STRIPS,  128 

Demon,  303.     See  also  Control  strategy. 

DENDRAL,  60,  157,  198 

Denotative  knowledge  representation,  200 

Dependency  grammar,  274 

Depth  bound,  49,  57,  99,  115 

Depth-first  search,  49-51,  57,  60,  61,  101, 
113,  138,  203 

Depth  of  a  node,  49 

Derivation  tree,  229,  242,  246,  256,  266, 
273,  281,  293,  296,  302 

Diagram,  reasoning  from,  201 

Dialogue.     See  Discourse. 

Dictionary,  for  machine  translation,  234 

Difference 
in  GPS,  113 

in  means-ends  anaylsis,  24 
in  STRIPS,  129 


400 


Subject  Index 


Direct  (analogical)  knowledge  represen- 
tation, 158,  177,  200-206 
and  parallel  processing,  204 
vs.  propositions!  knowledge  represen- 
tation, 200 

Directedness  of  reasoning,  151,  174-177, 
185,  188,  193,  219 

Direction  of  reasoning,  23-24,  198,  259 

Discourse,  339,  358 
dialogue,  220 
extended,  279 
pragmatics,  249,  327,  332,  334,  359 

Discovery,  by  AM,  196 

Discrimination  network,  158,  278,  304 

Distributed  processing,  336.     See  also 
Parallel  processing. 

Divide-and-conquer.     See  Problem 
reduction. 

Document  retrieval  task,  328,  351 

Domain-specific  knowledge,  151,  176,  220. 
See  also  Heuristic. 

DRAGON,  328-329,  337 

Dynamic  ordering,  102 

Dynamic  programming,  351 

Dynamic  weighting,  69 

Early  natural  language  programs,  227- 

229,  237,  257,  260,  281-287 
Education,  applications  of  AI  in,  186 
8-puzzle,  32,  51,  62,  67,  68 
Elimination  rule,  in  logic,  163,  164,  169 
ELIZA,  227,  257,  260,  285-287 
Ellipsis,  in  natural  language,  320,  358 
Embedding,  in  natural  language,  263 
EPAM,  158,  196 
Epistemology,  151,  153,  170 
Evaluation  function,  60,  61-62,  64,  67-73, 

77,  78,  80,  83,  97 
Event-driven  processing.     See  Data-driven 

processing. 
Event  queue,  356 
Expansion  of  a  node,  46,  55 
Expectation-driven  processing,  183,  198, 

216-218,  232,  326,  334,  336,  344. 

See  also  Backward  reasoning;  Control 

strategy;  Top-down  processing. 
Expert  system,  9 

explanation  by,  9,  195,  198-199 
knowledge-based  system,  227,  229 
knowledge  engineering,  9,  198 
Expertise,  interactive  transfer  of,  199 
Explanation,  by  expert  systems,  9,  195, 

198-199 


Explicit  vs.  implicit  knowledge  repre- 
sentation, 150,  172 
Extended  discourse,  279 
Extended  grammar,  245-255 
Extended  grammar  parsers,  260 
Extended  inference,  176 

15-puzzle,  68,  73 

Finite-state  grammar,  337.     See  also 
Regular  grammar. 

Finite-state  transition  diagram  (FSTD), 
263-264 

First-order  logic,  165 

Fixed  ordering  of  nodes,  in  search,  90, 
101 

Focus  of  attention,  control  strategy,  190, 
197,  338,  340,  347,  356,  360 

FOL,  169,  171,  205 

Formal  grammar,  239-244 

Formal  language,  239-244,  263 

Formal  reasoning,  146 

Formula,  in  preference  semantics,  288-289 

Forward-chaining  control  strategy,  198 

Forward  pruning,  of  game  trees,  104 

Forward  reasoning,  23-25,  51,  56,  74,  198 

Frame  knowledge  representation,  149, 

156,  158-159,  216-222,  334-335.     See 
also  Script  knowledge  representation, 
and  case  frames,  183,  254 
matching  in,  159 

and  preference  semantics,  208,  229,  231 
and  semantic  networks,  183,  186,  189 

Frame  problem,  177,  201 

Fregean  knowledge  representation.     See 
Propositional  knowledge  represen- 
tation. 

FRL-0,  221 

Full-width  search,  103 

Functions,  in  logic,  165 

Game  tree,  25,  43-45,  84 

random,  92 

totally  dependent,  92 

uniform,  91-93 
Game-tree  search,  84-108.     See  also 
Search  algorithms;  AND/OR  tree. 

alpha-beta,  88-93,  94,  101 

backed-up  values,  87 

dead  position,  87,  99 

forward,  104 

horizon  effect,  99 

killer  heuristic,  102 

live  position,  87 


Subject  Index 


401 


method  of  analogies,  104 

minimax,  84-87,  88,  90,  91,  94,  98 

negmax,  86-87,  89 

plausible-move  generation,  104 

quiescence,  99-100,  103 

refutation  move,  102 

secondary  search,  100 

static  evaluation  function,  87,  96-97, 

100 
tapered  forward,  104 
Games,  153.     See  also  Puzzles, 
backgammon,  103 
checkers,  26,  43,  44,  95,  97 
chess,  6,  22,  23,  26,  43,  94-108,  205, 

334,  351 
go,  103 

tic-tac-toe,  43,  94 
voice  chess,  328,  334,  344 
General  Problem  Solver  (GPS),  113-118, 
129,  135,  169,  196.     See  also  Means- 
ends  analysis. 
General  Space  Planner,  202-203 
General  Syntactic  Processor  (GSP), 

268-272 
Generality  vs.  power,  335 
Generalized  AND/OR  graph,  82 
Generate-and-test,  30 
Generative  grammar,  229,  245,  247 
Generative  semantics,  248 
Geometry  Theorem  Prover,  119-122, 

201-202 
Go,  103 

Goal,  22,  36,  105,  114,  306,  308,  310-311 
Goal-directed  reasoning.     See  Backward 
reasoning;  Control  strategy; 
Expectation-driven  processing; 
Top-down  reasoning. 
Goal  states,  33 
GOLUX,  171,  175 
GPS.     See  General  Problem  Solver. 
Graceful  degradation,  336 
Grain  size  of  a  knowledge  representation, 

147 
Grammar.     See  also  Natural  language 
understanding;  Parsing. 
ATN,  186,  230,  261,  263-267,  268,  271, 

277-279,  292-294,  303,  304,  316 
average  branching  factor  of,  328,  329 
case,  229,  249,  252-255,  277 
context-free,  242-243,  245,  247,  260, 

263,  273,  274 
context-sensitive,  241-242,  245 
definition  of,  225,  229 


dependency,  274 

extended,  260-261 

finite-state,  337 

formal,  239-244 

generative,  229,  245,  247 

habitability  of,  328 

mood  system  of,  249 

obligatory  and  optional  transformations 
in,  247 

and  parsing,  256,  260-262 

performance,  261,  335,  355,  359 

phrase-structure,  240-246,  260,  262 

regular,  243,  245,  263 

semantic,  229,  261,  318,  320,  335,  355, 
359 

in  speech  systems,  326,  332,  349 

story,  306 

systemic,  229,  249-251,  297 

transformational,  229,  233,  237,  245- 
248,  249,  251,  252 

transition  tree,  in  LIFER,  316-317 

transitivity  system  of,  249 
Grammarless  parsers,  261 
Graph  Traverser,  67 
Ground  space,  in  ABSTRIPS,  135 
GSP.     See  General  Syntactic  Processor. 
GUS,  220,  231 

Habitability  of  a  language,  328 

HAM,  185 

HARPY,  328,  329,  335,  337,  339,  344, 
346,  349-352,  356 

HAWKEYE,  318 

HEARSAY,  196-197,  336,  338,  343-348 
HEARSAY-I,  328,  334,  335,  343 
HEARSAY-H,  328,  345 

Heuristic,  21,  64,  66,  74,  78,  94,  119,  151, 
168,   174,  177,  188,  201,  220,  228, 
258,  277,  282,  284,  293,  296,  298, 
299,  335.     See  also  Heuristic  search, 
definitions  of,  28-30,  58,  109 
killer,  in  game  playing,  102 

Heuristic  Path  Algorithm,  67 

Heuristic  search,  28,  29-30,  46,  58-83, 
94-108,  117,  350,  356 

Hierarchical  planning,  135 

Hierarchical  search,  135 

Hierarchy.     See  Inheritance. 

Homomorphic  knowledge  representation, 
200 

Horizon  effect,  in  game-tree  search,  99 

Human  engineering,  319 

Human  memory.     See  Memory,  models  of. 


402 


Subject  Index 


Human  problem  solving,  6-7,  14,  285 
HWIM,  267,  292,  328,  337,  339,  353-357 
Hybrid  control  strategy,  340,  356 
Hypothesis  posting,  336,  338,  354.     See 

also  Control  strategy. 
Hypothesis  scoring,  340,  346,  347,  351, 

355,  356 
shortfall  density  strategy,  341,  356 
uniform  scoring  policy,  340 
Hypothesize-and-test.     See  Generate- an  d- 

test. 
Hypothetical  worlds,  360 

Ideational  function  of  language,  249 
Incremental  simulation,  in  HWIM,  341 
Indeterminacy  of  knowledge  represen- 
tations, 148 
Inexact  reasoning,  195 
Inference,  146,  188,  213,  228,  231,  236- 

237,  255,  276,  303-304.     See  also 

Reasoning, 
extended,  176 
rules  of,  146,  154,  155,  160,  162-165, 

168,  175 
Information  retrieval,  22,  145,  282-283, 

292,  316,  318 
Information-processing  psychology.     See 

Psychology. 
Informedness  of  an  algorithm,  65 
Inheritance 

hierarchy,  156,  181,  218 
of  properties,  156,  181-184,  216,  218 
Initial  states,  33 

Instance,  in  semantic  networks,  182 
Integration.     See  Symbolic  integration. 
Intelligence,  3-11 
Intelligent  technology,  3 
Interactive  transfer  of  expertise,  199 
Interdependent  subproblems,  56,  81-83 
Interlingua,  234-235,  237,  288,  300,  303, 

304 
INTERLISP,  320 

Intermediate  OR  node,  39,  56,  57 
Interpersonal  function,  of  language,  249 
Interpreter,  of  a  production  system, 

190-192 
Interpretive  semantics,  248 
Intonation,  in  speech  signal,  333 
Introduction  rule,  in  logic,  163,   164,   169 
IPL-V,  281-282 
Island-driving  control  strategy,  259,  337, 

339,  346,  356,  361 


Isolated-word  recognition  of  speech,  325, 

333,  349 
Iterative  deepening  search,  100-101 

Juncture  rules,  in  speech  understanding, 
330,  350,  354 

Killer  heuristic,  102 
Kinship  relations,  281 
KLONE,  221 

Knowledge,  144.     See  also  Heuristic, 
compiled,  336,  337,  349 
compiler,  349 
constraining,  344 
domain-specific,  151,  176,  220 
explicit  vs.  implicit,  150,  172 
world,  226,  230 
Knowledge  acquisition,  145,  194,  195,  198. 

See  also  Learning. 
Knowledge-based  system,  227,  229.     See 

also  Expert  system. 
Knowledge  engineering,  9,  198.     See  also 

Expert  system. 
Knowledge  representation,  143-222,  226, 

229-232.     See  also  Knowledge  repre- 
sentation languages. 
ad  hoc,  227 
completeness  of,  178 
consistency  of,  178 
declarative,  230 
declarative  vs.  procedural,  151,  172, 

219,  230 
denotative,  200 

direct  (analogical),  158,  177,  200-206 
homomorphic,  200 
indeterminacy  of,  148 
issues  in,  145-152 
modularity  of,  149,  157,  170,  178,  193, 

198,  336,  343 
organization  of,  336 
procedural,  146,  149-150,  155-156,  172- 

179,  219-220,  230,  289,  295-297 
procedural-declarative  controversy,  151, 

230 
propositional  (Fregean),  200 
propositional  vs.  direct,  200 
scope  of,  147 

semantic  interpretation  function,  200 
Knowledge  representation  languages.     See 

also  AI  programming  languages. 
FRL-0,  221 
KLONE,  221 
KRL,   158,  221,  231 


Subject  Index 


403 


UNITS,  221 
Knowledge  source,  257,  298,  326,  336, 
343-348,  353.     See  also  Blackboard. 

ablation  studies  of,  335 

response  frame  of,  345,  347 

stimulus  frame  of,  345 
KRL,  158,  221,  231 

Ladder,  318 

Language  definition  system,  316,  359 
Language,  formal,  239-244,  263 
Language  understanding.     See  Natural 

language  understanding. 
Learning,  9,  97,  128,  145,  157,  193,  195. 

See  also  Knowledge  acquisition. 
Legal-move  generator,  153,  334,  344 
Length-first  search,  138 
Lexicon,  247,  333,  346,  354 
LIFER,  231,  232,  261,  316-321,  360 
Limited-logic  natural  language  systems, 

228 
Linguistics,  computational.     See 

Computational  linguistics. 
LISP,  15,  173,  237,  283,  295,  303 
List  processing,  227,  281-287 
Live  position  in  a  game,  87 
Logic,  4,  8,  146,  148,  151,  154-155,  160- 
171,  172,  174 
completeness  and  consistency  of,  178 
first-order,  165 
functions  in,  165 
natural  deduction  in,  163,  164,  169, 

175 
predicate  calculus,  128,  163,  200,  292, 

297,  299 
predicates  in,  163,  182 
propositional  calculus,  109,  116,  118, 

160-163 
quantification  in,  151,  164,  360 
resolution  method  in,  168,  175 
Logic  Theorist  (LT),  24,  109-112,  113, 

116,  119 
LUNAR,  230,  267,  292-294,  353 

Machine  translation 

current  status  of,  237-238 

early  AI  work  in,  226,  233-237 

and  semantic  primitives,  207-213 

and  text  generation,  273-274,  279,  289, 

291 
Wilks's  system,  288-291 

Machinese.     See  Interlingua. 

Macro-operators,  28 


MACROP,  133 

Manageability,  of  production  systems, 

193,  198 
MARGIE,  149,  211,  231,  278,  300-305, 

306,  334 
Matching.     See  also  Control  strategy, 
Pattern  matching, 
of  frames,  159 

of  semantic  network  fragments,  187 
Mathematics,  applications  of  AI  in,  195 
Max  cost.     See  Cost,  in  search  algo- 
rithms. 
Means-ends  analysis,  24,  59,  113,  117, 
126,  129,  135,  169.     See  also 
General  Problem  Solver. 
Mechanical  translation.     See  Machine 

translation. 
Medicine,  applications  of  AI  in,  195,  220 
MEMOD,  215 

Memory,  models  of.     See  also  Psychology; 
Semantic  network  knowledge  repre- 
sentation. 
ACT,  195 
associative,  230 
EPAM,  158,  196 
HAM,  185 
imagery,  201 
MEMOD,  215 
Quillian's  spreading  activation  system, 

185,  187 
semantic  network,  180 
Meta-knowledge,  144,  147 
Method  of  analogies,  in  game-tree  search, 

104 
MICRO-PLANNER,  295-297 
Middle-out  search  strategy.     See  Island 

driving  control  strategy 
MIND,  268,  272 
Minimax  search  in  game  trees,  84-87,  88, 

90,  91,  94,  98 
Model,  semantic,  in  FOL,  205 
Modularity  of  a  knowledge  representation, 
149,  157,  170,  178,  193,  198,  336,  343 
Modus  ponens,  162 
Mood  system,  of  a  grammar,  249 
Morphemics 

in  speech  understanding,  332-333 

in  transformational  grammar,  246 

Multiple  sources  of  knowledge.     See 

Knowledge  source. 
Mutilated  chessboard  problem,  27 
MYCIN,  151,  157,  195-199 


404 


Subject  Index 


Named  plan,  in  PAM,  313 

Natural  deduction,  in  logic,  163-164,  169, 

175 
Natural  language  features,  problematic 
agreement,  263 
ambiguity,  208-211 
anaphoric  reference,  293,  358 
case  ambiguity,  291 
ellipsis,  320,  358 
embedding,  263 
habitability,  328 
speech  acts,  280 
Natural  language  understanding,  3,  8, 

225-321,  358-359.     See  also  Speech 

understanding, 
competence  vs.  performance  in,  245 
early  research,  227-229,  237,  257,  260, 

281-287 
and  semantic  primitives,  149,  207-214 
Natural  language  understanding,  appli- 
cations 
information  retrieval,  22,  145,  282,  283, 

292,  316,  318 
machine  translation,  207-213,  225,  226, 

233-238,  273,  274,  279,  281,  288-291 
paraphrasing,  149,  211,  255,  274,  302- 

304,  321 
question  answering,  168-169,  173,  185- 

186,  281,  295,  302 
story  understanding,  221,  231,  300,  306 
Negmax  formalism  for  game-tree  search, 

86-87,  89 
Network  representation.     See  also 

Semantic  network  knowledge 

representation. 
ATN,  186,  230,  233,  261,  263-267,  268, 

271,  277-279,  292-294,  303,  304,  316 
discrimination,  158,  278,  304 
Finite-state  transition  diagram,  263-264 
partitioning,  186 
pronunciation  graphs,  330 
RTN,  264-266 

segmented  lattice,  330,  337,  353,  356 
in  speech  systems,  330,  337 
spelling  graph,  330,  337,  346 
transition  tree,  316-317 
Node 

critical,  91 
depth  of,  49 
expansion  of,  46,  55 
intermediate,  39,  56,  57 
solvable,  40 
successor,  26,  33,  46 


terminal,  38,  43 

tip,  80,  87 

unsolvable,  40,  55 
Noise,  in  speech  signal,  343 
Nondeterminism.     See  Parsing. 
Nonterminal  symbols  of  a  grammar,  239 
NP-complete  problems,  68,  69 
NUDGE,  221 

Obligatory  transformation,  in  a  grammar, 

247 
Observation  of  a  semantic  model,  205 
Operator  schemata,  33 
Operators,  in  problem  solving,  22,  32,  36, 

74,  110,  113,  119,  123,  128,  135 
Optimal  solution,  in  search,  28,  62,  74 
Optimality,  of  search  algorithm,  65-67, 

80,  83 
Optional  transformation,  in  a  grammar, 

247 
Ordered  depth-first  search,  60,  102 
Ordered  search,  59-62,  64,  72,  77-81,  82, 

124 
Organization  of  knowledge,  336 

PAM,  300,  306,  313-314 
Parallel  processing,  258,  265,  298 
co-routining,  271 
and  direct  knowledge  representation, 

204 
distributed,  336 
Paraphrasing,  149,  211,  255,  274,  302-304, 

321 
Paraplate,  in  preference  semantics,  279, 

291 
PARRY,  257 
PARSIFAL,  230 

Parsing,  225,  229,  239-240,  256-272.     See 
also  Grammar;  Natural  language 
understanding, 
ad  hoc,  287 

with  an  ATN,  263-267,  293,  349,  355 
with  charts,  260,  268-271,  354 
control  strategies,  230,  258-259 
derivation  tree,  229,  242,  246,  256,  266, 

273,  281,  293,  296,  302 
with  extended  grammars,  260 
in  LIFER,  316-318 
by  MARGIE'S  conceptual  analyzer, 

302-303 
nondeterminism,  265 
grammarless  parsers,  260,  261 


Subject  Index 


405 


by  SHRDLU's  PROGRAMMAR, 

297-298 
in  speech  understanding,  327,  359 
template  matching,  260 
with  a  transformational  grammar,  260 
Partial  development,  in  search,  59,  114 
Partial  expansion.     See  Partial  develop- 
ment. 
Partial  functions,  operators  viewed  as,  33 
Partitioned  semantic  network,  186,  360 
Pattern  matching,  123,  256,  260,  283-287. 

See  also  Matching. 
Perceptual  primitives,  in  WHISPER,  204 
Performance  evaluation,  of  speech  sys- 
tems, 329 
Performance  grammar,  261,  335,  349,  355, 

359.     See  also  Semantic  grammar. 
PHLIQA1,  232 
Phonemics 

in  speech  understanding,  327,  332-333 
in  transformational  grammar,  246 
Phonetics,  327,  332-333,  343 
Phonological  component  of  a  transfor- 
mational grammar,  248 
Phrase  marker,  in  a  transformational 

grammar,  246,  273 
Phrase- structure  grammar,  240-246 

compared  with  transformation  grammar, 

245 
definition  of,  243 
in  parsing,  260,  262 
Plan 

in  problem  solving,  107,  128,  131,  137 
in  story  understanding,  306,  309-310 
PLANNER,  151,  155,  171,  175-178, 

295-297 
Planning,  22,  28,  169.     See  also  Problem 
solving;  Reasoning, 
constraint-structured,  203 
hierarchical,  in  ABSTRIPS,  135 
generalized,  in  STRIPS,  131-134 
Plausible-move  generation,  in  game-tree 

search,  104 
Plausible  reasoning,  177 
Ply,  in  game  trees,  99 
POPLER,  176 
Potential  solution,  in  heuristic  search, 

77-79,  80,  82 
Pragmatics,  in  discourse,  249,  327,  332, 

334,  359 
Preconditions,  of  an  operator 
in  ABSTRIPS,  136 
in  STRIPS,  128,  131,  135 


Predicate  calculus,   128,   163,  200,  292, 

297,  299.     See  also  Logic. 
Predicate,  in  logic,   163,   182 
Preference  semantics,  208,  279,  288-291 
Primitive  problem,  36,  38,  74,  121 
Primitives 

perceptual,  in  WHISPER,  204 
semantic,  148-149,  183,  198,  207-215, 
231,  237,  278,  288-291,  300-303,  306 
Problem  reduction,  7,  114,  119,  201 
Problem-reduction  representation,  25, 

36-42,  54,  74,  113 
Problem  representation,  8,  22-28,  32-45 
game  tree,  25,  43-45,  84 
AND/OR  graph,  26,  38-40,  43,  74, 

113,   119,  124 
problem-reduction,  25,  36-42,  54,  74, 

113 
state  space,  26,  33,  195 
theorem-proving,  25 
Problem  solving,  7,  21,  58,  74,  109,  113, 
119,  123,  128,  135,  153,  284,  296. 
See  also  Planning;  Problem  represen- 
tation; Reasoning;  Theorem  proving, 
generate-and-test,  30 
human,  285 

interdependent  subproblems,  56,  81-83 
means-ends  analysis,  24,  59,  113,  117, 

126,  129,  135,  169 
operators,  22,  32,  36,  74,  110,  113,  119, 

123,  128,  135 
optimal  solution,  28,  62,  74 
primitive  problem,  36,  38,  74,  121 
problem  reduction,  7,  114,  119,  201 
for  robots,  22,  128-139 
solution,  33 

state-space  search,  30,  35,  46-53,  55, 
58-73,  77,  80,  111,   153,  195 
Problem  space.     See  State  space. 
Procedural  attachment,  156,  158,  179, 

218-221 
Procedural-declarative  controversy,  151, 

230 
Procedural  knowledge,  193,  198,  219 
Procedural  knowledge  representation,  146, 
149-150,   155-156,  172-179,  219-220, 
230,  289,  295-297 
Procedural  semantics,  229-230 
Process  control.     See  Control  strategy. 
Production  rule,   157,   190,  239,  303 
Production  system,  157,  190-199 
adaptive,  195 
conflict  resolution  in,  192,  197 


406 


Subject  Index 


Production  system  (continued) 

context,  190,  197 

interpreter,  190-192 

manageability  of,  193,  198 
PROGRAMMAR,  297,  319 
Programming  languages  for  AI.     See  AI 

programming  languages. 
Pronunciation  graph,  330 
Property  inheritance.     See  Inheritance. 
Propositional  calculus,  109,  116,  118, 

160-163.     See  also  Logic. 
Propositional  (Fregean)  knowledge 

representation,  200 
Prosodies,  in  speech  understanding,  327, 

332-334,  359 
PROSPECTOR,  157,  181,  196,  198 
PROTOSYNTHEX,  228 
Pruning,  59,  60,  121,  129,  201.     See  also 

Game-tree  search. 
Pseudo-language,  233 
Psychology,  157,  180,  193,  201 

human  problem  solving,  6-7,  14,  285 

memory,  180,  187,  201,  230 
Puzzles.     See  also  Games. 

blocks  world,  276 

8-puzzle,  32,  51,  62,  67,  68 

15-puzzle,  68,  73 

mutilated  chessboard,  27 

Tower  of  Hanoi,  36-38,  42,  160,  165 

traveling-salesman  problem,  21,  34,  48, 
62,  69,  70-71 

QA3,  129,  168-169 

QA4,  176 

QLISP,  176 

Quantification,  151,  164,  360 

Query  language,  292 

Question  answering,  168-169,  173,  185- 

186,  281,  295,  302 
Quiescence,  in  game-tree  search,  99-100, 

103 


direction  of,  23-24,  198 

directedness  of,  151,  174-177,  185,  188, 

193,  219 
expectation-  or  goal-driven,  23-24,  183, 
197,  216-218,  232,  326,  334,  336,  344 
extended  inference  in,  176 
formal,  146 

forward,  23-25,  51,  56,  74,  198 
from  a  diagram,  201 
inexact,  195 
inference  in,  146,  188,  213,  228,  231, 

236-237,  255,  276,  303-304 
plausible,  177 

spreading  activation,  185,  187,  189 
top-down,  24 

top-down  vs.  bottom  up.     See  Control 
strategy,  direction  of. 
Recursive  pattern  matcher,  256 
Recursive  transition  networks  (RTN), 

264-266 
Refutation  move,  in  game  playing,  102 
Regular  grammar,  243,  245,  263.     See  also 

Finite-state  grammar. 
Representation  of  knowledge.     See  Knowl- 
edge representation. 
Resolution  method,  in  logic,  168,  175 
Response  frame,  of  a  knowledge  source, 

345,  347 
Rewrite  rules,  239,  261,  316.     See  also 

Grammar;  Production  rule. 
ROBOT,  232 

Robot  problem  solving,  22,  128-139 
Robotics,  10 
Rule 

of  inference,  146,  154-155,  160,  162- 

165,  168,  175 
production,  157,  190,  239,  303 
rewrite,  239,  261,  316 
Rule  base,  of  a  production  system,  190 
Rule-based  system.     See  Production 
system. 


Random  game  tree,  92 

Random  text  generation,  233,  273 

Reasoning,  8,  146.     See  also  Control 

strategy;  Planning;  Problem  solving. 

analogical,   146 

backward,  23-25,  36,  51,  56,  74,  110, 
111 

bottom-up,  24 

data-  or  event-driven,  23-24,  198,  220 

deductive,   146,  205 

default,   176-177 


SAD-SAM,  158,  227,  237,  260,  281-282 

SAINT,  123-127 

SAM,  211,  216,  220,  231,  300,  306, 
311-313,  334 

Scheduler,  347,  356 

Schema.     See  Frame  knowledge  repre- 
sentation. 

SCHOLAR,  186 

Scientific  applications  of  AI,  221 

Scope  of  a  knowledge  representation,  147 

Scoring.     See  Hypothesis  scoring. 


Subject  Index 


407 


Script  knowledge  representation,  216-222, 

231,  300,  306,  307-309,  311,  334 
SDC  speech  system,  337 
Search,  6,  7,  21,  25,  330,  337,  338,  339, 

343,  344 
Search  algorithms.     See  also  Game- tree 
search. 
AND/OR  graph  search,  54-57,  74-83 
A*  algorithm,  64-73,  80 
alpha-beta  pruning,  88-93,  94,  101 
bandwidth,  60,  69-71 
beam,  337,  341,  350,  356 
best-first,  59,  60,  102,  360 
bidirectional,  24,  51-53,  72-73,  74 
blind,  21,  29-30,  46-57,  58,  61-62,  72, 

111 
breadth-first,  47-48,  56-57,  61,  68,  73, 

111 
depth-first,  49-51,  57,  60,  61,  101,  113, 

138,  203 
fixed  ordering,  90,  101 
full-width,  103 
generate-and-test,  30 
heuristic,  21,  28,  29-30,  46,  58-83,  117, 

119,  350 
Heuristic  Path  Algorithm,  67 
hierarchical,  135 
iterative  deepening,  100-101 
length-first,  138 

minimax,  84-87,  88,  90,  91,  94,  98 
negmax,  86-87,  89 
optimality,  65,  66,  67,  80,  83 
ordered,  59-62,  64,  72,  77-81,  82,  124 
ordered  depth-first,  60,  102 
in  speech  systems,  339-340 
uniform-cost,  48-49,  51,  61,  65,  73 
Search  graph,  26 

Search  space,  26-28,  58,  94,  339,  343 
Secondary  search,  in  game  trees,  100 
Segmented  lattice,  330,  337,  353,  356 
Semantic  analysis,  in  natural  language 

understanding,  228,  230 
Semantic  component,  of  a  transforma- 
tional grammar,  248 
Semantic  density,  in  preference  semantics, 

290 
Semantic  grammar,  229,  261,  318,  320, 
335,  355,  359.     See  also  Performance 
grammar. 
Semantic  interpretation  function,  in 

knowledge  representation,  200 
Semantic  marker,  297 
Semantic  model,  in  FOL,  205 


Semantic  network  knowledge 

representation,   156,   172,   180-189, 
193,   197,  208,  218,  229,  230,  254, 
276,  277,  303,  330,  355,  360 
active  structural  network,  185 
fragment  matching  in,  187 
partitioning  of,   186,  360 
spreading  activation  in,   185,  187,   189 
Semantic  primitives,  148,  149,  183,  198, 
207-215,  231,  237,  254,  278,  288,  300, 
306 
Semantics,   184,   186,  189,  225,  235,  287, 
316,  326,  327,  332,  334,  344 
generative,  248 
interpretive,  248 
preference,  208 
procedural,  229,  230 
Sentential  connectives,  in  logic,  161 
Short-term  memory  buffer,  in  production 

systems.     See  Context. 
Shortfall  density  strategy,  for  hypothesis 

scoring  in  HWIM,  341,  356 
SHRDLU,  151,   176,   196,  230,  251,  257, 

260,  276,  295-299,  319 
Simulation  structure,  in  FOL,  205 
SIN,   125-127 
SIR,   158,   173,  185,  228,  237,  260, 

283-284 
SLIP,  286 

Slot,  of  a  frame,  158,  216 
SNIFFER,  188 
SOLDIER,  125 
Solution  graph,  40,  55 
Solution,  in  problem  solving,  33 
Solution  tree,  40,  75,  77-79 
Solvable  node,  40 
SOPHIE,  257,  261 
Sort,  in  logic,  163,   166 
Space  planning  task,  202 
Speech  acts,  280 

Speech  recognition,  325,  326,  333,  349 
Speech  signal,  332 
acoustics,  343 
allophone,  333,  337,  349 
intonation,  333 
noise,  343 
stress,  333 
syllable,  333,  343 
Speech  understanding,  158,  186,  226,  231, 
257,  259,  267,  292,  325-361 
connected  speech,  326 
evaluation  of  system  performance,  329 
isolated-word  recognition,  325,  333,  349 


408 


Subject  Index 


Speech  understanding  (continued) 
morphemics,  332-333 
network  representations  in,  330,  337 
phonemics,  327,  332-333 
prosodies,  327,  332-334,  359 
vs.  speech  recognition,  326 
SPEECHLIS,  328,  353 
Spelling  correction,  320 
Spelling  graph,  330,  337,  346 
Spreading  activation,  in  semantic 

networks,  185,  187,  189 
SRI  speech  system,  339,  358-361 
Start  symbol,  of  a  grammar,  240 
State,  22,  32 
State  space,  26,  33,  195 

graph,  25,  33-34,  43,  46,  61,  64,  74 
representation,  24,  32-35,  36,  40-42, 

46,  74,   113,   129 
search,  30,  35,  46-53,  55,  58-73,  77, 

80,  111,  153,  195 
Static  evaluation  function,  in  game-tree 

search,  87,  96-97,  100 
Stereotypes,  in  preference  semantics,  289 
Stimulus  frame,  of  a  knowledge  source, 

345 
Story  grammar,  306 
Story  understanding,  231,  300,  306 
Stress,  in  speech  understanding,  333 
STRIPS,  22,  28,  42,  82,  128-134,  135, 

138-139,  169 
STUDENT,  196,  227,  237,  260,  284-285 
Stylistics,  in  text  generation,  279 
Subgoals,  conjunctive,  111,  119 
Subproblems,  interdependent,  56,  81-83. 

See  also  Problem  solving;  Subgoals. 
Successor  node,  26,  33,  46 
Sum  cost.     See  Cost,  in  search  algo- 
rithms. 
Surface  structure  of  a  natural  language, 

247,  252,  273,  274,  277.     See  also 

Syntax. 
Syllable,  in  speech  understanding,  333, 

343 
Symbolic  integration,  21,  22,  24,   118, 

123-127 
Syntactic  analysis,  in  natural  language 

understanding,  230 
Syntactic  categories,  of  a  grammar,  239 
Syntactic  component,  of  a  transforma- 
tional grammar,  247 
Syntactic  symmetry,  in  the  Geometry 

Theorem  Prover,   120 


Syntax,  155,  225,  326,  327,  332,  334,  344, 

346 
Systemic  grammar,  229,  249-251,  297 
Systems  architecture,  for  speech  under- 
standing, 332-342,  353 

Table  of  Connections,  in  GPS,  115 
Tapered  forward  pruning,  104 
Tautology,  in  logic,  162 
Taxonomy,  181.  See  also  Inheritance. 
Teachable  Language  Comprehender 

(TLC),  185,  228 
TEIRESIAS,  145,  195-199 
Template 

bare,  288,  290 

in  case  grammars,  253 

matching,  in  parsing,  260 

in  preference  semantics,  279,  288-291 

in  speech  recognition,  333,  337,  340, 

349 
word,  349 
Terminal  node,  of  an  AND/OR  graph, 

38,  43 
Terminal  symbol,  in  a  grammar,  239 
Text-based  NL  systems,  228 
Text  generation,  273-280 
in  MARGIE,  304 
random,  233,  273 

and  machine  translation,  273-274,  279, 
289,  291 
Textual  function,  of  language,  249 
Theme,  in  story  understanding,  306, 

310-311,  313 
Theorem  proving,  22,  23,  26,  62,  74,  109, 
116,  118,  119,  129,  151,  155,  168, 
171,  175,  188,  297 
Theorem-proving  representation,  25 
THNOT,  in  PLANNER,  176 
Tic-tac-toe,  43,  94 

Tip  node,  of  an  AND/OR  graph,  80,  87 
Top-down  processing,  259,  326,  334,  338, 
344,  355,  358,  359.     See  also  Back- 
ward reasoning;  Control  strategy; 
Expectation-driven  processing. 
Top-down  reasoning,  24 
Top-down  vs.  bottom-up  reasoning,  198 
TORUS,  186 

Totally  dependent  game  tree,  92 
Tower  of  Hanoi  puzzle,  36-38,  42,  160, 

165 
Transfer  of  expertise,  199 
Transformational  grammar,  229,  237, 
245-248,  249,  251,  252 


Subject  Index  409 


parsers,  260 
Transformations,  obligatory  and  optional, 

246-247 
Transition  operator.     See  Legal-move 

generator. 
Transition-tree  grammar,  in  LIFER, 

316-317 
Transitivity  system,  of  a  grammar,  249 
Travel  budget  manager  task,  353 
Traveling- salesman  problem,  21,  34,  48, 

62,  69,  70-71 
Tree.     See  Grammar;  Parsing;  Problem 

representation. 
Triangle  table,  in  STRIPS,  131-132 
Trigger.     See  Procedural  attachment. 
Truth  table,  in  logic,  162 
Truth  values,  in  logic,  161 
Turing  machine,  4,  241,  266 

Understandability,  of  knowledge  repre- 
sentations, 150,  156-157,  174,  193 

Uniform-cost  search,  48^9,  51,  61,  65,  73 

Uniform  game  tree,  91-93 

Uniform  scoring  policy,  of  hypotheses  in 
HWIM,  340 

UNITS,  221 

Universal  specialization,  in  logic,  164 

Unsolvable  node,  of  an  AND/OR  graph, 
40,  55 

Variable  domain  array,  in  the  General 

Space  Planner,  202 
Variable,  in  logic,  164 
Verb  sense,  278 
Vision,  10,  330,  334 
Voice  chess,  328,  334,  344 

Well-formed  formula,  in  logic,  164 

WHISPER,  203 

Word  island,  in  HWIM,  353 

Word  template,  349 

World  knowledge,  226,  230.     See  also 

Domain-specific  knowledge;  Heuristic. 
World  model,  22,  128,  135 


3.  CRYSALIS 

4.  Applications  in  organic  synthesis 
D.  Applications  in  mathematics 

1.  MACSYMA 

2.  AM 

F.  Research  on  miscellaneous  science  applications 

1.  The  SRI  computer-based  consultant 

2.  PROSPECTOR 


VOL  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Medicine 

A.  Overview 

B.  Medical  applications  systems 

1.  MYCIN 

2.  CASNET 

3.  INTERNIST 

4.  Present  Illness  Program 

5.  Digitalis  Advisor 

6.  IRIS 

7.  EXPERT 


IX.  Applications-oriented  AI  Research:  Education 

A.  Historical  overview  of  AI  applications  in  educai 

B.  Issues  in  the  design  of  tutoring  systems 

C.  Computer-based  tutoring  systems 

1.  SCHOLAR 

2.  WHY 

3.  SOPHIE 

4.  WEST 

5.  WUMPUS 

6.  BUGGY 

7.  EXCHECK 

D.  Research  on  nontutorial  uses  of  AI  in  educatioi 


X.  Automatic  Programming 

A.  Overview-Methods  of  program  specification 

B.  Basic  approaches  to  automatic  programming 

C.  Automatic  programming  systems 

1.  PSI 

2.  SAFE 

3.  Programmer's  Apprentice 

4.  PECOS 

5.  DAEDALUS 

6.  PROTOSYSTEM-1 

7.  NLPQ 

8.  LIBRA-Automatic  program  optimization 


VOLUME   m   (Tentative) 


XL  Models  of  Cognition 

A.  Overview 

B.  General  Problem  Solver 

C.  Models  of  cognitive  development 

D.  EPAM 

E.  Semantic-network  models  of  memory 

1.  Quillian's  semantic  memory  system 

2.  HAM 


Avron  Barr,  a 
Research  Associate  in 
the  Computer  Science 
Department  at  Stan- 
ford University,  has 
been  Managing 
Editor  of  The  Ar- 
tificial Intelligence 
Handbook  project 
since  its  inception  in 
1975.  His  current 
research  involves  In- 
telligent, Computer-based  Instructional 
Systems,  Computing  Environments  for  Novice 
Programmers,  and  the  Representation  and  Use 
of  "Meta-knowledge"  in  Artificial  Intelligence 
systems. 


Edward  Feigenbaum  joined  the  Stanford 
University  faculty  in  1965.  Professor  Feigen- 
baum's  interests  include  the  applications  of  ar- 
tificial intelligence  methods  to  science  and 
medicine  and  have  led  to  the  formation  of  the 
Stanford  Heuristic  Programming  Project,  the 
world's  best-known  center  for  the  applications 
of  Artificial  Intelligence.  Chairman  of  the 
Computer  Science  Department  since  1976, 
Professor  Feigenbaum  also  heads  the  national 
computer  facility  for  applications  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  to  Medicine  and  Biology  known  as 
the  SUMEX-AIM  facility,  established  by  NIH 
at  Stanford  University. 


Jacket  design  by  Hans- J.  Wacker 


"As  to  artificial  intelligence,  we  have  hardly  begun  to  under- 
stand what  this  abundant  and  cheap  intellectual  power  will  do  to 
our  lives.  It  has  already  started  to  change  physically  the  research 
laboratories  and  the  manufacturing  plants.  It  is  difficult  for  the 
mind  to  grasp  the  ultimate  consequences  for  man  and 
society  .  .  . " 

—Jean  Riboud,  Chairman  and  President 
Schlumberger  Limited 


What  is  a  ''heuristic  problem-solving  program?"  How  do  com- 
puters understand  English?  What  are  "semantic  nets"  or 
"frames?"  Can  computer  programs  outperform  human  ex- 
perts? Such  questions— asked  by  scientists,  engineers,  students, 
and  hobbyists  encountering  Artificial  Intelligence  for  the  first 
time— can  now  be  readily  answered  by  The  Handbook  of 
Artificial  Intelligence,  a  work  which  makes  the  full  scope  of  im- 
portant techniques  and  concepts  of  AI  available  for  the  first 
time  to  the  rapidly  expanding  world  of  computer  technologists 
and  users. 

The  scope  of  this  handbook  is  broad:  over  two  hundred  short  ar- 
ticles covering  all  of  the  important  ideas,  techniques,  and 
systems  developed  during  twenty-five  years  of  research  in  the  AI 
field.  The  articles  are  written  for  people  with  no  background  in 
AI.  Some  articles  serve  as  overviews,  discussing  the  various 
approaches  within  a  subfield,  the  issues,  and  the  problems.  The 
handbook  is  a  reference  work,  a  textbook,  a  guide  to  program- 
ming techniques  and  to  the  extensive  literature  of  the  field,  and  a 
book  for  intellectual  browsing.  Jargon  has  been  eliminated  in 
each  of  the  short,  penetrating  articles,  and  the  hierarchical 
organization  of  the  book  allows  readers  to  choose  how  deeply 
they  wish  to  delve  into  a  particular  subject. 

Conceived  and  produced  at  Stanford  University's  Department 
of  Computer  Science,  with  contributions  from  universities  and 
laboratories  across  the  nation,  The  Handbook  of  Artificial 
Intelligence  promises  to  become  the  standard  reference  work  in 
the  rapidly  growing  AI  field. 


ISBN  0-86576-005-5 


William  Kaufmann,  Inc.  •  One  First  Street  •  Los  Altos,  California 


